======================================================== for Champions (New York:
Random House Puzzles & Games, 2006), x.
“Human creativity was even more paramount”; “My advantage in calculating”: Kasparov and
Greengard, Deep Thinking .
“freestyle chess”: For an excellent discussion of human-computer chess partnerships, see: T. Cowen,
Average is Over (New York: Dutton, 2013).
His teammate, Nelson Hernandez: Hernandez kindly engaged in an extended back-and-forth,
explaining to me the nuances of freestyle chess and providing me with documentation about
tournaments. He estimated that Williams’s Elo rating in traditional chess would be about 1800.
In 2007, National Geographic TV: The program was “My Brilliant Brain.”
The first took place in the 1940s: A. D. de Groot, Thought and Choice in Chess (Amsterdam:
Amsterdam University Press, 2008).
added a wrinkle: Chase and Simon’s chunking theory: W. G. Chase and H. A. Simon, “Perception in
Chess,” Cognitive Psychology 4 (1973): 55–81.
if rigorous training had not begun by age twelve: F. Gobet and G. Campitelli, “The Role of
Domain-Specific Practice, Handedness, and Starting Age in Chess,” Developmental Psychology 43
(2007): 159–72. For the different rates at which individuals progress, see: G. Campitelli and F.
Gobet, “The Role of Practice in Chess: A Longitudinal Study,” Learning and Individual Differences
18, no. 4 (2007): 446–58.
Treffert studied savants: Treffert shared with me videos from his library of documentation on
savants. His book Islands of Genius (London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 2012) is a great account
of his research.
“What I heard seemed so unlikely”: A. Ockelford, “Another Exceptional Musical Memory,” in
Music and the Mind, ed. I. Deliège, and J. W. Davidson (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011).
Other sources on savants and atonal music: L. K. Miller, Musical Savants (Hove, East Sussex:
Psychology Press, 1989); B. Hermelin et al., “Intelligence and Musical Improvisation,”
Psychological Medicine 19 (1989): 447–57.
when artistic savants are briefly shown pictures: N. O’Connor and B. Hermelin, “Visual and
Graphic Abilities of the Idiot-Savant Artist,” Psychological Medicine 17 (1987): 79–90. (Treffert has
helped replace the term “ idiot-savant” with “savant syndrome.”) See also: E. Winner, Gifted
Children: Myths and Realities (New York: BasicBooks, 1996), ch. 5.
AlphaZero programmers touted: D. Silver et al., “Mastering Chess and Shogi by Self-Play with a
General Reinforcement Learning Algorithm,” arXiv (2017): 1712.01815.
“In narrow enough worlds”: In addition to an interview with Gary Marcus, I used video of his June
7, 2017, lecture at the AI for Good Global Summit in Geneva, as well as several of his papers and
essays: “Deep Learning: A Critical Appraisal,” arXiv: 1801.00631; “In Defense of Skepticism About
Deep Learning,” Medium, January 14, 2018; “Innateness, AlphaZero, and Artificial Intelligence,”
arXiv: 1801.05667.
IBM ’s Watson: For a balanced take on Watson’s challenges in healthcare—from one critic calling it
“a joke,” to others suggesting it falls far short of the original hype but does indeed have value—see:
D. H. Freedman, “A Reality Check for IBM’s AI Ambitions,” MIT Technology Review , June 27,
2017, online ed.
“The difference between winning at Jeopardy! ”: The oncologist is Dr. Vinay Prasad. He said this
to me in an interview, and also shared it on Twitter.
a report in the esteemed journal Nature : J. Ginsberg et al., “Detecting Influenza Epidemics Using
Search Engine Query Data,” Nature 457 (2009): 1012–14.

double the prevalence: D. Butler, “When Google Got Flu Wrong,” Nature 494 (2013): 155–56; D.
Lazer et al., “The Parable of Google Flu: Traps in Big Data Analysis,” Science 343 (2014): 1203–5.
“the essence of their job”: C. Argyris, “Teaching Smart People How to Learn,” Harvard Business
Review, May– June 1991.
subtitle of Schwartz’s paper: B. Schwartz, “Reinforcement-Induced Behavioral Stereotypy: How
Not to Teach People to Discover Rules,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 111, no. 1
(1982):23–59.
“Big-C creator”: E. Winner, “Child Prodigies and Adult Genius: A Weak Link,” in The Wiley
Handbook of Genius, ed. D. K. Simonton (Malden, MA: John Wiley & Sons, 2014).
Accountants and bridge and poker players: A useful source, in addition to Kahneman and Klein’s
“adversarial collaboration” paper, and Hogarth’s Educating Intuition, is: J. Shanteau, “Competence in
Experts: The Role of Task Characteristics,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
53 (1992): 252–62.
“robust statistical regularities”: Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow .
research in the game of bridge: P. A. Frensch and R. J. Sternberg, “Expertise and Intelligent
Thinking: When Is It Worse to Know Better?” in Advances in the Psychology of Human Intelligence,
vol. 5, ed. R. J. Sternberg (New York: Psychology Press, 1989).
experienced accountants; “cognitive entrenchment”; “having one foot outside”: E. Dane,
“Reconsidering the Trade-Off Between Expertise and Flexibility,” Academy of Management Review
35, no. 4 (2010): 579–603. For a general discussion of expert flexibility and inflexibility: P. J.
Feltovich et al., “Issues of Expert Flexibility in Contexts Characterized by Complexity and Change,”
in Expertise in Context, ed. P. J. Feltovich et al. (Cambridge, MA: AAAI Press/ MIT Press, 1997);
and F. Gobet, Understanding Expertise (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016).
Nobel laureates are at least: R. Root-Bernstein et al., “Arts Foster Scientific Success: Avocations of
Nobel, National Academy, Royal Society and Sigma Xi Members,” Journal of Psychology of Science
and Technology 1, no. 2 (2008): 51–63; R. Root-Bernstein et al., “Correlations Between Avocations,
Scientific Style, Work Habits, and Professional Impact of Scientists,” Creativity Research Journal 8,
no. 2 (1995): 115–37.
“To him who observes them from afar”: S. Ramón y Cajal, Precepts and Counsels on Scientific
Investigation (Mountain View, CA: Pacific Press Publishing Association, 1951).
those who did not make a creative contribution: A. Rothenberg, A Flight from Wonder: An
Investigation of Scientific Creativity (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015).
“rather than obsessively focus[ing]”: D. K. Simonton, “Creativity and Expertise: Creators Are Not
Equivalent to Domain-Specific Experts!,” in The Science of Expertise, ed. D. Hambrick et al. (New
York: Routledge, 2017 [Kindle ebook]).
“When we were designing”: Steve Jobs’s 2005 commencement address at Stanford:
https://news.stanford.edu/ 2005/ 06/ 14/ jobs-061505.
“no one else was familiar”: J. Horgan, “Claude Shannon: Tinkerer, Prankster, and Father of
Information Theory,” IEEE Spectrum 29, no. 4 (1992): 72–75. For more depth on Shannon, see J.
Soni and R. Goodman, A Mind at Play (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2017).
“career streams”; “traveled on an eight-lane highway”: C. J. Connolly, “Transition Expertise:
Cognitive Factors and Developmental Processes That Contribute to Repeated Successful Career
Transitions Amongst Elite Athletes, Musicians and Business People” (PhD thesis, Brunel University,
2011).
CHAPTER 2 : HOW THE WICKED WORLD WAS MADE

a thirty-year-old paper: R. D. Tuddenham, “Soldier Intelligence in World Wars I and II,” American
Psychologist 3, no. 2 (1948): 54–56.
Should Martians alight on Earth: J. R. Flynn, Does Your Family Make You Smarter? (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2016), 85.
“cradle to the grave”: J. R. Flynn, What Is Intelligence? (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2009).
When Flynn published his revelation: J. R. Flynn, “The Mean IQ of Americans: Massive Gains
1932 to 1978,” Psychological Bulletin 95, no. 1 (1984): 29–51; J. R. Flynn, “Massive IQ Gains in 14
Nations,” Psychological Bulletin 101, no. 2 (1987): 171–91. For an excellent primer on the Flynn
effect and response, see I. J. Deary, Intelligence: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2001).
tests that gauged material: In addition to interviews with Flynn, his books were helpful—
particularly the hundred pages of appendices in Are We Getting Smarter? (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2012).
both separate day from night: M. C. Fox and A. L. Mitchum, “A Knowledge-Based Theory of
Rising Scores on ‘Culture-Free’ Tests,” Journal of Experimental Psychology 142, no. 3 (2013): 979–
1000.
When a group of Estonian researchers: O. Must et al., “Predicting the Flynn Effect Through Word
Abstractness: Results from the National Intelligence Tests Support Flynn’s Explanation,” Intelligence
57 (2016): 7–14. I first saw these results in St. Petersburg, Russia, at the 2016 annual conference of
the International Society for Intelligence Research. The ISIR invited me to give the annual Constance
Holden Memorial Address. Four attempts at getting a visa later, I arrived. The event was full of
vigorous but civil debate, including over the Flynn effect, and was an excellent background resource.
“The huge Raven’s gains”: J. R. Flynn, What Is Intelligence?
Even in countries: E. Dutton et al., “The Negative Flynn Effect,” Intelligence 59 (2016): 163–69.
And see Flynn’s Are We Getting Smarter? on, for example, trends in Sudan.
Alexander Luria: Luria’s fascinating book is the major source for this section: Cognitive
Development: Its Cultural and Social Foundations (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1976).
He learned the local language: E. D. Homskaya, Alexander Romanovich Luria: A Scientific
Biography (New York: Springer, 2001).
“eduction”: Flynn’s Does Your Family Make You Smarter? and chap. 22 of R. J. Sternberg and S. B.
Kaufman, eds., The Cambridge Handbook of Intelligence (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2011).
forest for the trees: An in-depth description of the “seeing the trees” phenomenon in a different
context can be found in sections about “weak central coherence” in U. Frith, Autism: Explaining the
Enigma (Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2003).
The Kpelle people: S. Scribner, “Developmental Aspects of Categorized Recall in a West African
Society,” Cognitive Psychology 6======================================================== challenge. Even the most sacred tools. Even the tools
so taken for granted they become invisible. It is, of course, easier said than
done. Especially when the tool is the very core of an organization’s culture.
As Captain Tony Lesmes described it, his team at Bagram Air Base in
northeast Afghanistan only went to work when someone got really unlucky.
Lesmes commanded a team of Air Force pararescue jumpers, PJs for short,
a division of Special Operations designed for harrowing rescue missions,
like parachuting into enemy territory at night to save downed pilots. Cross a
soldier, a paramedic, a rescue diver, a firefighter, a mountain rescue
specialist, and a parachutist, and you get a PJ. Their emblem depicts an
angel with arms wrapped around the world, and the words “That others may
live.”
There was no typical day for the PJs at Bagram. One day they were
rappelling down a mountain to rescue a soldier who fell into an unmarked
well. Another day they were rushing to treat Marines injured in a firefight.
PJs could accompany units out on missions, but mostly they stayed on
twenty-four-hour alert, waiting for a “9-line,” a form (with nine lines) that
provided basic information about an active emergency. Like one that came
in on an autumn day in 2009. It was a category alpha, traumatic injuries.
Within minutes, the team would be airborne.

Intel was sparse. A roadside bomb had exploded in the middle of an
Army convoy of armored vehicles. The site was approximately a half hour
away by helicopter. There were serious injuries, but it was unclear how
many or how serious, and whether the bomb was part of a search and rescue
trap, where enemies lie in ambush awaiting the rescue team.
The PJs were used to working with cloudy information, but this was
ambiguous even for them. Lesmes knew they would have to bring heavy
equipment, like the Jaws of Life and a diamond-tipped saw, because “you
can’t just cut through an armored vehicle like a car door,” he told me.
Weight was an obstacle, especially at altitude in the mountains. If the
choppers were too heavy, they wouldn’t grab enough air to stay aloft. Fuel
limitations were a challenge. Space was a bigger one. Each PJ came with
gear, and each of the two helicopters only had interior space on the order of
a large van. They didn’t know how many soldiers were injured badly
enough to need evacuation, and how much space they would need for them.
Lesmes was certain of just one thing: he wanted to make sure they saved
enough room for potential patients so that they would only have to visit the
explosion site once. It would take extra time to treat and load severely
wounded soldiers. The more time on site, the more likely the operation
would draw enemy attention. The rescue team could end up needing a
rescue team.
He was twenty-seven, and the previous year had led a stateside hurricane
rescue team. Afghanistan was his first extended deployment, and he was
directing a team with older members who had had numerous overseas
deployments. As usual, Lesmes brought two team members to the
operations center to get information and help him make sense of the
situation. “Sometimes other guys are able to get really good questions out
that I wouldn’t normally think of,” he told me. “And you want to share as
much information as possible, and there isn’t a lot of time.” But there was
little additional intel. “In Hollywood, a drone flies over the site and you get
all the information,” Lesmes told me. “But that’s Hollywood.”
He walked out to the helicopters, where PJs were donning their full battle
rattle, as he put it. The situation didn’t fit the usual decision trees; he laid
out the challenges, and asked the men: How do we solve this?
Just move equipment around to cram more stuff into the helicopters, one
team member suggested. Another said they could leave a few PJs with the
Army convoy if they needed extra helicopter room for patients. One

recommended they evacuate the most serious patients, and if a second trip
was needed, move the convoy from the explosion site and meet them
somewhere less conspicuous. But the bomb had exploded in the middle of a
procession of vehicles, in rugged terrain. Lesmes didn’t even know how
mobile the convoy would be.
“We weren’t coming up with any real solution that would give us an
advantage. I wanted a speed advantage, and the ability to leverage the
weight and space for wounded soldiers,” he told me. “The distance and the
timeline and the constraints and the unknown of the enemy all started to add
up. I just started feeling like we didn’t have the setup to be successful in a
worst-case scenario. There wasn’t that pattern recognition, it was outside of
the normal pattern.” In others words, he didn’t have the definitive intel he
would have liked. Based on the information he had, Lesmes guessed there
would be more than three serious injuries but fewer than fifteen. An idea
started to form, one that could preserve more space for potential patients.
He could put aside a tool he had never dropped in this situation: himself.
Lesmes had never not accompanied his team on a mass-casualty category
alpha. He was the site conductor. His role was to keep a broad view of the
situation while PJs were “heads down” working furiously to save patients,
or their limbs. He helped secure the site; communicated with his guys, the
base, and helicopter pilots who were circling waiting to pick up patients and
go; he radioed planes for backup if a firefight erupted; he coordinated with
officers in the area, frequently from other military branches. Emotional
chaos was an explosion site certainty. Soldiers watching their shell-shocked
teammates suck on fentanyl lollipops, in danger of bleeding out, are
desperate to help, but they must be moved. The site had to be managed.
This time, as long as there were not many more injuries than Lesmes
guessed, he knew his senior enlisted team member could manage leadership
on the ground while administering medical aid. Lesmes could help ready
the field hospital for returning patients, and coordinate helicopter pickups
from the operations center, adjusting as he listened via radio to his guys on
the ground. It was a trade-off, but every option was.
Lesmes went to the team with his “hypothesis,” as he called it—his
hunch held lightly. “I wanted them to disprove it,” he told me. He told them
he planned to stay at the base to save room for equipment and patients. The
helicopter blades were spinning up, moments ticking away in the so-called
golden hour, the critical window for saving a severely injured soldier. He

told them to talk quickly, and he would consider everything they had to say.
A few were quiet. Several objected. Togetherness was their most basic tool,
the one they didn’t know could be dropped until someone said to drop it.
One of the men said flatly that it was the commanding officer’s job to come
along, and he should do his job. Another got angry. A third reflexively
suggested that Lesmes was afraid. He told Lesmes that when it was his
time, it was his time, so they should just do what they always did. Lesmes
was afraid, but not for his life. “If something bad happens, and the officer is
not there,” he told me, “think about explaining that to ten families.”
I was sitting with him at the World War II Memorial in Washington, D.C.,
when he said that. He had been stoic, and then he started crying. “The
whole construct is built on that training and that familiarity and that
cohesion,” he said. “I totally understand why some guys were upset. It was
breaking our standard operating procedure. I mean, my judgment was
questioned. But if I go, we might have to go to the rescue site twice.” The
objections he got were emotional and philosophical, not tactical. They had
changed his mind about a plan before, but not this time. He would stay, and
it was time for them to go. The helicopters strained into the air as Lesmes
returned to the operations center. “I struggled immensely,” he said. “I could
see what was going on, and if something bad were to happen, I could
literally watch the rescue helicopter go down.”
The rescue mission, thankfully, was an unqualified success. PJs treated
injuries at the explosion site, and seven wounded soldiers had to be loaded
into the helicopters. They were packed in like sardines. Several required
amputations at the field hospital, but all survived.
When it was over, the senior enlisted man acknowledged it was the right
call. Another PJ did not address it for months, and then only to say that he
was taken aback that Lesmes had that much trust in them. The soldier who
had gotten angry initially remained angry, for a while. Another Bagram PJ I
spoke with said, “If I was in that position, I definitely would have said,
‘Yeah, we’re all going.’ It must have been really hard.”
“I don’t know, man,” Lesmes told me. “Sometimes, I still struggle with
that decision. Something could’ve gone wrong and then it would be a bad
decision. Maybe it was luck. None of the options at the time looked very
optimal.”
As we finished talking, I mentioned Weick’s work about wilderness
firefighters clinging to their tools. Under pressure, Weick explained,

experienced pros regress to what they know best. I suggested to Lesmes that
maybe his PJs were just reacting emotionally, with a reflex for the familiar.
There must be times when even the sacrosanct tool of togetherness should
be dropped, right? “Yeah, mmm-hmm.” He nodded in agreement. It was, of
course, easy for me to say. He paused for a moment. “Yeah,” he said, “but
everything is built on that.”
The Challenger managers made mistakes of conformity. They stuck to the
usual tools in the face of an unusual challenge. Captain Lesmes dropped a
sacred tool, and it worked. Once emotions cooled, several members of his
team acknowledged it was the right call. Others never did. Going back over
it brought Lesmes to tears. It isn’t exactly the fairy-tale ending to a good
decision. Had NASA canceled the launch, Allan======================================================== the foremost music
scholar of the day, was astounded by what he saw in Venice. On one
ospedali trip, he was given a two-hour private performance, with no curtain
between him and the performers. “It was really curious to see, as well as to
hear, every part of this excellent concert, performed by female violins,
hautbois [oboes], tenors, bases, harpsichords, french-horns, and even double
bases,” Burney wrote. More curious still, “these young persons frequently
change instruments.”
Figlie took singing lessons, and learned to play every instrument their
institution owned. It helped that they were paid for learning new skills. A
musician named Maddalena married and left institutional life, and toured
from London to St. Petersburg, performing as a violinist, harpsichordist,
cellist, and soprano. She wrote of “acquiring skills not expected of my sex,”
and became so famous that her personal life was covered by one of the
day’s gossip writers.
For those who stayed a lifetime in the institution, their multi-instrument
background had practical importance. Pelegrina della Pietà, who arrived at
the scaffetta swaddled in rags, started on the bass, moved to violin, and then
to oboe, all while working as a nurse. Vivaldi wrote oboe parts specifically
for Pelegrina, but in her sixties her teeth fell out, abruptly ending her oboe

career. So she switched back to violin, and continued performing into her
seventies.
The Pieta’s musicians loved to show off their versatility. According to a
French writer, they were trained “in all styles of music, sacred or profane,”
and gave concerts that “lent themselves to the most varied vocal and
instrumental combinations.” Audience members commonly remarked on
the wide range of instruments the figlie could play, or on their surprise at
seeing a virtuosa singer come out during intermission to improvise an
instrumental solo.
Beyond instruments the figlie played in concert, they learned instruments
that were probably used primarily for teaching or experimentation: a
harpsichord-like spinet; a chamber organ; a giant string instrument known
as a tromba marina; a wooden, flutelike instrument covered with leather
called a zink; and a viola da gamba, a string instrument played upright and
with a bow like a cello, but with more strings, a subtly different shape, and
frets befitting a guitar. The figlie weren’t merely playing well, they were
participants in an extraordinary period for instrument invention and
reinvention. According to musicologist Marc Pincherle, in the multiskilled
figlie and their menagerie of instruments, “Vivaldi had at his disposal a
musical laboratory of unlimited resources.”
Some of the instruments the figlie learned are so obscure that nobody
knows what exactly they were. A young Pietà musician named Prudenza
apparently sang beautifully, and performed fluently with the violin and the
“violoncello all’inglese.” Music scholars have argued about what that even
is, but, as with anything else the Pietà could get its musical mitts on—like
the chalumeau (wind) and the psaltery (string)—the figlie learned to play it.
They lifted composers to unexplored heights. They were part of the
bridge that carried music from Baroque composers to the classical masters:
Bach (who transcribed Vivaldi’s concertos); Haydn (who composed
specifically for one of the figlie , Bianchetta, a singer, harpist, and organist);
and perhaps Mozart, who visited an ospedale with his father as a boy, and
returned as a teen. The figlie ’s skills on a vast array of instruments enabled
musical experimentation so profound that it laid a foundation for the
modern orchestra. According to musicologist Denis Arnold, the
modernization of church music that occurred through the figlie was so
influential that one of Mozart’s iconic sacred pieces, without the girls of the
Venetian orphanages, “might never have been composed at all.”

But their stories were largely forgotten, or thrown away, literally. When
Napoleon’s troops arrived in 1797, they tossed manuscripts and records out
the ospedali windows. When, two hundred years later, a famous eighteenth-
century painting of women giving a concert was displayed at the National
Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., the mysterious figures dressed in black,
in an upper balcony above the audience, went entirely unidentified.
Maybe the memories of the figlie faded because they were women—
playing music in public religious ceremonies defied papal authority. Or
because so many of them neither came with families nor left any behind.
They lacked family names, but the abandoned girls were so synonymous
with their instruments that those became their names. The baby who came
through a notch in the wall and began her way in the world as Anna Maria
della Pietà left the world having been, by various stages, Anna Maria del
violino, Anna Maria del theorbo, Anna Maria del cembalo, Anna Maria del
violoncello, Anna Maria del luta, Anna Maria della viola d’amore, and
Anna Maria del mandolin.
Imagine it today: click a tourism site and the entertainment
recommendation is the world-famous orchestra comprised of orphans left at
the doorstep of the music venue. You will be treated to virtuoso solos on
instruments you know and love, as well as those you’ve never heard of.
Occasionally the musicians will switch instruments during the show. And
please follow us on Twitter, @FamousFoundlings. Never mind 200-ducat
dowries, the figlie would have speaking agents and feature film deals.
Just like Tiger Woods’s television appearance when he was two, it would
foment a frenzy of parents and media seeking to excavate the mysterious
secret to success. Parents actually did flock in the eighteenth century.
Noblemen vied (and paid) to get their daughters a chance to play with those
“able indigents,” as one historian put it.
But the strategies of their musical development would be a hard sell.
Today, the massively multi-instrument approach seems to go against
everything we know about how to get good at a skill like playing music. It
certainly goes against the deliberate practice framework, which only counts
highly focused attempts at exactly the skill to be performed. Multiple
instruments, in that view, should be a waste of time.

In the genre of modern self-help narratives, music training has stood
beside golf atop the podium, exemplars of the power of a narrowly focused
head start in highly technical training. Whether it is the story of Tiger
Woods or the Yale law professor known as the Tiger Mother, the message is
the same: choose early, focus narrowly, never waver.
The Tiger Mother’s real name is Amy Chua, and she coined the term in
her 2011 book Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother. Like Tiger, the Tiger
Mother permeated popular culture. Chua advertised the secrets to “how
Chinese parents raise such stereotypically successful kids.” On the very first
page of the very first chapter is the litany of things Sophia and Lulu must
never do, including: “play any instrument other than the piano or the
violin.” (Sophia gets piano, Lulu is assigned violin.) Chua supervised three,
four, and sometimes five hours of music practice a day.
Parents in online forums agonize over what instrument to pick for their
child, because the child is too young to pick for herself and will fall
irredeemably behind if she waits. “I am slowly trying to convince him how
nice playing music is,” a parent of a two-and-a-half-year-old posted. “I am
just not too sure which instrument would be best.” Another post advised
nixing violin if a child has not started by seven, as she will be too far
behind. In response to such concerns, the director of a private music school
wrote a “how to choose” advice column with tips for picking an instrument
for a child who can’t yet stick with the same favorite color from one week
to the next.
There are, of course, many routes to expertise. Some outstanding
musicians have focused very young. The supreme cellist Yo-Yo Ma is a
well-known example. Less well known, though, is that Ma started on violin,
moved to piano, and then to the cello because he didn’t really like the first
two instruments. He just went through the sampling period a lot faster than
the typical student.
Tiger parents are trying to skip that phase entirely. It reminds me of a
conversation I had with Ian Yates, a British sports scientist and coach who
helped develop future professional athletes in a range of sports. Parents,
Yates told me, increasingly come to him and “want their kids doing what
the Olympians are doing right now, not what the Olympians were doing
when they were twelve or thirteen,” which included a wider variety of
activities that developed their general athleticism and allowed them to
probe their talents and interests before they focused narrowly on technical

skills. The sampling period is not incidental to the development of great
performers—something to be excised in the interest of a head start—it is
integral.
John Sloboda is undoubtedly one of the most influential researchers in the
psychology of music. His 1985 book The Musical Mind ranged from the
origins of music to the acquisition of playing skill, and set a research
agenda that the field is still carrying out today. Through the 1990s, Sloboda
and his colleagues studied strategies for musical growth. Practice,
unsurprisingly, was crucial in the development of musicians. But the details
were less intuitive.
A study of music students aged eight to eighteen and ranging in skill
from rank novices to students in a highly selective music school found that
when they began training there was no difference in the amount of practice
undertaken between any of the groups of players, from the least to the most
accomplished. The students who would go on to be most successful only
started practicing much more once they identified an instrument they
wanted to focus on, whether because they were better at it or just liked it
more. The instrument, it appeared, was driving the practitioner, rather than
the======================================================== going on started flying. Every hour of lab meeting Dunbar recorded
required eight hours of transcribing and labeling problem-solving behaviors
so that he could analyze the process of scientific creativity, and he found an
analogy fest.
Dunbar witnessed important breakthroughs live, and saw that the labs
most likely to turn unexpected findings into new knowledge for humanity
made a lot of analogies, and made them from a variety of base domains.
The labs in which scientists had more diverse professional backgrounds
were the ones where more and more varied analogies were offered, and
where breakthroughs were more reliably produced when the unexpected
arose. Those labs were Keplers by committee. They included members with
a wide variety of experiences and interests. When the moment came to
either dismiss or embrace and grapple with information that puzzled them,
they drew on their range to make analogies. Lots of them.
For relatively straightforward challenges, labs started with analogies to
other, very similar experiments. The more unusual the challenge, the more

distant the analogies, moving away from surface similarities and toward
deep structural similarities. In some lab meetings a new analogy entered the
conversation every four minutes on average, some of them from outside of
biology entirely.
In one instance, Dunbar actually saw two labs encounter the same
experimental problem at around the same time. Proteins they wanted to
measure would get stuck to a filter, which made them hard to analyze. One
of the labs was entirely E. coli experts, and the other had scientists with
chemistry, physics, biology, and genetics backgrounds, plus medical
students. “One lab made an analogy drawing on knowledge from the person
with a medical degree, and they figured it out right there at the meeting,”
Dunbar told me. “The other lab used E. coli knowledge to deal with every
problem. That didn’t work here so they had to just start experimenting for
weeks to get rid of the problem. It put me in an awkward position because I
had seen the answer in another lab’s meeting.” (As part of the conditions of
the study, he was not allowed to share information between labs.)
In the face of the unexpected, the range of available analogies helped
determine who learned something new. In the lone lab that did not make
any new findings during Dunbar’s project, everyone had similar and highly
specialized backgrounds, and analogies were almost never used. “When all
the members of the laboratory have the same knowledge at their disposal,
then when a problem arises, a group of similar minded individuals will not
provide more information to make analogies than a single individual,”
Dunbar concluded.
“It’s sort of like the stock market,” he told me. “You need a mixture of
strategies.”
The trouble with courses of study like Northwestern’s Integrated Science
Program, which impart a broad mixture of strategies, is that they may
require abandoning a head start toward a major or career. That is a tough
sell, even if it better serves learners in the long run.
Whether it is the making-connections knowledge Lindsey Richland
studied, or the broad concepts that Flynn tested, or the distant, deep
structural analogical reasoning that Gentner assessed, there is often no
entrenched interest fighting on the side of range, or of knowledge that must
be slowly acquired. All forces align to incentivize a head start and early,

narrow specialization, even if that is a poor long-term strategy. That is a
problem, because another kind of knowledge, perhaps the most important of
all, is necessarily slowly acquired—the kind that helps you match yourself
to the right challenge in the first place.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 6
The Trouble with Too Much Grit
THE BOY’S MOTHER APPRECIATED music and art, but when the boy tried to
freehand sketch the family cat, he proved such a deficient draftsman that he
destroyed the picture and refused to try again. Instead, he spent his
childhood in the Netherlands playing marbles or sledding with his little
brother, but mostly just looking at things. A prominent parenting handbook
advised against unsupervised wanderings that might “intoxicate” a child’s
imagination, but he wandered alone for hours. He walked in storms, and at
night. He walked for miles just to sit for hours watching a bird’s nest, or
following water bugs on their commutes across a brook. He was especially
obsessed with collecting beetles, labeling each one with its proper Latin
species name.
When he was thirteen, the boy was admitted to a brand-new school
housed in a hulking former royal palace. It was so far from his home that he
had to board with a local family. His mind was elsewhere during class, but
he was a good student, and spent his free time memorizing poetry.
The art teacher was the faculty celebrity, an education pioneer who
argued for design to become a central part of the national economic engine.
That crusade was so successful it led the federal government to mandate
freehand drawing classes in every public school. Rather than holding forth
from the front of the class, the teacher arranged students in the center and
meandered through them like a sewing needle, giving personal attention.
Most students adored him. But he made no impression on the boy. As an
adult, the boy would complain that nobody had ever told him what
perspective was in drawing, even though it was so central to the teacher’s

tenets that knowledge of perspective was written into the new law
expanding art education.
The boy didn’t like living with strangers, so he left the school just before
he turned fifteen. For the next sixteen months, he did little other than take
long nature walks. That could not go on forever, but he had no idea what
else to do. Fortunately, his uncle owned a fantastically successful art
dealership, and had just been knighted. He offered his nephew a job in the
big city. Making art had not inspired the boy, but selling it did. He turned
the observational intensity he had practiced in nature to lithographs and
photographs, categorizing what he saw just as he had his beetles. By twenty,
he was dealing with important clients and traveling abroad for sales trips.
The young man confidently told his parents that he would never have to
look for a job again. He was wrong.
He was a country boy in the city, without enough social grace to smooth
over disagreements with his boss, and he disliked bargaining, which felt
like trying to take advantage of customers. He was soon transferred to a
London office that did not deal directly with customers, and then at twenty-
two he was transferred again, this time to Paris. He arrived in France amid
an artistic revolution. On walks to work, the young man passed the studios
of artists who were in the process of becoming famous. And yet, as with the
art teacher, as a pair of his future biographers would write, “None of it
registered.” He was too busy with a new obsession: religion. Years later,
when he and his little brother discussed those revolutionary artists, he
would say he had “seen absolutely nothing of them.”
When he was finally dismissed from the dealership, he went to work as
an assistant teacher at a boarding school in a seaside town in England.
Working fourteen-hour days, he taught classes from French to math,
oversaw the dorm, took the kids to church, and acted as the handyman. The
school was simply a business venture for the owner, and the young man was
cheap labor. He found another job as a tutor, this time at a fancier boarding
school, but after a few months he decided he would become a missionary in
South America. His parents talked him out of that, insisting that he needed
to “stop following [his] own desires” and return to a stable life course. His
mother wished he would do something in nature that would make him
“happier and calmer.” He decided to follow in his father’s footsteps; he
would train to become a full-fledged pastor.

In the meantime, his father arranged a job as a bookstore clerk. The
young man loved books and worked from 8 a.m. until midnight. When the
store flooded, he astounded his colleagues with his sheer physical
endurance as he carried pile after pile of books to safety. His new goal was
to get accepted to a university so that he could later train as a pastor. Again,
he unleashed his tireless passion. He worked with a tutor, and copied by
hand the text of entire books. “I must sit up as long as I can keep my eyes
open,” he told his brother. He reminded himself that “practice makes
perfect,” but Latin and Greek did not come easily to him. He moved in with
an uncle, a stern war hero who urged him simply, “push on.” The young
man resolved to begin work before his peers rose and finish after they slept.
His uncle would find him reading in the wee morning hours.
And still, he floundered in his studies. Nearing his twenty-fifth birthday,
the young man heard a sermon about how the economic revolution had
made certain citizens, like his art-dealer uncle, fabulously wealthy, while
others had been thrust into abject poverty. He decided to forsake university
to spread the Word more quickly. He opted for a shorter educational course,
but was not adept at giving the succinct, punchy sermons that the school
mandated. He failed in that program as well. But nobody could stop him
from preaching, so he headed for coal country, where inspiration was
needed most .
When the young man arrived and saw the blackened sky, he likened it to
the shading of a Rembrandt. There he would preach to workers so
downtrodden that they referred to the world above the mineshaft as “up in
Hell.” He dove in to spiritual service with his usual verve, giving away his
clothes and money, and doting night and day on the ill and injured. They
were legion.
Shortly after he arrived, a series of explosions killed 121 miners and sent
gas streaming out of the ground, fueling a pillar of fire like some monstrous
Bunsen burner nestled below the earth. The======================================================== Scientific Discovery: The Case of Johannes Kepler,” in
Model-Based Reasoning: Science, Technology, Values, ed. L. Magnani and N. J. Nersessian (New
York: Kluwer Academic/ Plenum Publishers, 2002), 21–39; D. Gentner et al., “Analogy and
Creativity in the Works of Johannes Kepler,” in Creative Thought: An Investigation of Conceptual
Structures and Processes, ed. T. B. Ward et al. (Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association, 1997).
maybe the planets were like magnets: D. Gentner and A. B. Markman, “Structure Mapping in
Analogy and Similarity,” American Psychologist 52, no. 1 (1997): 45–56. Also, Kepler read a new
publication on magnetism: A. Caswell, “Lectures on Astronomy,” Smithsonian Lectures on
Astronomy, 1858 (British Museum collection).
“the moon’s dominion over the waters”: J. Gleick, Isaac Newton (New York: Vintage, 2007).
no concept of gravity as a force; “Ye physicists” : A. Koestler, The Sleepwalkers: A History of
Man’s Changing Vision of the Universe (New York: Penguin Classics, 2017).
“I especially love analogies”: B. Vickers, “Analogy Versus Identity,” in: Occult and Scientific
Mentalities in the Renaissance, ed. B. Vickers (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984).
“action at a distance”: Gentner et al., “Analogy and Creativity in the Works of Johannes Kepler.”;
E. McMullin, “The Origins of the Field Concept in Physics,” Physics in Perspective 4, no. 1 (2002):
13–39.
Suppose you are a doctor: M. L. Gick and K. J. Holyoak, “Analogical Problem Solving,” Cognitive
Psychology 12 (1980): 306–55.
There once was a general; small-town fire chief; “might well have supposed”; “ ill-defined”
problems: M. L. Gick and K. J. Holyoak, “Schema Induction and Analogical Transfer,” Cognitive
Psychology 15 (1983): 1–38.

An experiment on Stanford international relations students; college football coaches: T.
Gilovich, “Seeing the Past in the Present: The Effect of Associations to Familiar Events on
Judgments and Decisions,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 40, no. 5 (1981): 797–808.
Kahneman had a personal experience: Kahneman’s story is in his Thinking, Fast and Slow (New
York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2011). With background on the inside and outside views, it is also in
D. Kahneman and D. Lovallo, “Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts,” Management Science 39, no. 1
(1993): 17–31.
investors from large private equity firms: D. Lovallo, C. Clarke, and C. Camerer, “Robust
Analogizing and the Outside View,” Strategic Management Journal 33, no. 5 (2012): 496–512.
qualities of the specific horse: M. J. Mauboussin, Think Twice: Harnessing the Power of
Counterintuition (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2009).
the more internal details: L. Van Boven and N. Epley, “The Unpacking Effect in Evaluative
Judgments: When the Whole Is Less Than the Sum of Its Parts,” Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 39 (2003): 263–69.
“natural causes”: A. Tversky and D. J. Koehler, “Support Theory,” Psychological Review 101, no. 4
(1994): 547–67.
90 percent of major infrastructure projects: B. Flyvbjerg et al., “What Causes Cost Overrun in
Transport Infrastructure Projects?” Transport Reviews 24, no. 1 (2004): 3–18.
a massive underestimate: B. Flyvbjerg, “Curbing Optimism Bias and Strategic Misrepresentation in
Planning,” European Planning Studies 16, no. 1 (2008): 3–21. The £1 billion price tag: S.
Brocklehurst, “Going off the Rails,” BBC Scotland , May 30, 2014, online ed.
the movie business: Lovallo, Clarke, and Camerer, “Robust Analogizing and the Outside View.”
Netflix came to a similar conclusion: T. Vanderbilt, “The Science Behind the Netflix Algorithms
That Decide What You’ll Watch Next,” Wired.com , August 7, 2013; and C. Burger, “Personalized
Recommendations at Netflix,” Tastehit.com , February 23, 2016.
Lovallo and Dubin gave some students: F. Dubin and D. Lovallo, “The Use and Misuse of
Analogies in Business,” Working Paper (Sydney: University of Sydney, 2008).
In 2001, the Boston Consulting Group: A short discussion about the impetus for BCG’s exhibits is:
D. Gray, “A Gallery of Metaphors,” Harvard Business Review, September 2003.
Gentner and colleagues gave the Ambiguous Sorting Task: B. M. Rottman et al., “Causal Systems
Categories: Differences in Novice and Expert Categorization of Causal Phenomena,” Cognitive
Science 36 (2012): 919–32.
In one of the most cited studies: M. T. H. Chi et al., “Categorization and Representation of Physics
Problems by Experts and Novices,” Cognitive Science 5, no. 2 (1981): 121–52.
“What matters to me”: Koestler, The Sleepwalkers .
1 percent of the national budget: N. Morvillo, Science and Religion: Understanding the Issues
(Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010).
“If I had believed we could ignore these eight minutes”: Koestler, The Sleepwalkers .
When Dunbar started: An excellent background source on Dunbar’s work is: K. Dunbar, “What
Scientific Thinking Reveals About the Nature of Cognition,” in Designing for Science, ed. K.
Crowley et al. (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2001).
“When all the members”: K. Dunbar, “How Scientists Really Reason,” in The Nature of Insight, ed.
R. J. Sternberg and J. E. Davidson (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995), 365–95.
CHAPTER 6:THE TROUBLE WITH TOO MUCH GRIT

The boy’s mother appreciated: Details of Van Gogh’s life come from several main sources,
including translated letters written by and to Van Gogh. More than nine hundred letters (that is, every
surviving one) are available at the incredible Vincent van Gogh: The Letters website
(vangoghletters.org ), courtesy of the Van Gogh Museum and the Huygens Institute for the History of
the Netherlands. Without another incredible source, I would not have known which letters to read:
Steven Naifeh and Gregory White Smith, Van Gogh: The Life (New York: Random House, 2011).
Naifeh and Smith took the extraordinary step of creating a searchable database of sources at
vangoghbiography.com/notes.php . It was extremely helpful. Two other written sources that were
helpful: N. Denekamp et al., The Vincent van Gogh Atlas (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press and
the Van Gogh Museum, 2016); and J. Hulsker, The Complete Van Gogh (New York: Harrison House/
H. N. Abrams, 1984). Finally, two exhibitions: “Van Gogh’s Bedrooms” at the Art Institute of
Chicago (2016), and the impressionism and post-impressionism collections at the Hermitage
Museum in St. Petersburg, Russia.
“None of it registered”: Naifeh and Smith, Van Gogh: The Life.
“absolutely nothing of them”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, June 1884.
“own desires”; “happier and calmer”; “push on”: Naifeh and Smith, Van Gogh: The Life .
“must sit up”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, September 1877.
“up in Hell”: Émile Zola, Germinal, trans. R. N. MacKenzie (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing,
2011).
“the bars of his cage”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, June 1880.
“I’m writing to you while drawing”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, August 1880.
Guide to the ABCs of Drawing : Naifeh and Smith, Van Gogh: The Life .
“you are no artist”; “you started too late”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, March 1882 (trans.
Johanna van Gogh-Bonger).
“[He] made an astonishing discovery”: Naifeh and Smith, Van Gogh: The Life .
“Painting has proved less difficult”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, August 1882. The painting
that Van Gogh made that day is Beach at Scheveningen in Stormy Weather. The painting was stolen
from the Van Gogh Museum in 2002, but recovered more than a decade later.
An ecstatic review: The review, by G.-Albert Aurier, was titled “Les isolés: Vincent van Gogh.”
life expectancy in the Netherlands: The exact figure is 39.84 and comes from the online publication
Our World in Data (ourworldindata.org ).
Gauguin . . . at the age of thirty-five: The Great Masters (London: Quantum Publishing, 2003).
“failed on an epic scale”: J. K. Rowling, text of speech, “The Fringe Benefits of Failure, and the
Importance of Imagination,” Harvard Gazette, June 5, 2008, online ed.
Nobel laureate economist Theodore Schultz: T. W. Schultz, “Resources for Higher Education,”
Journal of Political Economy 76, no. 3 (1968): 327–47.
found a natural experiment: O. Malamud, “Discovering One’s Talent: Learning from Academic
Specialization,” Industrial and Labor Relations 64, no. 2 (2011): 375–405.
Scots quickly caught up: O. Malamud, “Breadth Versus Depth: The Timing of Specialization in
Higher Education,” Labour 24, no. 4 (2010): 359–90.
more mistakes: D. Lederman, “When to Specialize?,” Inside Higher Ed, November 25, 2009.
“The benefits to increased match quality”: Malamud, “Discovering One’s Talent.”
Steven Levitt . . . leveraged his readership: S. D. Levitt, “Heads or Tails: The Impact of a Coin
Toss on Major Life Decisions and Subsequent Happiness,” NBER Working Paper No. 22487 (2016).

“the willingness to jettison”: Levitt, in the September 30, 2011, Freakonomics Radio program, “The
Upside of Quitting.”
“Teachers tend to leave schools”: C. K. Jackson, “Match Quality, Worker Productivity, and Worker
Mobility: Direct Evidence from Teachers,” Review of Economics and Statistics 95, no. 4 (2013):
1096–1116.
Psychologist Angela Duckworth conducted the most famous study: A. L. Duckworth et al., “Grit:
Perseverance and Passion for Long-Term Goals,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 92,
no. 6 (2007): 1087–1101. (The entire incoming class comprised 1,223 freshman cadets, so
Duckworth surveyed nearly every one.) Table 3 gives a nice summary of the amount of variance
accounted for by grit in results from West Point, the Scripps National Spelling Bee, Ivy League
students’ grades, and adult educational attainment. Additionally, Duckworth made her work very
accessible in her book, Grit: The Power of Passion and Perseverance (New York: Scribner, 2016).
Duckworth learned that: An incisive piece on grit and the Whole Candidate Score is: D. Engber, “Is
‘Grit’ Really the Key to Success?,” Slate, May 8, 2016.
“I worry I’ve contributed”: A. Duckworth, “Don’t Grade Schools on Grit,”======================================================== in cartoons when a robot’s belly opens
up and a boxing glove fires out. He stuck a gripping tool on the outer end
that closed when he squeezed handles to extend the arm. Now he could
lazily retrieve distant objects .
The company president saw the new hire goofing around with his
contraption and called him into his office. “I thought I would be scolded,”
Yokoi recalled. Instead, the desperate executive told Yokoi to turn his
device into a game. Yokoi added a group of colored balls that could be
grabbed, and the “Ultra Hand” went to market immediately. It was
Nintendo’s first toy, and it sold 1.2 million units. The company paid off a
chunk of its debt. That was the end of Yokoi’s maintenance career. The
president assigned him to start Nintendo’s first research and development
department. The facility that briefly made instant rice was converted into a
toy factory.
More toy success followed, but it was an abject failure that first year that
profoundly influenced Yokoi. He helped create Drive Game, a tabletop unit
where a player used a steering wheel to guide a plastic car along a
racetrack, which scrolled beneath the car via electric motor. It was the first
Nintendo toy that required electricity, and a complete flop. The internal
mechanism was advanced for the time and ended up so complex and fragile
that it was expensive and hard to produce, and units were riddled with

defects. But the debacle was the seed of a creative philosophy Yokoi would
hone for the next thirty years.
Yokoi was well aware of his engineering limitations. As one aficionado
of game history put it, “He studied electronics at a time where the
technology was evolving faster than the snow melts in sunlight.” Yokoi had
no desire (or capability) to compete with electronics companies that were
racing one another to invent some entirely new sliver of dazzling
technology. Nor could Nintendo compete with Japan’s titans of traditional
toys—Bandai, Epoch, and Takara—on their familiar turf. With that, and
Drive Game, in mind, Yokoi embarked on an approach he called “lateral
thinking with withered technology.” Lateral thinking is a term coined in the
1960s for the reimagining of information in new contexts, including the
drawing together of seemingly disparate concepts or domains that can give
old ideas new uses. By “withered technology,” Yokoi meant tech that was
old enough to be extremely well understood and easily available, so it
didn’t require a specialist’s knowledge. The heart of his philosophy was
putting cheap, simple technology to use in ways no one else considered. If
he could not think more deeply about new technologies, he decided, he
would think more broadly about old ones. He intentionally retreated from
the cutting edge, and set to monozukuri .
He connected a transistor to a cheap, store-bought galvanometer, and
noticed he could measure the current flowing through his coworkers. Yokoi
imagined a toy that would make it fun for boys and girls to hold hands,
risqué at the time in Japan. 
*
 The Love Tester was nothing more than two
conductive handles and a gauge. Players grasped a handle and joined hands,
thereby completing the circuit. The gauge reported electrical current as if it
were a measure of the love between participants. The sweatier their palms,
the better a couple’s conductance. It was a hit among teenagers, and a party
prop for adults. Yokoi was encouraged. He committed to using technology
that had already become cheap, even obsolete, in new ways.
By the early 1970s, radio-controlled toy cars were popular, but good RC
technology could cost a month’s salary, so it was a hobby reserved for
adults. As he often did, Yokoi pondered a way to democratize RC toys. So
he took the tech backward. Expense came from the need for multiple radio
control channels. Cars started with two channels, one to control the engine
output and one the steering wheel. The more functions a toy had, the more
channels it required. Yokoi stripped the technology down to the absolute

bare minimum, a single-channel RC car that could only turn left. Product
name: Lefty RX. It was less than a tenth the cost of typical RC toys, and
just fine for counterclockwise races. Even when it did have to navigate
obstacles, kids easily learned how to left-turn their way out of trouble.
One day in 1977, while riding the bullet train back from a business trip in
Tokyo, Yokoi awoke from a nap to see a salaryman playing with a
calculator to relieve the boredom of his commute. The trend at the time was
to make toys as impressively big as possible. What if, Yokoi wondered,
there was a game small enough that an adult could play it discreetly while
commuting? He sat on the idea for a while, until one day when he was
drafted to be the company president’s chauffeur. The normal driver had the
flu, and thanks to Yokoi’s interest in foreign vehicles, he was the only one
of Nintendo’s hundred employees who had driven a car with the steering
wheel on the left, like the president’s Cadillac. He floated his miniature
game idea from the front seat. “He was nodding along,” Yokoi recalled,
“but he didn’t seem all that interested.”
A week later, Yokoi received a surprise visit from executives at Sharp, a
calculator manufacturer. At the meeting Yokoi had driven him to, the
Nintendo president sat next to the head of Sharp, and relayed his
chauffeur’s idea. For several years, Sharp had been engaged in calculator
wars with Casio. In the early 1970s a calculator cost a few hundred dollars,
but as components got cheaper and companies raced for market share, cost
plummeted and the market saturated. Sharp was eager to find a new use for
its LCD screens.
When Sharp executives heard Yokoi’s idea for a video game the size of a
business card holder, and that could be held in the lap and played with
thumbs, they were intrigued, and skeptical. Was it worth mobilizing a new
partnership just to reuse technology that had become dirt cheap? They
weren’t convinced it was even possible to make a display smooth enough
for the game Yokoi proposed, which involved a juggler whose arms move
left and right, trying not to drop balls as they speed up. Nonetheless, the
Sharp engineers made Yokoi an LCD screen in the appropriate size. Then he
hit a severe problem. The electronics in the tiny game were packed in such
a thin space that the liquid crystal display element touched a plate in the
screen, which created a visual distortion of light and dark bands, known as
Newton’s rings. Yokoi needed a sliver of space between the LCD and the
plate. He took an idea from the credit card industry. With a slight tweak of

the old hanafuda printing machines, he delicately embossed the screen with
hundreds of dots to keep the plate and the display element narrowly
separated. As a final flourish, with just a few hours of work, a colleague
helped him program a clock into the display. LCD screens were already in
wristwatches, and they figured it would give adults an excuse to buy their
“Game & Watch.”
In 1980, Nintendo released its first three Game & Watch models, with
high hopes for one hundred thousand sales. Six hundred thousand copies
sold in the first year. Nintendo could not keep up with international
demand. The Donkey Kong Game & Watch was released in 1982 and alone
sold eight million units. Game & Watch remained in production for eleven
years and sold 43.4 million units. It also happened to include another Yokoi
invention that would be used laterally: the directional pad, or “D-pad,”
which allowed a player to move their character in any direction using just a
thumb. After the success of the Game & Watch, Nintendo put the D-pad in
controllers on its new Nintendo Entertainment System. That home console
brought arcade games into millions of homes around the world, and
launched a new era of gaming. The combination of successes—the Game &
Watch and the NES—also led to Yokoi’s lateral-thinking magnum opus, a
handheld console that played any game a developer could put on a
cartridge: the Game Boy.
From a technological standpoint, even in 1989, the Game Boy was
laughable. Yokoi’s team cut every corner. The Game Boy’s processor had
been cutting edge—in the 1970s. By the mid-1980s, home consoles were in
fierce competition over graphics quality. The Game Boy was an eyesore. It
featured a total of four grayscale shades, displayed on a tiny screen that was
tinted a greenish hue somewhere between mucus and old alfalfa. Graphics
in fast lateral motion smeared across the screen. To top it off, the Game Boy
had to compete with handheld consoles from Sega and Atari that were
technologically superior in every way. And it destroyed them .
What its withered technology lacked, the Game Boy made up in user
experience. It was cheap. It could fit in a large pocket. It was all but
indestructible. If a drop cracked the screen—and it had to be a horrific drop
—it kept on ticking. If it were left in a backpack that went in the washing
machine, once it dried out it was ready to roll a few days later. Unlike its
power-guzzling color competitors, it played for days (or weeks) on AA
batteries. Old hardware was extremely familiar to developers inside and

outside Nintendo, and with their creativity and speed unencumbered by
learning new technology, they pumped out games as if they were early
ancestors of iPhone app designers— Tetris, Super Mario Land , The Final
Fantasy Legend, and a slew of sports games released in the first year were
all smash hits. With simple technology, Yokoi’s team sidestepped the
hardware arms race and drew the game programming community onto its
team.
The Game Boy became the Sony Walkman of video gaming, forgoing
top-of-the-line tech for portability and affordability. It sold 118.7 million
units, far and away the bestselling console of the twentieth century. Not bad
for the little company that was allowed to sell hanafuda .
Even though he was revered by then, Yokoi had to push and shove
internally for his “lateral thinking with withered======================================================== going on started flying. Every hour of lab meeting Dunbar recorded
required eight hours of transcribing and labeling problem-solving behaviors
so that he could analyze the process of scientific creativity, and he found an
analogy fest.
Dunbar witnessed important breakthroughs live, and saw that the labs
most likely to turn unexpected findings into new knowledge for humanity
made a lot of analogies, and made them from a variety of base domains.
The labs in which scientists had more diverse professional backgrounds
were the ones where more and more varied analogies were offered, and
where breakthroughs were more reliably produced when the unexpected
arose. Those labs were Keplers by committee. They included members with
a wide variety of experiences and interests. When the moment came to
either dismiss or embrace and grapple with information that puzzled them,
they drew on their range to make analogies. Lots of them.
For relatively straightforward challenges, labs started with analogies to
other, very similar experiments. The more unusual the challenge, the more

distant the analogies, moving away from surface similarities and toward
deep structural similarities. In some lab meetings a new analogy entered the
conversation every four minutes on average, some of them from outside of
biology entirely.
In one instance, Dunbar actually saw two labs encounter the same
experimental problem at around the same time. Proteins they wanted to
measure would get stuck to a filter, which made them hard to analyze. One
of the labs was entirely E. coli experts, and the other had scientists with
chemistry, physics, biology, and genetics backgrounds, plus medical
students. “One lab made an analogy drawing on knowledge from the person
with a medical degree, and they figured it out right there at the meeting,”
Dunbar told me. “The other lab used E. coli knowledge to deal with every
problem. That didn’t work here so they had to just start experimenting for
weeks to get rid of the problem. It put me in an awkward position because I
had seen the answer in another lab’s meeting.” (As part of the conditions of
the study, he was not allowed to share information between labs.)
In the face of the unexpected, the range of available analogies helped
determine who learned something new. In the lone lab that did not make
any new findings during Dunbar’s project, everyone had similar and highly
specialized backgrounds, and analogies were almost never used. “When all
the members of the laboratory have the same knowledge at their disposal,
then when a problem arises, a group of similar minded individuals will not
provide more information to make analogies than a single individual,”
Dunbar concluded.
“It’s sort of like the stock market,” he told me. “You need a mixture of
strategies.”
The trouble with courses of study like Northwestern’s Integrated Science
Program, which impart a broad mixture of strategies, is that they may
require abandoning a head start toward a major or career. That is a tough
sell, even if it better serves learners in the long run.
Whether it is the making-connections knowledge Lindsey Richland
studied, or the broad concepts that Flynn tested, or the distant, deep
structural analogical reasoning that Gentner assessed, there is often no
entrenched interest fighting on the side of range, or of knowledge that must
be slowly acquired. All forces align to incentivize a head start and early,

narrow specialization, even if that is a poor long-term strategy. That is a
problem, because another kind of knowledge, perhaps the most important of
all, is necessarily slowly acquired—the kind that helps you match yourself
to the right challenge in the first place.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 6
The Trouble with Too Much Grit
THE BOY’S MOTHER APPRECIATED music and art, but when the boy tried to
freehand sketch the family cat, he proved such a deficient draftsman that he
destroyed the picture and refused to try again. Instead, he spent his
childhood in the Netherlands playing marbles or sledding with his little
brother, but mostly just looking at things. A prominent parenting handbook
advised against unsupervised wanderings that might “intoxicate” a child’s
imagination, but he wandered alone for hours. He walked in storms, and at
night. He walked for miles just to sit for hours watching a bird’s nest, or
following water bugs on their commutes across a brook. He was especially
obsessed with collecting beetles, labeling each one with its proper Latin
species name.
When he was thirteen, the boy was admitted to a brand-new school
housed in a hulking former royal palace. It was so far from his home that he
had to board with a local family. His mind was elsewhere during class, but
he was a good student, and spent his free time memorizing poetry.
The art teacher was the faculty celebrity, an education pioneer who
argued for design to become a central part of the national economic engine.
That crusade was so successful it led the federal government to mandate
freehand drawing classes in every public school. Rather than holding forth
from the front of the class, the teacher arranged students in the center and
meandered through them like a sewing needle, giving personal attention.
Most students adored him. But he made no impression on the boy. As an
adult, the boy would complain that nobody had ever told him what
perspective was in drawing, even though it was so central to the teacher’s

tenets that knowledge of perspective was written into the new law
expanding art education.
The boy didn’t like living with strangers, so he left the school just before
he turned fifteen. For the next sixteen months, he did little other than take
long nature walks. That could not go on forever, but he had no idea what
else to do. Fortunately, his uncle owned a fantastically successful art
dealership, and had just been knighted. He offered his nephew a job in the
big city. Making art had not inspired the boy, but selling it did. He turned
the observational intensity he had practiced in nature to lithographs and
photographs, categorizing what he saw just as he had his beetles. By twenty,
he was dealing with important clients and traveling abroad for sales trips.
The young man confidently told his parents that he would never have to
look for a job again. He was wrong.
He was a country boy in the city, without enough social grace to smooth
over disagreements with his boss, and he disliked bargaining, which felt
like trying to take advantage of customers. He was soon transferred to a
London office that did not deal directly with customers, and then at twenty-
two he was transferred again, this time to Paris. He arrived in France amid
an artistic revolution. On walks to work, the young man passed the studios
of artists who were in the process of becoming famous. And yet, as with the
art teacher, as a pair of his future biographers would write, “None of it
registered.” He was too busy with a new obsession: religion. Years later,
when he and his little brother discussed those revolutionary artists, he
would say he had “seen absolutely nothing of them.”
When he was finally dismissed from the dealership, he went to work as
an assistant teacher at a boarding school in a seaside town in England.
Working fourteen-hour days, he taught classes from French to math,
oversaw the dorm, took the kids to church, and acted as the handyman. The
school was simply a business venture for the owner, and the young man was
cheap labor. He found another job as a tutor, this time at a fancier boarding
school, but after a few months he decided he would become a missionary in
South America. His parents talked him out of that, insisting that he needed
to “stop following [his] own desires” and return to a stable life course. His
mother wished he would do something in nature that would make him
“happier and calmer.” He decided to follow in his father’s footsteps; he
would train to become a full-fledged pastor.

In the meantime, his father arranged a job as a bookstore clerk. The
young man loved books and worked from 8 a.m. until midnight. When the
store flooded, he astounded his colleagues with his sheer physical
endurance as he carried pile after pile of books to safety. His new goal was
to get accepted to a university so that he could later train as a pastor. Again,
he unleashed his tireless passion. He worked with a tutor, and copied by
hand the text of entire books. “I must sit up as long as I can keep my eyes
open,” he told his brother. He reminded himself that “practice makes
perfect,” but Latin and Greek did not come easily to him. He moved in with
an uncle, a stern war hero who urged him simply, “push on.” The young
man resolved to begin work before his peers rose and finish after they slept.
His uncle would find him reading in the wee morning hours.
And still, he floundered in his studies. Nearing his twenty-fifth birthday,
the young man heard a sermon about how the economic revolution had
made certain citizens, like his art-dealer uncle, fabulously wealthy, while
others had been thrust into abject poverty. He decided to forsake university
to spread the Word more quickly. He opted for a shorter educational course,
but was not adept at giving the succinct, punchy sermons that the school
mandated. He failed in that program as well. But nobody could stop him
from preaching, so he headed for coal country, where inspiration was
needed most .
When the young man arrived and saw the blackened sky, he likened it to
the shading of a Rembrandt. There he would preach to workers so
downtrodden that they referred to the world above the mineshaft as “up in
Hell.” He dove in to spiritual service with his usual verve, giving away his
clothes and money, and doting night and day on the ill and injured. They
were legion.
Shortly after he arrived, a series of explosions killed 121 miners and sent
gas streaming out of the ground, fueling a pillar of fire like some monstrous
Bunsen burner nestled below the earth. The======================================================== New York Times, March
26, 2016.
“necessarily limited”: Duckworth et al., “Grit: Perseverance and Passion for Long-Term Goals.”
32 of 1,308: M. Randall, “New Cadets March Back from ‘Beast Barracks’ at West Point,” Times
Herald-Record , August 8, 2016.
“young and foolish”: R. A. Miller, “Job Matching and Occupational Choice,” Journal of Political
Economy 92, no. 6 (1984): 1086–1120.
“tasks we don’t have the guts to quit”: S. Godin, The Dip: A Little Book That Teaches You When to
Quit (and When to Stick) (New York: Portfolio, 2007 [Kindle ebook]).
twenty-year mark: G. Cheadle (Brig. Gen. USAF [Ret.]), “Retention of USMA Graduates on Active
Duty,” white paper for the USMA Association of Graduates, 2004.
A 2010 monograph; “institution that taught its cadets”: This monograph is one in a six-part series
about officer development and retention: C. Wardynski et al., “Towards a U.S. Army Officer Corps
Strategy for Success: Retaining Talent,” Strategic Studies Institute, 2010.
Ash Carter visited West Point: A. Tilghman, “At West Point, Millennial Cadets Say Rigid Military
Career Tracks Are Outdated,” Military Times, March 26, 2016.
talent-based branching: D. Vergun, “Army Helping Cadets Match Talent to Branch Selection,”
Army News Service , March 21, 2017.
American adults at large: You can compare your grit score to other adults at
https://angeladuckworth.com/grit-scale/ .
“Olympic athletes need to understand”: S. Cohen, “Sasha Cohen: An Olympian’s Guide to
Retiring at 25,” New York Times, February 24, 2018.
A recent international Gallup survey: Gallup’s State of the Global Workplace report, 2017. 137–
CHAPTER 7:FLIRTING WITH YOUR POSSIBLE SELVES
Frances Hesselbein grew up: Information about Hesselbein’s life comes from multiple interviews
with her, as well as her books, and corroboration from others who know her. Her book, My Life in
Leadership (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2011), was a particularly useful source and contains the “a
doctor, a lawyer, an aviatrix” quote.
“any company in America”: E. Edersheim, “The Woman Drucker Said Was the Best CEO in
America,” Management Matters Network , April 27, 2017.

“I would pick Frances”: J. A. Byrne, “Profiting from the Nonprofits,” Business Week, March 26,
1990.
Presidential Medal of Freedom: When President Bill Clinton presented the medal to Hesselbein, he
made a humorous point of asking her to come “forward” to receive the award, as she did not like the
use of hierarchical words like “up” and “down.”
Phil Knight: Good Morning America , April 26, 2016.
“wasn’t much for setting goals”: Phil Knight, Shoe Dog (New York: Scribner, 2016).
“Nor did I ever attend again”: These and other details of Darwin’s life can be found in The
Autobiography of Charles Darwin . A free version with annotation can be found at Darwin-
online.org.uk .
recommended him for an unpaid position: There is a wealth of information, like the invitation
from professor J. S. Henslow (in a letter on August 24, 1831), publicly available at the University of
Cambridge’s Darwin Correspondence Project (www.darwinproject.ac.uk ).
“died a natural death”; “It seems ludicrous”; “If his father had given him any choice”: The
Autobiography of Charles Darwin.
“I would never have to wonder”: Bio at www.michaelcrichton.com .
“end of history illusion”: J. Quoidbach, D. T. Gilbert, and T. D. Wilson, “The End of History
Illusion,” Science 339, no. 6115 (2013): 96–98.
the results of ninety-two studies: B.W. Roberts et al., “Patterns of Mean-Level Change in
Personality Traits Across the Life Course,” Psychological Bulletin 132, no. 1 (2006): 1-25. See also:
B. W. Roberts and D. Mroczek, “Personality Trait Change in Adulthood,” Current Directions in
Psychological Science 17, no. 1 (2009): 31–35. For a nice (and free) review of personality research
intended for a broad audience, see M. B. Donnellan, “Personality Stability and Change,” in Noba
Textbook Series: Psychology, ed. R. Biswas-Diener and E. Diener (Champaign, IL: DEF Publishers,
2018), nobaproject.com .
Psychologist Walter Mischel and his research team: W. Mischel, The Marshmallow Test (New
York: Little, Brown, 2014 [Kindle ebook]).
Shoda has repeatedly made a point: Shoda used the occasion of winning a research award to make
the point again. A June 2, 2015, press release from the University of Washington announcing the
award noted, “While pleased by the honor, Shoda expressed concern about media coverage of the
study over the years, and the incorrect notion that parents could predict their children’s fate by doing
the study themselves.” He added that “the relationships we are finding are far from perfect. And there
is a lot of room for change.”
“if-then signatures”; “The gist of such findings”: Y. Shoda et al., eds., Persons in Context :
Building a Science of the Individual (New York: Guilford Press, 2007 [Kindle ebook]).
“If you are conscientious”: T. Rose, The End of Average : How We Succeed in a World That Values
Sameness (New York: HarperOne, 2016 [Kindle ebook]).
a replication of the marshmallow test: T. W. Watts et al., “Revisiting the Marshmallow Test,”
Psychological Science 29, no. 7 (2018): 1159–77.
Ibarra began; “We discover the possibilities”: H. Ibarra, Working Identity (Boston: Harvard
Business Review Press, 2003).
“painless path to a new career”: P. Capell, “Taking the Painless Path to a New Career,” Wall Street
Journal Europe , January 2, 2002.
Paul Graham . . . high school graduation speech: “What You’ll Wish You’d Known,”
www.paulgraham.com/hs.html .

William Wallace showed: W. Wallace, “Michelangelo: Separating Theory and Practice,” in
Imitation, Representation and Printing in the Italian Renaissance, ed. R. Eriksen and M. Malmanger
(Pisa and Rome: Fabrizio Serra Editore, 2009).
grew to dislike painting; half . . . left unfinished: The Complete Poems of Michelangelo, trans. J. F.
Nims (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998): poem 5 (painting); p. 8 (half unfinished).
“I couldn’t play the instruments”: “Haruki Murakami, The Art of Fiction No. 182.” The Paris
Review , 170 (2004).
“ringing double”: H. Murakami, “The Moment I Became a Novelist,” Literary Hub, June 25, 2015.
“led to a revelation”: Bio at patrickrothfuss.com .
“I was just not interested in thinking about it”: Interview with Maryam Mirzakhani, Guardian,
August 12, 2014, republished with permission of the Clay Mathematics Institute.
“It is like being lost in a jungle”: A. Myers and B. Carey, “Maryam Mirzakhani, Stanford
Mathematician and Fields Medal Winner, Dies,” Stanford News, July 15, 2007.
“My passion for the sport”: “A new beginning,” Chrissiewellington.org , March 12, 2012.
“A warm feelin’ come over my body”: H. Finster, as told to T. Patterson, Howard Finster: Stranger
from Another World (New York: Abbeville Press, 1989).
CHAPTER 8:THE OUTSIDER ADVANTAGE
more than one-third: K. R. Lakhani, “InnoCentive.com (A),” HBS No. 9-608-170, Harvard
Business School Publishing, 2009. See also: S. Page, The Difference (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2008). 160–
“more savage”: T. Standage, An Edible History of Humanity (New York: Bloomsbury, 2009).
offered a reward: “Selected Innovation Prizes and Rewards Programs,” Knowledge Ecology
International, KEI Research Note, 2008: 1.
a whole sheep: J. H. Collins, The Story of Canned Foods (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1924).
fed the English troops at Waterloo: Standage, An Edible History of Humanity . 175 “I think it
helped me”: Cragin’s presentation at Collaborative Innovation: Public Sector Prizes, June 12, 2012,
Washington, D.C., The Case Foundation and The Joyce Foundation.
“three evenings”: J. Travis, “Science by the Masses,” Science 319, no. 5871 (2008): 1750–52.
“the further the problem was”: C. Dean, “If You Have a Problem, Ask Everyone,” New York Times,
July 22, 2008. See also: L. Moise interview with K. Lakhani, “5 Questions with Dr. Karim Lakhani,”
InnoCentive Innovation Blog , Jul 25, 2008.
“exploration [of new solutions]”: K. R. Lakhani et al., “Open Innovation and Organizational
Boundaries,” in A. Grandori, ed., Handbook of Economic Organization (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar,
2013).
“our research shows”: S. Joni, “Stop Relying on Experts for Innovation: A Conversation with
Karim Lakhani,” Forbes, October 23, 2013, online ed.
“need more creative solutions”: Kaggle Team, “Profiling Top Kagglers: Bestfitting, Currently #1 in
the World,” No Free Hunch (official Kaggle blog), May 7, 2018.
“Swanson is the first physical scientist”: Copy of University of Chicago Office of Public Relations
memo (No. 62-583) for December 17, 1962.
“The disparity between the total quantity”: D. R. Swanson, “On the Fragmentation of Knowledge,
the Connection Explosion, and Assembling Other People’s Ideas,” Bulletin of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology 27, no. 3 (2005): 12–14.

In 1960, the U.S. National Library of Medicine: K. J. Boudreau et al., “Looking Across and
Looking Beyond the Knowledge Frontier,” Management Science 62, no. 10 (2016): 2765–83.
“eleven neglected connections”: D. R. Swanson, “Migraine and Magnesium: Eleven Neglected
Connections,” Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 31, no. 4 (1988): 526–57.
“‘home field’” : L. Moise interview with K. Lakhani, “5 Questions with Dr. Karim Lakhani.”
She came upon a paper: the paper was F. Deymeer et al., “ Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy
with Unusual Features,” Muscle and Nerve 16 (1993): 1359–65.
In 1999, she got an email from Italy: The Italian research team soon published their results (and
thanked Jill): G. Bonne et al., “Mutations in the Gene Encoding 179–Lamin A/ C Cause Autosomal
Dominant Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy,” Nature Genetics 21, no. 3 (1999): 285–88.
CHAPTER 9:LATERAL THINKING WITH WITHERED TECHNOLOGY
During two centuries of closed-borders isolation: Several sources on the history of Nintendo were
of particular importance: F. Gorges with I. Yamazaki, The History of Nintendo, vol. 1, 1889–1980 (
Triel-sur-Seine: Pix’N Love, 2010). F. Gorges with I. Yamazaki, The======================================================== going on started flying. Every hour of lab meeting Dunbar recorded
required eight hours of transcribing and labeling problem-solving behaviors
so that he could analyze the process of scientific creativity, and he found an
analogy fest.
Dunbar witnessed important breakthroughs live, and saw that the labs
most likely to turn unexpected findings into new knowledge for humanity
made a lot of analogies, and made them from a variety of base domains.
The labs in which scientists had more diverse professional backgrounds
were the ones where more and more varied analogies were offered, and
where breakthroughs were more reliably produced when the unexpected
arose. Those labs were Keplers by committee. They included members with
a wide variety of experiences and interests. When the moment came to
either dismiss or embrace and grapple with information that puzzled them,
they drew on their range to make analogies. Lots of them.
For relatively straightforward challenges, labs started with analogies to
other, very similar experiments. The more unusual the challenge, the more

distant the analogies, moving away from surface similarities and toward
deep structural similarities. In some lab meetings a new analogy entered the
conversation every four minutes on average, some of them from outside of
biology entirely.
In one instance, Dunbar actually saw two labs encounter the same
experimental problem at around the same time. Proteins they wanted to
measure would get stuck to a filter, which made them hard to analyze. One
of the labs was entirely E. coli experts, and the other had scientists with
chemistry, physics, biology, and genetics backgrounds, plus medical
students. “One lab made an analogy drawing on knowledge from the person
with a medical degree, and they figured it out right there at the meeting,”
Dunbar told me. “The other lab used E. coli knowledge to deal with every
problem. That didn’t work here so they had to just start experimenting for
weeks to get rid of the problem. It put me in an awkward position because I
had seen the answer in another lab’s meeting.” (As part of the conditions of
the study, he was not allowed to share information between labs.)
In the face of the unexpected, the range of available analogies helped
determine who learned something new. In the lone lab that did not make
any new findings during Dunbar’s project, everyone had similar and highly
specialized backgrounds, and analogies were almost never used. “When all
the members of the laboratory have the same knowledge at their disposal,
then when a problem arises, a group of similar minded individuals will not
provide more information to make analogies than a single individual,”
Dunbar concluded.
“It’s sort of like the stock market,” he told me. “You need a mixture of
strategies.”
The trouble with courses of study like Northwestern’s Integrated Science
Program, which impart a broad mixture of strategies, is that they may
require abandoning a head start toward a major or career. That is a tough
sell, even if it better serves learners in the long run.
Whether it is the making-connections knowledge Lindsey Richland
studied, or the broad concepts that Flynn tested, or the distant, deep
structural analogical reasoning that Gentner assessed, there is often no
entrenched interest fighting on the side of range, or of knowledge that must
be slowly acquired. All forces align to incentivize a head start and early,

narrow specialization, even if that is a poor long-term strategy. That is a
problem, because another kind of knowledge, perhaps the most important of
all, is necessarily slowly acquired—the kind that helps you match yourself
to the right challenge in the first place.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 6
The Trouble with Too Much Grit
THE BOY’S MOTHER APPRECIATED music and art, but when the boy tried to
freehand sketch the family cat, he proved such a deficient draftsman that he
destroyed the picture and refused to try again. Instead, he spent his
childhood in the Netherlands playing marbles or sledding with his little
brother, but mostly just looking at things. A prominent parenting handbook
advised against unsupervised wanderings that might “intoxicate” a child’s
imagination, but he wandered alone for hours. He walked in storms, and at
night. He walked for miles just to sit for hours watching a bird’s nest, or
following water bugs on their commutes across a brook. He was especially
obsessed with collecting beetles, labeling each one with its proper Latin
species name.
When he was thirteen, the boy was admitted to a brand-new school
housed in a hulking former royal palace. It was so far from his home that he
had to board with a local family. His mind was elsewhere during class, but
he was a good student, and spent his free time memorizing poetry.
The art teacher was the faculty celebrity, an education pioneer who
argued for design to become a central part of the national economic engine.
That crusade was so successful it led the federal government to mandate
freehand drawing classes in every public school. Rather than holding forth
from the front of the class, the teacher arranged students in the center and
meandered through them like a sewing needle, giving personal attention.
Most students adored him. But he made no impression on the boy. As an
adult, the boy would complain that nobody had ever told him what
perspective was in drawing, even though it was so central to the teacher’s

tenets that knowledge of perspective was written into the new law
expanding art education.
The boy didn’t like living with strangers, so he left the school just before
he turned fifteen. For the next sixteen months, he did little other than take
long nature walks. That could not go on forever, but he had no idea what
else to do. Fortunately, his uncle owned a fantastically successful art
dealership, and had just been knighted. He offered his nephew a job in the
big city. Making art had not inspired the boy, but selling it did. He turned
the observational intensity he had practiced in nature to lithographs and
photographs, categorizing what he saw just as he had his beetles. By twenty,
he was dealing with important clients and traveling abroad for sales trips.
The young man confidently told his parents that he would never have to
look for a job again. He was wrong.
He was a country boy in the city, without enough social grace to smooth
over disagreements with his boss, and he disliked bargaining, which felt
like trying to take advantage of customers. He was soon transferred to a
London office that did not deal directly with customers, and then at twenty-
two he was transferred again, this time to Paris. He arrived in France amid
an artistic revolution. On walks to work, the young man passed the studios
of artists who were in the process of becoming famous. And yet, as with the
art teacher, as a pair of his future biographers would write, “None of it
registered.” He was too busy with a new obsession: religion. Years later,
when he and his little brother discussed those revolutionary artists, he
would say he had “seen absolutely nothing of them.”
When he was finally dismissed from the dealership, he went to work as
an assistant teacher at a boarding school in a seaside town in England.
Working fourteen-hour days, he taught classes from French to math,
oversaw the dorm, took the kids to church, and acted as the handyman. The
school was simply a business venture for the owner, and the young man was
cheap labor. He found another job as a tutor, this time at a fancier boarding
school, but after a few months he decided he would become a missionary in
South America. His parents talked him out of that, insisting that he needed
to “stop following [his] own desires” and return to a stable life course. His
mother wished he would do something in nature that would make him
“happier and calmer.” He decided to follow in his father’s footsteps; he
would train to become a full-fledged pastor.

In the meantime, his father arranged a job as a bookstore clerk. The
young man loved books and worked from 8 a.m. until midnight. When the
store flooded, he astounded his colleagues with his sheer physical
endurance as he carried pile after pile of books to safety. His new goal was
to get accepted to a university so that he could later train as a pastor. Again,
he unleashed his tireless passion. He worked with a tutor, and copied by
hand the text of entire books. “I must sit up as long as I can keep my eyes
open,” he told his brother. He reminded himself that “practice makes
perfect,” but Latin and Greek did not come easily to him. He moved in with
an uncle, a stern war hero who urged him simply, “push on.” The young
man resolved to begin work before his peers rose and finish after they slept.
His uncle would find him reading in the wee morning hours.
And still, he floundered in his studies. Nearing his twenty-fifth birthday,
the young man heard a sermon about how the economic revolution had
made certain citizens, like his art-dealer uncle, fabulously wealthy, while
others had been thrust into abject poverty. He decided to forsake university
to spread the Word more quickly. He opted for a shorter educational course,
but was not adept at giving the succinct, punchy sermons that the school
mandated. He failed in that program as well. But nobody could stop him
from preaching, so he headed for coal country, where inspiration was
needed most .
When the young man arrived and saw the blackened sky, he likened it to
the shading of a Rembrandt. There he would preach to workers so
downtrodden that they referred to the world above the mineshaft as “up in
Hell.” He dove in to spiritual service with his usual verve, giving away his
clothes and money, and doting night and day on the ill and injured. They
were legion.
Shortly after he arrived, a series of explosions killed 121 miners and sent
gas streaming out of the ground, fueling a pillar of fire like some monstrous
Bunsen burner nestled below the earth. The======================================================== like hyperspecialization today was actually a bold hybrid at the
time.
Smithies was a professor at the University of North Carolina when we
spoke. He passed away nine months later, at ninety-one. To the end of his
life, he encouraged students to think laterally, broaden their experience, and
forge their own path in search of match quality. “I try to teach people,
‘Don’t end up a clone of your thesis adviser,’” he told me. “Take your skills
to a place that’s not doing the same sort of thing. Take your skills and apply

them to a new problem, or take your problem and try completely new
skills.”
Smithies lived the advice he gave. In his fifties, he took a sabbatical in
order to venture a mere two floors away in the same building to learn how
to work with DNA. He never did find a precursor to insulin, and by the time
he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 2007, it was as a geneticist, for figuring
out how to modify disease-causing genes so that they could be studied in
animals. In that regard, he was a late specializer. I told Smithies that I had
recently talked with the provost of a large research university who was
using data analytics to assess contributions and make hires and promotions.
The provost told me that chemists reliably fall off a cliff twenty years after
they get their PhDs. Smithies laughed. “Yeah, well, my most important
paper was published when I was about sixty,” he said. A 2016 analysis of
ten thousand researchers’ careers determined that there is no standard
relationship between experience and contribution; an individual’s most
impactful paper was as likely to be their first as their second, their tenth, or
their last. (Researchers did tend to publish more frequently at younger ages,
though.)
When I mentioned to Smithies that his starched-shirts memory was an
example of lateral thinking with withered technology, he added that in 1990
he shared the Gairdner Award (a sort of pre-Nobel) with Edwin Southern,
who also wielded a childhood memory that, on its face, seemed totally
unrelated. “His was a memory of cyclostyling,” Smithies said, referring to
an old document-copying device that used glazed paper and a stencil
system. With that in mind, Southern created the “Southern blot,” a
ubiquitous method for detecting specific DNA molecules. Gunpei Yokoi
would have been delighted. And yet those were nothing compared to the
withered technology employed by Tu Youyou, who in 2015 became the first
(and so far only) Chinese national to win the Nobel Prize in Physiology or
Medicine, and the first Chinese woman in any category.
Tu is known as the “professor of the three no’s”: no membership in the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, no research experience outside of China,
and no postgraduate degree. Before Tu, other scientists had reportedly
tested 240,000 compounds searching for a malaria cure. Tu was interested
in both modern medicine and history, and was inspired by a clue in a recipe
for medication made from sweet wormwood, written by a fourth-century
Chinese alchemist. Technology doesn’t get much more withered than that. It

led her to experiment (at first on herself) with a sweet wormwood extract
known as artemisinin. Artemisinin is now regarded as one of the most
profound drug discoveries in medicine. A study on the decline of malaria in
Africa attributed 146 million averted cases to artemisinin-based therapies
between 2000 and 2015. Tu had a lot of disadvantages, but she had an
outsider advantage as well that made it easier for her to look in places
others would not dare. The kind of advantage Smithies sought on Saturday
mornings.
Over his career, Smithies filled and kept 150 notebooks. “That was also
Saturday,” he repeated, as he walked me through important pages. When I
pointed it out, he replied, “Well, I’ve had people say, ‘Why did you come to
work any other day!’”
The breakthroughs, of course, were exceptions. One Saturday morning
experiment accidentally dissolved an important piece of equipment. In
another, Smithies contaminated his shoes with a putrid chemical. He
thought he had aired them out sufficiently, until he heard one elderly
woman ask another if she smelled a dead body. Smithies could not resist
“picking up anything” to experiment with, he said, a habit his colleagues
noticed. Rather than throw out damaged equipment, they would leave it for
him, with the label NBGBOKFO: “no bloody good, but OK for Oliver.”
An enthusiastic, even childish, playful streak is a recurring theme in
research on creative thinkers. University of Manchester physicist Andre
Geim employs (with no relation to Smithies) “Friday night experiments”
(FNEs). It was a Friday night when he began the work that led to his 2000
Ig Nobel Prize. The Ig Nobel is given for work that at first blush seems
ridiculous or trivial. The mascot is an image of Rodin’s The Thinker
sculpture, except “The Stinker” has fallen off his pedestal and is lying on
his back on the ground. Recipients are asked beforehand if they are willing
to accept the award, so they can weigh reputational concerns. Geim won for
levitating a frog with strong magnets. (Frogs, and the water they contain,
are diamagnetic, or repelled by magnetic fields.)
Needless to say, FNEs are not funded, and most amount to nothing. After
the frog, though, another FNE produced “gecko tape,” an adhesive inspired
by a gecko’s feet. And then there was the one that started with using Scotch
tape to rip thin layers of graphite, the material that comprises pencil lead.

That low-tech affair culminated in the 2010 Nobel Prize in Physics, for
Geim and his colleague Konstantin Novoselov’s production of graphene, a
material one-hundred thousand times thinner than a human hair and two
hundred times stronger than steel. It is flexible, more transparent than glass,
and an excellent electrical conductor. Spiders fed graphene have spun silk
many times tougher than the Kevlar in bulletproof vests. Graphene consists
of carbon strips one atom thick, an arrangement previously considered
purely theoretical. When Geim and Novoselov submitted their initial work
to one of the world’s most prestigious journals, one reviewer said it was
impossible, and another deemed it not “a sufficient scientific advance.”
Art historian Sarah Lewis studies creative achievement, and described
Geim’s mindset as representative of the “deliberate amateur.” The word
“amateur,” she pointed out, did not originate as an insult, but comes from
the Latin word for a person who adores a particular endeavor. “A paradox
of innovation and mastery is that breakthroughs often occur when you start
down a road, but wander off for a ways and pretend as if you have just
begun,” Lewis wrote. When Geim was asked (two years before the Nobel)
to describe his research style for a science newsletter, he offered this: “It is
rather unusual, I have to say. I do not dig deep—I graze shallow. So ever
since I was a postdoc, I would go into a different subject every five years or
so. . . . I don’t want to carry on studying the same thing from cradle to
grave. Sometimes I joke that I am not interested in doing re-search, only
search.” Deviating from what Geim calls the “straight railway line” of life
is “not secure . . . psychologically,” but comes with advantages, for
motivation and for “questioning things people who work in that area never
bother to ask.” His Friday evenings are like Smithies’s Saturday mornings;
they balance the rest of the week’s standard practice with wide-roaming
exploration. They embrace what Max Delbrück, a Nobel laureate who
studied the intersection of physics and biology, called “the principle of
limited sloppiness.” Be careful not to be too careful, Delbrück warned, or
you will unconsciously limit your exploration.
Novoselov was Geim’s PhD student, taken on board after Geim’s
colleague told him that Novoselov “seems to be wasting his life” in another
lab. When Novoselov arrived, he found equipment that was similar to that
in his previous lab, but “this flexibility and the opportunity to try yourself in
different areas which was interesting.” A Science profile of him bore the
section titles “Going for Breadth” and “Spread Thin,” which would sound

really bad and like he was falling behind if the article wasn’t also about how
at thirty-six he was the youngest physics Nobel laureate in forty years.
Like Van Gogh or Frances Hesselbein or hordes of young athletes,
Novoselov probably looked from the outside like he was behind, until all of
a sudden he very much wasn’t. He was lucky. He arrived in a workspace
that treated mental meandering as a competitive advantage, not a pest to be
exterminated in the name of efficiency.
That kind of protection from the cult of the head start is increasingly rare.
At some point or other, we all specialize to one degree or another, so the
rush to get there can seem logical. Fortunately, there are pioneers who are
working to balance the cult of the head start. They want to have it all—the
mental meandering along with the wisdom of deep experience; the broad
conceptual skills that make use of Flynn’s scientific spectacles even within
training programs for specialists; and the creative power of interdisciplinary
cross-fertilization. They want to reverse the Tiger trend, not just for
themselves, but for everyone, and even in domains synonymous with
hyperspecialization. The future of discovery, they argue, depends on it.
It only takes a few minutes of conversation to gather that Arturo Casadevall
is a beaker-half-full kind of guy. One of the greatest days of his life was
when gravitational waves were detected, and that’s not his field. “Two black
holes collide in space a billion years ago, and for a billion years those
gravity waves travel through space-time,” he narrated, eyes widening.
“When the original signal began, life on Earth was unicellular, and in that
time humanity manages to build two interferometers and measure it. I
mean, what an accomplishment that is.” He is also an MD-PhD and a star in
his own======================================================== many different
sources”; “they appear to flit among ideas”; “broad range of interests”;
“they read more (and more broadly) than other technologists and have a
wider range of outside interests”; “need to learn significantly across
multiple domains”; “Serial innovators also need to communicate with
various individuals with technical expertise outside of their own domain.”
Get the picture?
Charles Darwin “could be considered a professional outsider,” according
to creativity researcher Dean Keith Simonton. Darwin was not a university
faculty member nor a professional scientist at any institution, but he was
networked into the scientific community. For a time, he focused narrowly
on barnacles, but got so tired of it that he declared, “I am unwilling to spend
more time on the subject,” in the introduction to a barnacle monograph.
Like the 3M generalists and polymaths, he got bored sticking in one area, so
that was that. For his paradigm-shattering work, Darwin’s broad network
was crucial. Howard Gruber, a psychologist who studied Darwin’s journals,
wrote that Darwin only personally carried out experiments “opportune for
experimental attack by a scientific generalist such as he was.” For
everything else, he relied on correspondents, Jayshree Seth style. Darwin
always juggled multiple projects, what Gruber called his “network of
enterprise.” He had at least 231 scientific pen pals who can be grouped
roughly into thirteen broad themes based on his interests, from worms to

human sexual selection. He peppered them with questions. He cut up their
letters to paste pieces of information in his own notebooks, in which “ideas
tumble over each other in a seemingly chaotic fashion.” When his chaotic
notebooks became too unwieldy, he tore pages out and filed them by themes
of inquiry. Just for his own experiments with seeds, he corresponded with
geologists, botanists, ornithologists, and conchologists in France, South
Africa, the United States, the Azores, Jamaica, and Norway, not to mention
a number of amateur naturalists and some gardeners he happened to know.
As Gruber wrote, the activities of a creator “may appear, from the outside,
as a bewildering miscellany,” but he or she can “map” each activity onto
one of the ongoing enterprises. “In some respects,” Gruber concluded,
“Charles Darwin’s greatest works represent interpretative compilations of
facts first gathered by others.” He was a lateral-thinking integrator .
Toward the end of their book Serial Innovators, Abbie Griffin and her
coauthors depart from stoically sharing their data and observations and offer
advice to human resources managers. They are concerned that HR policies
at mature companies have such well-defined, specialized slots for
employees that potential serial innovators will look like “round pegs to the
square holes” and get screened out. Their breadth of interests do not neatly
fit a rubric. They are “π-shaped people” who dive in and out of multiple
specialties. “Look for wide-ranging interests,” they advised. “Look for
multiple hobbies and avocations. . . . When the candidate describes his or
her work, does he or she tend to focus on the boundaries and the interfaces
with other systems?” One serial innovator described his network of
enterprise as “a bunch of bobbers hanging in the water that have little
thoughts attached to them.” Hamilton creator Lin-Manuel Miranda painted
the same idea elegantly: “I have a lot of apps open in my brain right now.”
Griffin’s research team noticed that serial innovators repeatedly claimed
that they themselves would be screened out under their company’s current
hiring practices. “A mechanistic approach to hiring, while yielding highly
reproducible results, in fact reduces the numbers of high-potential [for
innovation] candidates,” they wrote. When I first spoke with him, Andy
Ouderkirk was developing a class at the University of Minnesota partly
about how to identify potential innovators. “We think a lot of them might be
frustrated by school,” he said, “because by nature they’re very broad.”
Facing uncertain environments and wicked problems, breadth of
experience is invaluable. Facing kind problems, narrow specialization can

be remarkably efficient. The problem is that we often expect the
hyperspecialist, because of their expertise in a narrow area, to magically be
able to extend their skill to wicked problems. The results can be disastrous.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 10
Fooled by Expertise
THE BET WAS ON , and it was over the fate of humanity.
On one side was Stanford biologist Paul Ehrlich. In congressional
testimony, on The Tonight Show (twenty times), and in his 1968 bestseller
The Population Bomb, Ehrlich insisted that it was too late to prevent a
doomsday apocalypse from overpopulation. On its lower left corner, the
book cover bore an image of a fuse burning low, and a reminder that the
“bomb keeps ticking.” Resource shortages would cause hundreds of
millions of starvation deaths within a decade, Ehrlich warned. The New
Republic alerted the world that the global population had already
outstripped the food supply. “The famine has started,” it proclaimed. It was
cold, hard math: human population was growing exponentially, the food
supply was not. Ehrlich was a butterfly specialist, and an accomplished one.
He knew full well that nature did not regulate animal populations delicately.
Populations exploded, blew past the available resources, and crashed. “The
shape of the population growth curve is one familiar to the biologist,” he
wrote.
Ehrlich played out hypothetical scenarios in his book, representing “the
kinds of disasters that will occur.” In one scenario, during the 1970s the
United States and China start blaming one another for mass starvation and
end up in a nuclear war. That’s the moderate scenario. In the bad one,
famine rages across the planet. Cities alternate between riots and martial
law. The American president’s environmental advisers recommend a one-
child policy and sterilization of people with low IQ scores. Russia, China,
and the United States are dragged into nuclear war, which renders the

northern two-thirds of Earth uninhabitable. Pockets of society persist in the
Southern Hemisphere, but the environmental degradation soon extinguishes
the human race. In the “cheerful” scenario, population controls begin. The
pope announces that Catholics should reproduce less, and gives his blessing
to abortion. Famine spreads, and countries teeter. By the mid-1980s, the
major death wave ends and agricultural land can begin to be rehabilitated.
The cheerful scenario only forecast half a billion or so deaths by starvation.
“I challenge you to create one more optimistic,” Ehrlich wrote, adding that
he would not count scenarios involving benevolent aliens with care
packages.
Economist Julian Simon took up Ehrlich’s challenge to create a more
optimistic picture. The late 1960s was the prime of the “green revolution.”
Technology from other sectors—water control techniques, hybridized seeds,
management strategies—moved into agriculture, and global crop yields
were increasing. Simon saw that innovation was altering the equation. More
people would actually be the solution, because it meant more good ideas
and more technological breakthroughs. So Simon proposed a bet. Ehrlich
could choose five metals that he expected to become more expensive as
resources were depleted and chaos ensued over the next decade. The
material stakes were $1,000 worth of Ehrlich’s five metals. If, ten years
hence, prices had gone down, Ehrlich would have to pay the price
difference to Simon. If prices went up, Simon would be on the hook for the
difference. Ehrlich’s liability was capped at $1,000, whereas Simon’s risk
had no roof. The bet was made official in 1980.
In October 1990, Simon found a check for $576.07 in his mailbox.
Ehrlich got smoked. The price of every one of the metals declined.
Technological change not only supported a growing population, but the
food supply per person increased year after year, on every continent. The
proportion of people who are undernourished is too high until it is zero, but
it has never been so low as it is now. In the 1960s, 50 of every 100,000
global citizens died annually from famine; now that number is 0.5. Even
without the pope’s assistance, the world’s population growth rate began a
precipitous decline that continues today. When child mortality declined and
education (especially for women) and development increased, birth rates
decreased. Humanity will need more innovation as absolute world
population continues to grow, but the growth rate is declining, rapidly. The
United Nations projects that by the end of the century human population

will be near a peak—the growth rate approaching zero—or it could even be
in decline.
Ehrlich’s starvation predictions were almost magically bad. He made
them just as technological development was dramatically altering the global
predicament, and right before the rate of population growth started a long
deceleration. And yet, the very same year he conceded the bet, Ehrlich
doubled down in another book. Sure, the timeline had been a little off, but
“now the population bomb has detonated.” Despite one erroneous
prediction after another, Ehrlich amassed an enormous following and
continued to receive prestigious awards. Simon became a standard-bearer
for scholars who felt that Ehrlich had ignored economic principles, and for
anyone angry at an incessant flow of dire predictions that did not manifest.
The kind of excessive regulations Ehrlich advocated, the Simon camp
argued, would quell the very innovation that had delivered humanity from
catastrophe. Both men became luminaries in their respective domains. And
both were mistaken.
When economists later examined metal prices for every ten-year window
from 1900 to 2008, during which time world population quadrupled, they
saw that Ehrlich would have won the bet 62 percent of the time. The catch:
commodity prices are a bad======================================================== concept of Kahneman and Tversky, ref1
instinctive decisions, ref1
instructors, ref1
Integrated Science Program at Northwestern University, ref1 , ref2
Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA), ref1
interdisciplinary approaches, ref1 , ref2 , ref3n , ref4 , ref5
“interleaving” (mixed practice), ref1
inventors
failures and breakthroughs of, ref1
impacts of specialist vs. generalist, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
See also innovation and innovators
IQ scores and the Flynn effect, ref1 , ref2
Israel Defense Forces, ref1
Jackson, Kirabo, ref1
Japan, ref1 , ref2n
jazz musicians, ref1 , ref2
Jentleson, Katherine, ref1
Jeopardy! ref1
Jobs, Steve, ref1
Jordan, Hillary, ref1
Junger, Sebastian, ref1
Kaggle competitions, ref1
Kahan, Dan, ref1 , ref2
Kahneman, Daniel
on experience-expertise link, ref1 , ref2
high school curriculum project of, ref1
“inside view” concept of, ref1
on repetitive domains, ref1
Kaphar, Titus, ref1
Kasparov, Garry, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Kepler, Johannes
analogies used by, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
and Copernican model of planets, ref1
documentation of discovery process, ref1
and Mars orbit, ref1
and planetary motion, ref1
“kind” learning environments
about, ref1
domains that benefit from, ref1
and early specialization, ref1 , ref2
efficiency of specialization in, ref1 , ref2
pattern recognition in, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Klein, Gary, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Knight, Phil, ref1
Konnikova, Maria, ref1
Kornell, Nate, ref1 , ref2
Kpelle people in Liberia, ref1
Kranz, Gene, ref1 , ref2

Lakhani, Karim, ref1 , ref2
language and abstract thinking, ref1
lateral thinking, ref1
about, ref1
of Darwin, ref1
and Dyson’s birds/frogs analogy, ref1
and Game Boy by Nintendo, ref1
and impact of specialist vs. generalist inventors, ref1 , ref2
and Ouderkirk’s multilayer optical film, ref1
of polymaths, ref1
and Unusual (or Alternative) Uses Task, ref1
with withered technology, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
of Yokoi at Nintendo, ref1 , ref2
late starts/specialization
in art world, ref1
in athletics, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
and changing employment, ref1
as integral to success, ref1
in literary world, ref1
of Malamud, ref1
and “match quality” in vocations, ref1 , ref2
of Tillman Scholars, ref1 , ref2
learning environments, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 . See also “kind” learning environments
learning fast and slow, ref1
and blocked practice, ref1
and “desirable difficulties,” ref1 , ref2 , ref3
and distributed practice/“spacing,” ref1 , ref2
in early childhood education programs, ref1 , ref2n
efficiency in, ref1
and generation effect, ref1
and hint-giving practices, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
“making connections” vs. “using procedures” question types, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
and mistakes, ref1 , ref2n
and mixed practice/“interleaving,” ref1
and open/closed skills, ref1
and short/long term performance, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
and testing/self-testing, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Ledecká, Ester, ref1
Lee, Stan, ref1
Lefai, Etienne, ref1
Lemke, Leslie, ref1
Lesmes, Tony, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Levitt, Steven, ref1 , ref2n
Lewis, Sarah, ref1
Liberia, Kpelle people of, ref1
Limb, Charles, ref1
LinkedIn, ref1
local search strategies, ref1
Logic, The Theory of Inquiry (Dewey), ref1
Lomachenko, Vasyl, ref1

Lopes-Schliep, Priscilla, ref1 , ref2
Lovallo, Dan, ref1 , ref2
Lucas, William, ref1
Luria, Alexander, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Lyell, Charles, ref1
Ma, Yo-Yo, ref1
Mackie, Glen, ref1
Maclean, Norman, ref1 , ref2
“making connections” question type, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Malamud, Ofer, ref1
Mann Gulch fire, ref1
Marcus, Gary, ref1
Mars, orbit of, ref1
marshmallow test, ref1 , ref2n
Marvel Comics, ref1
match quality
about, ref1
in Army officer training, ref1 , ref2 , ref3n , ref4
of early and late specializers, ref1 , ref2
and grit/persistence, ref1 , ref2
and personal changes, ref1 , ref2
process for, ref1
sampling as means of maximizing, ref1
and Smithies, ref1
and value of experimentation, ref1
and Van Gogh, ref1
and winding career paths of dark horses, ref1
math-skills acquisition, ref1
McDonald, Allan, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
medical field, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
Melero, Eduardo, ref1
Mellers, Barbara, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
memories, ref1 , ref2
Metcalfe, Janet, ref1
Michelangelo, ref1 , ref2
military servicemen, ref1
Millennial generation, ref1n
Miller, Robert A., ref1 , ref2
Miranda, Lin-Manuel, ref1
Mirzakhani, Maryam, ref1 , ref2
Mischel, Walter, ref1 , ref2
mistakes, benefits of, ref1 , ref2n
mixed practice (“interleaving”), ref1
Miyazaki, Hayao, ref1
modern world, exposure to, ref1
Monet, Claude, ref1
Moore, Joanne, ref1n
Moravec’s paradox, ref1
motor skills learning, correcting, ref1n

mountain climbers, Himalayan, ref1
movie industry forecasts, ref1
Mozart, Wolfgang, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Mudbound (Jordan), ref1
Mulloy, Larry, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
multilayer optical film, ref1
Murakami, Haruki, ref1
The Musical Mind (Sloboda), ref1
music and musicians, ref1
backgrounds of legendary artists, ref1
and creativity, ref1
and deliberate practice, ref1 , ref2
early specialization of, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
figlie del coro of Venice, ref1
and improvisation, ref1 , ref2
and inability to read music, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
and instrument selection, ref1 , ref2
jazz, ref1 , ref2
and lessons, ref1
and multi-instrument approach, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
quitting, ref1
and role of practice, ref1 , ref2
and sampling period, ref1 , ref2
self-taught, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
and Suzuki Method, ref1
traits of exceptional musicians, ref1
Mutual of America insurance company, ref1
Naifeh, Steven, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
The Name of the Wind (Rothfuss), ref1
Napoleon, ref1
NASA
and Challenger disaster, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
and Columbia disaster, ref1
communication in, ref1 , ref2
culture of, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
and Gravity Probe B project, ref1
and InnoCentive solutions, ref1
Nash, Steve, ref1
National Assessment of Educational Progress, ref1
National Spelling Bee, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
naturalistic decision making (NDM), ref1
nature vs. nurture, ref1
Netflix’s recommendation algorithm, ref1
Nicolas, Ashley, ref1 , ref2
Nike, ref1
Nintendo, ref1 , ref2
Nobel laureates, ref1
Nolan, Christopher ref1
Northwestern University, ref1 , ref2

Novoselov, Konstantin, ref1 , ref2
officer training, military, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Ogas, Ogi, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Ohsumi, Yoshinori, ref1
Okada, Satoru, ref1
O’Neal, Shaquille, ref1
open/closed skills, ref1
open-ended problem solving, ref1
open-mindedness, active, ref1 , ref2
ospedali , ref1 , ref2
Ouderkirk, Andy, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
outsider advantage, ref1
and Appert’s food preservation solutions, ref1
and Bingham, ref1 , ref2
in Eli Lilly’s chemistry problems, ref1
and Exxon Valdez oil tanker disaster, ref1
and InnoCentive solutions, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
and interdisciplinary opportunities, ref1 , ref2
in Kaggle competitions, ref1
and Viles’s genetics sleuthing, ref1
overpopulation debate, ref1
Palomeras, Neus, ref1
parents and household rules, ref1 , ref2
Pasteur, Louis, ref1
patents, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Patil, Shefali, ref1 , ref2
pattern repetition and recognition
in chess, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
and chunking, ref1
and cognitive entrenchment, ref1 , ref2
computer aided, ref1
in firefighting, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
and forecasting, ref1
in golf, ref1
and kind learning environments, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
of military commanders, ref1
of savants, ref1
Pat Tillman Foundation, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Paul, Les, ref1
Peele, Jordan, ref1
Pegau, Scott, ref1
Pelegrina della Pietà, ref1
The Perfect Storm (Junger), ref1
persistence. See grit
personality traits, ref1 , ref2n , ref3
Pfirman, Stephanie, ref1n
Pinker, Steven, ref1n
poker players, ref1
Polgar, Laszlo, ref1 , ref2 , ref3

Polgar sisters, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Pollock, Jackson, ref1
polymaths, ref1 , ref2
population of planet Earth, ref1
practice. See deliberate practice ; repetitive practice
predictions and forecasters, ref1
and active open-mindedness, ref1 , ref2
and breadth of experience, ref1 , ref2
and counterarguments, ref1
flu predictions, ref1
and hedgehog/foxes model, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
and IARPA tournament, ref1
and importance of curiosity, ref1 , ref2
improving accuracy in, ref1
learning from results of, ref1
and narrow experts as resource, ref1
and overpopulation debate of Ehrlich and Simon, ref1
superforecasters, ref1 , ref2
Tetlock’s research on, ref1
premodern people, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
PricewaterhouseCoopers, ref1
primates, ref1
Prince, ref1
producers, ref1
professors, ref1
R3 Initiative (Rigor, Responsibility, Reproducibility), ref1
Ramón y Cajal, Santiago, ref1
Raven’s Progressive Matrices, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Redberg, Rita F., ref1
Reinhardt, Django, ref1 , ref2
repetitive practice
and chunking, ref1 , ref2
and “closed” skills, ref1
and comic book creators, ref1
domains that benefit from, ref1
in domains without clearly repetitive patterns, ref1
and mixed practice/“interleaving,” ref1
in music training, ref1
and specialized teams, ref1
and value of struggle, ref1
See also pattern repetition and recognition
research and development (R&D), ref1
Rhimes, Shonda, ref1n
Rhoades, Quentin, ref1 , ref2
Rhoten, Diana, ref1n
Richland, Lindsey, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Richter, Sviatoslav, ref1
Roberts, Brent W., ref1 , ref2n
Rose, Todd, ref1 , ref2

Rothfuss, Patrick, ref1
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, ref1
routines of specialists, ref1
Rowling, J. K., ref1
rules in households, ref1
Sabin, Paul, ref1
sampling period, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
savants, ref1 , ref2
Schultz, Theodore, ref1
Schwartz, Barry, ref1
“Science, the Endless Frontier” (Bush), ref1
science and scientists
atypical knowledge combinations in, ref1
and commercial applications, ref1
critical thinking skills of, ref1 , ref2
hyperspecialization in, ref1 , ref2n
and interdisciplinary approaches, ref1 , ref2n , ref3 , ref4
with outside avocations, ref1
parallel trenches of, ref1 , ref2
rush to======================================================== the students filled the shoes of the engineers on the emergency

conference call who gave the green light for launch. The professor unfurled
the lesson masterfully.
“Like all of you, nobody [at NASA or Thiokol] asked for the seventeen
data points for which there had been no problems,” he explains. “Obviously
that data existed, and they were having a discussion like we had. If I was in
your situation I would probably say, ‘But in a classroom the teacher
typically gives us material we’re supposed to have.’ But it’s often the case
in group meetings where the person who made the Power-Point slides puts
data in front of you, and we often just use the data people put in front of us.
I would argue we don’t do a good job of saying, ‘Is this the data that we
want to make the decision we need to make?’”
The presidential commission that investigated the Challenger accident
concluded that simply including the nonfailure flights would have revealed
the correlation between O-ring damage and temperature. A University of
Chicago professor of organizational psychology wrote that the missed data
was such a rudimentary mistake that it came down to “a professional
weakness shared by all participants” on the conference call. “Arguments
against launching at cold temperatures could have been quantified, but were
not quantified.” The engineers were poorly educated, he declared.
Sociologist Diane Vaughan’s book The Challenger Launch Decision
came to be regarded by NASA as the definitive causal account of the
tragedy. “More stunning is the observation that they did have the pertinent
data,” it reads. “There were charts [that several Thiokol engineers who
wanted to postpone launch] did not imagine and did not construct that, if
created, would have provided the quantitative correlational data required to
sustain their position.”
Business professors around the world have been teaching Carter Racing
for thirty years because it provides a stark lesson in the danger of reaching
conclusions from incomplete data, and the folly of relying only on what is
in front of you.
And now for one last surprise. They all got it wrong. The Challenger
decision was not a failure of quantitative analysis. NASA’s real mistake was
to rely on quantitative analysis too much.
Before ignition, Challenger ’s O-rings sat squashed in the joints that
connected vertical sections of the booster. At ignition, burning gas came

shooting down the booster. The metal walls that connected to form a joint
pulled apart for a split second, at which point the rubber O-rings
immediately expanded to fill the space and keep the joint sealed. When the
O-rings got cold, the rubber hardened and could not expand as quickly. The
colder the O-ring, the longer the fraction of a second when the joint was not
sealed and burning gas could shoot right through the booster wall. Even so,
temperature usually did not matter; the O-rings were protected by a special
insulating putty meant to block burning gas from reaching them in the first
place. On the seventeen flights with no O-ring problems—akin to the
seventeen Carter Racing races with no engine problems—the putty worked
perfectly. Those flights provided no information whatsoever about how O-
rings might fail, no matter the temperature, because the burning gas could
not even get to the O-rings to cause a problem. Sometimes, however, small
holes formed in the putty when the joints were assembled. On the seven
flights that had O-ring issues, burning gas pushed through the holes in the
protective putty and reached the O-rings. Only those seven data points were
relevant to how the O-rings could be damaged or fail .
And on those seven shuttle flights—unlike gasket breaks in Carter
Racing, which was the same problem every time—the O-ring issues came
in two different varieties. The first: erosion. On five flights, burning gas that
came shooting down the booster at ignition hit the O-rings and eroded the
rubber surface. This was not a life-or-death condition. There was more than
enough rubber for the O-ring to do its job. And erosion had nothing at all to
do with temperature.
The second variety: blow-by. If the rubber ring did not expand instantly
to fully seal the joint at ignition, burning gas “blew by” and could
potentially shoot right through the booster wall. Blow-by was a life-or-
death condition and, engineers would later learn, dramatically worsened
when cool temperatures hardened the O-ring rubber. Two pre- Challenger
flights had blow-by, but still returned home safely.
Thiokol engineers who opposed the launch on the emergency prelaunch
conference call did not really have twenty-four relevant data points on O-
ring failure to work with, as the Carter Racing study indicates. They did not
even have seven, like the Harvard students. They had two.
Now what does the chart tell you?

Ironically, Allan McDonald, then director of the rocket-booster project at
Morton Thiokol, told me, “Looking only at the relevant data points
supported NASA’s [prelaunch] position that it was inconclusive.” There was
no 99.4 percent certainty that was missed. The engineers were not poorly
educated.
There was other important information the Thiokol engineers presented
that could have helped NASA avert disaster. But it was not quantitative, so
NASA managers did not accept it. The Carter Racing study teaches that the
answer was available, if only engineers looked at the right numbers. In
reality, the right numbers did not contain an answer at all. The Challenger
decision was truly ambiguous. It was a wicked problem, rife with
uncertainty, and outside of previous experience, where demanding more
data actually became the problem itself.
The infamous emergency conference call convened thirty-four engineers—
every manager was also an engineer—in three locations. Thiokol engineer
Roger Boisjoly had personally inspected the joints after both flights with
blow-by, and presented photographs from each. Following the 75-degree
flight, he found a very thin streak of light gray soot beyond an O-ring in the
joint, from a tiny amount of gas that had blown by before the O-ring sealed.
It was nowhere close to a catastrophic problem. After the 53-degree flight,
he found jet-black soot fanned out across a large swath of the joint. A lot of
burning gas had blown past that time. In Boisjoly’s opinion, the reason the

53-degree launch looked so much worse was that cool conditions had
hardened the O-rings and made them slow to expand and seal at ignition.
He was right, but he did not have the data to prove it. “I was asked to
quantify my concerns, and I said I couldn’t,” Boisjoly later testified. “I had
no data to quantify it, but I did say I knew that it was away from goodness.”
Thanks to an extraordinarily strong technical culture, NASA had
developed quantitatively rigorous “flight readiness reviews.” They were
productively adversarial, like superforecasting team discussions. Managers
grilled engineers and forced them to produce data to back up their
assertions. The process had worked remarkably. The space shuttle was the
most complex machine ever built, and all twenty-four flights had returned
safely. But on the emergency conference call, that same quantitative culture
led them astray.
On their engineers’ advice, McDonald and two Thiokol VPs on the call
initially supported a no-launch decision. The Challenger had already been
cleared, so this was an eleventh-hour reversal. When NASA officials asked
Thiokol engineers exactly what temperature range was safe for flight, they
recommended setting a limit at 53 degrees, the lower bound of previous
experience.
NASA manager Larry Mulloy was flabbergasted. He thought the shuttle
was supposed to be cleared to launch from 31 to 99 degrees. A last-minute
53-degree limit was setting an entirely new technical criteria for launches. It
had never been discussed, was not backed by quantitative data, and meant
that suddenly winter was off-limits for space exploration. Mulloy found it
frustrating; he later called it “dumb.”
How had the engineers arrived at that number? “They said because they
had flown at 53 degrees before,” a NASA manager reflected, “which is no
reason to me. That’s tradition rather than technology.” Boisjoly was asked
again for data to support his claim, “and I said I have none other than what
is being presented.”
With the conference call at an impasse, a Thiokol VP asked for a five-
minute “ offline caucus,” during which Thiokol concluded that they had no
more data to provide. They returned to the call a half hour later with a new
decision: proceed with launch. Their official document read, “temperature
data not conclusive on predicting primary O-ring blow-by.”
When conference call participants from NASA and Thiokol later spoke
with investigators and gave interviews, they repeatedly brought up the

“weak engineering position,” as one put it. Their statements comprised a
repetitive chorus: “Unable to quantify”; “supporting data was subjective”;
“hadn’t done a good technical job”; “just didn’t have enough conclusive
data.” NASA was, after all, the agency that hung a framed quote in the
Mission Evaluation Room: “In God We Trust, All Others Bring Data.”
“The engineers’ concerns for the most part were just based on a few
photographs they took of joints they pulled apart that had soot trapped in
there,” McDonald told me. “One was at a cool temperature, and one was at
a rather warm temperature. Roger Boisjoly thought the difference was
absolutely telling a story, but it was a qualitative assessment.” NASA’s
Mulloy later argued that he “would’ve felt naked” taking Thiokol’s
argument up the chain of command. Without a solid quantitative case, “I
couldn’t have defended it.”
The very tool that had helped make NASA so consistently successful,
what Diane Vaughan called “the original technical culture” in the agency’s
DNA, suddenly worked perversely in a situation where the familiar brand
of data did not exist. Reason without numbers was not accepted.======================================================== McDonald told me that
engineers who pushed to abort might have been cast as “Chicken Littles.”
Chicken Little doesn’t fare well in the space business. As NASA engineer
Mary Shafer once articulated, “Insisting on perfect safety is for people who
don’t have the balls to live in the real world.” It is no wonder that
organizations struggle to cultivate experts who are both proficient with their
tools and prepared to drop them. But there is an organizational strategy that
can help. The strategy, strange as it sounds, is to send a mixed message.
“Congruence” is a social science term for cultural “fit” among an
institution’s components—values, goals, vision, self-concepts, and
leadership styles. Since the 1980s, congruence has been a pillar of
organizational theory. An effective culture is both consistent and strong.
When all signals point clearly in the same direction, it promotes self-
reinforcing consistency, and people like consistency.
Plenty of profiles of individual businesses were written in support of
congruence. But in the first study that systematically examined a broad
swath of organizations across an industry, researchers who studied cultural
congruence at 334 institutions of higher education found that it had no
influence on any measure of organizational success whatsoever.
Administrators, department heads, and trustees in strongly congruent
institutions did have an easier time classifying the culture when asked, but
there was no impact at all on performance, from the academic and career
development of students to the satisfaction of faculty and the financial
health of the college. The researcher who led that work went on to study

thousands of businesses. She found that the most effective leaders and
organizations had range; they were, in effect, paradoxical. They could be
demanding and nurturing, orderly and entrepreneurial, even hierarchical
and individualistic all at once. A level of ambiguity, it seemed, was not
harmful. In decision making, it can broaden an organization’s toolbox in a
way that is uniquely valuable .
Philip Tetlock and Barbara Mellers showed that thinkers who tolerate
ambiguity make the best forecasts; one of Tetlock’s former graduate
students, University of Texas professor Shefali Patil, spearheaded a project
with them to show that cultures can build in a form of ambiguity that forces
decision makers to use more than one tool, and to become more flexible and
learn more readily.
In one experiment, subjects played the role of corporate human resources
managers who had to predict the performance of job applicants. The
managers were presented with a standard evaluation process that showed
them how a candidate’s skills were typically weighted, and then told that
they would be evaluated (and paid) based on how they made decisions. In a
sped-up simulation of real life, after each prediction they could see how the
candidate actually performed according to company records. In some
batches of applications, the candidates performed as the standard evaluation
process predicted; in others, they weren’t even close. Yet, over and over, the
individual managers conformed to standard procedure no matter what the
results told them, even when it clearly was not working, and even when a
better system was easily discoverable. They failed to learn with experience.
Until a wrinkle was added. Conformist managers were given fake Harvard
Business Review research proclaiming that successful groups prioritize
independence and dissent. Miraculously, their minds were opened and they
started learning. They began to see when the standard evaluation process
clearly needed to be modified or discarded. They were learning with
experience, and their predictions became more accurate. The managers
were benefitting from incongruence . The formal, conformist company
process rules were balanced out by an informal culture of individual
autonomy in decision making and dissent from the typical way of doing
things.
Incongruence worked in the other direction as well. HR managers who
were given a standard evaluation process but told that only the accuracy of
their predictions mattered began by ditching the process and making up

their own rules. They never learned when the standard process did indeed
work. In that case, the cure was fake Harvard Business Review research
indicating that successful groups prioritize cohesion, loyalty, and finding
common ground. Again, the HR managers became learning machines; they
suddenly hewed closer to the traditional process when it had value, but
continued to deviate readily when it didn’t, as NASA should have.
Business school students are widely taught to believe the congruence
model, that a good manager can always align every element of work into a
culture where all influences are mutually reinforcing—whether toward
cohesion or individualism. But cultures can actually be too internally
consistent. With incongruence, “you’re building in cross-checks,” Tetlock
told me.
The experiments showed that an effective problem-solving culture was
one that balanced standard practice—whatever it happened to be—with
forces that pushed in the opposite direction. If managers were used to
process conformity, encouraging individualism helped them to employ
“ambidextrous thought,” and learn what worked in each situation. If they
were used to improvising, encouraging a sense of loyalty and cohesion did
the job. The trick was expanding the organization’s range by identifying the
dominant culture and then diversifying it by pushing in the opposite
direction.
By the time of the Challenger launch, NASA’s “can do” culture
manifested as extreme process accountability combined with collectivist
social norms. Everything was congruent for conformity to the standard
procedures. The process was so rigid it spurned evidence that didn’t
conform to the usual rules, and so sacred that Larry Mulloy felt protected
by a signed piece of paper testifying that he had followed the usual process.
Dissent was valued at flight readiness reviews, but at the most important
moment, the most important engineering group asked for an offline caucus
where they found a way, in private, to conform. Like the one engineer said,
without data, “the boss’s opinion is better than mine. ”
The more I spoke with Captain Lesmes, the more it seemed to me that he
had felt strongly outcome accountable—searching for a solution even if it
deviated from standard procedure—within an extraordinarily potent
collective culture that ensured he would not make the decision to deviate
easily. He had, as Patil, Tetlock, and Mellers wrote, harnessed “the power of
cross-pressures in promoting flexible, ambidextrous thought.” The subtitle

of that paper: “Balancing the Risks of Mindless Conformity and Reckless
Deviation.”
Superforecasting teams harnessed the same cultural cross-pressure. A
team was judged purely by the accuracy of its members’ forecasts. But
internally the Good Judgment Project incentivized collective culture.
Commenting was an expectation; teammates were encouraged to vote for
useful comments and recognized for process milestones, like a certain
number of lifetime comments.
Prior to Challenger, there was a long span when NASA culture harnessed
incongruence. Gene Kranz, the flight director when Apollo 11 first landed
on the moon, lived by that same mantra, the valorized process—“In God
We Trust, All Others Bring Data”—but he also made a habit of seeking out
opinions of technicians and engineers at every level of the hierarchy. If he
heard the same hunch twice, it didn’t take data for him to interrupt the usual
process and investigate.
Wernher von Braun, who led the Marshall Space Flight Center’s
development of the rocket that propelled the moon mission, balanced
NASA’s rigid process with an informal, individualistic culture that
encouraged constant dissent and cross-boundary communication. Von
Braun started “Monday Notes”: every week engineers submitted a single
page of notes on their salient issues. Von Braun handwrote comments in the
margins, and then circulated the entire compilation. Everyone saw what
other divisions were up to, and how easily problems could be raised.
Monday Notes were rigorous, but informal.
On a typed page of notes from two days after the moon landing in 1969,
von Braun homed in on a short section in which an engineer guessed why a
liquid oxygen tank unexpectedly lost pressure. The issue was already
irrelevant for the moon mission, but could come up again in future flights.
“Let’s pin this down as precisely as possible,” von Braun wrote. “We must
know whether there’s more behind this, that calls for checks or remedies.”
Like Kranz, von Braun went looking for problems, hunches, and bad news.
He even rewarded those who exposed problems. After Kranz and von
Braun’s time, the “All Others Bring Data” process culture remained, but the
informal culture and power of individual hunches shriveled.
In 1974, William Lucas took over the Marshall Space Flight Center. A
NASA chief historian wrote that Lucas was a brilliant engineer but “often
grew angry when he learned of problems.” Allan McDonald described him

to me as a “ shoot-the-messenger type guy.” Lucas transformed von Braun’s
Monday Notes into a system purely for upward communication. He did not
write feedback and the notes did not circulate. At one point they morphed
into standardized forms that had to be filled out. Monday Notes became one
more rigid formality in a process culture. “Immediately, the quality of the
notes fell,” wrote another official NASA historian.
Lucas retired shortly after the Challenger disaster, but the entrenched
process culture persisted. NASA’s only other fatal shuttle accident, the
space shuttle Columbia disintegration in 2003, was a cultural carbon copy
of the Challenger . NASA clung to its usual process tools in an unusual
circumstance. The Columbia disaster engendered an even stronger ill-fated
congruence between process accountability and group-focused======================================================== similar.
“That’s usually exactly the wrong way to go about it regardless of what
you’re using analogy for,” Lovallo told me.
The good news is that it is easy to ride analogies from the intuitive inside
view to the outside view. In 2001, the Boston Consulting Group, one of the
most successful in the world, created an intranet site to provide consultants
with collections of material to facilitate wide-ranging analogical thinking.
The interactive “exhibits” were sorted by discipline (anthropology,
psychology, history, and others), concept (change, logistics, productivity,
and so on), and strategic theme (competition, cooperation, unions and
alliances, and more). A consultant generating strategies for a post-merger
integration might have perused the exhibit on how William the Conqueror
“merged” England with the Norman Kingdom in the eleventh century. An
exhibit that described Sherlock Holmes’s observational strategies could
have provided ideas for learning from details that experienced professionals
take for granted. And a consultant working with a rapidly expanding start-
up might have gleaned ideas from the writing of a Prussian military
strategist who studied the fragile equilibrium between maintaining
momentum after a victory and overshooting a goal by so much that it turns

into a defeat. If that all sounds incredibly remote from pressing business
concerns, that is exactly the point.
Dedre Gentner wanted to find out if everyone can be a bit more like Kepler,
capable of wielding distant analogies to understand problems. So she helped
create the “Ambiguous Sorting Task. ”
It consists of twenty-five cards, each one describing a real-world
phenomenon, like how internet routers or economic bubbles work. Each
card falls into two main categories, one for its domain (economics, biology,
and so on) and one for its deep structure. Participants are asked to sort the
cards into like categories.
For a deep structure example, you might put economic bubbles and
melting polar ice caps together as positive-feedback loops. (In economic
bubbles, consumers buy stocks or property with the idea that the price will
increase; that buying causes the price to increase, which leads to more
buying. When ice caps melt, they reflect less sunlight back to space, which
warms the planet, causing more ice to melt.) Or perhaps you would put the
act of sweating and actions of the Federal Reserve together as negative-
feedback loops. (Sweating cools the body so that more sweating is no
longer required. The Fed lowers interest rates to spur the economy; if the
economy grows too quickly, the Fed raises rates to slow down the activity it
launched.) The way gas prices lead to an increase in grocery prices and the
steps needed for a message to traverse neurons in your brain are both
examples of causal chains, where one event leads to another, which leads to
another, in linear order.
Alternatively, you might group Federal Reserve rate changes, economic
bubbles, and gas price changes together because they are all in the same
domain: economics. And you might put sweating and neurotransmission
together under biology.
Gentner and colleagues gave the Ambiguous Sorting Task to
Northwestern University students from an array of majors and found that all
of the students figured out how to group phenomena by domains. But fewer
could come up with groupings based on causal structure. There was a group
of students, however, who were particularly good at finding common deep
structures: students who had taken classes in a range of domains, like those
in the Integrated Science Program.

Northwestern’s website for the program features an alum’s description:
“Think of the Integrated Science Program as a biology minor, chemistry
minor, physics minor, and math minor combined into a single major. The
primary intent of this program is to expose students to all fields of the
natural and mathematical sciences so that they can see commonalities
among different fields of the natural sciences. . . . The ISP major allows you
to see connections across different disciplines.”
A professor I asked about the Integrated Science Program told me that
specific academic departments are generally not big fans. They want
students to take more specialized classes in a single department. They are
concerned about the students falling behind. They would rather rush them to
specialization than equip them with ideas from what Gentner referred to as
a “variety of base domains,” which foster analogical thinking and
conceptual connections that can help students categorize the type of
problem they are facing. That is precisely a skill that sets the most adept
problem solvers apart.
In one of the most cited studies of expert problem solving ever
conducted, an interdisciplinary team of scientists came to a pretty simple
conclusion: successful problem solvers are more able to determine the deep
structure of a problem before they proceed to match a strategy to it. Less
successful problem solvers are more like most students in the Ambiguous
Sorting Task: they mentally classify problems only by superficial, overtly
stated features, like the domain context. For the best performers, they wrote,
problem solving “begins with the typing of the problem.”
As education pioneer John Dewey put it in Logic, The Theory of Inquiry,
“a problem well put is half-solved.”
Before he began his tortuous march of analogies toward reimagining the
universe, Kepler had to get very confused on his homework. Unlike Galileo
and Isaac Newton, he documented his confusion. “What matters to me,”
Kepler wrote, “is not merely to impart to the reader what I have to say, but
above all to convey to him the reasons, subterfuges, and lucky hazards
which led me to my discoveries. ”
Kepler was a young man when he showed up to work at Tycho Brahe’s
observatory—so cutting edge at the time that it cost 1 percent of the
national budget of Denmark. He was given the assignment nobody wanted:

Mars and its perplexing orbit. The orbit had to be a circle, Kepler was told,
so he had to figure out why Brahe’s observations didn’t match that. Every
once in a while, Mars appears to reverse course in the sky, do a little loop,
and then carry on in the original direction, a feat known as retrograde
motion. Astronomers proposed elaborate contortions to explain how Mars
could accomplish this while riding the interlocking spheres of the sky.
As usual, Kepler could not accept contortions. He asked peers for help,
but his pleas fell on deaf ears. His predecessors had always managed to
explain away the Mars deviations without scrapping the overall scheme.
Kepler’s short Mars assignment (he guessed it would take eight days)
turned into five years of calculations trying to describe where Mars
appeared in the sky at any given moment. No sooner had Kepler done it
with great accuracy than he threw it away.
It was close, but not perfect. The imperfection was minuscule. Just two of
Brahe’s observations differed from Kepler’s calculations of where Mars
should be, and by just eight minutes of arc, a sliver of sky one-eighth the
width of a pinkie finger held at arm’s length. Kepler could have assumed
his model was correct and those two observations were slightly off, or he
could dispense with five years of work. He chose to trash his model. “If I
had believed we could ignore these eight minutes,” he wrote, “I would have
patched my hypothesis accordingly.” The assignment no one wanted
became Kepler’s keyhole view into a new understanding of the universe. He
was in uncharted territory. The analogies began in earnest, and he
reinvented astronomy. Light, heat, smells, boats, brooms, magnets—it
began with those pesky observations that didn’t quite fit, and ended in the
complete undoing of Aristotle’s clockwork universe.
Kepler did something that turns out to be characteristic of today’s world-
class research labs. Psychologist Kevin Dunbar began documenting how
productive labs work in the 1990s, and stumbled upon a modern version of
Keplerian thinking. Faced with an unexpected finding, rather than assuming
the current theory is correct and that an observation must be off, the
unexpected became an opportunity to venture somewhere new—and
analogies served as the wilderness guide.
When Dunbar started, he simply set out to document the process of
discovery in real time. He focused on molecular biology labs because they
were blazing new trails, particularly in genetics and treatments for viruses,
like HIV. He spent a year with four labs in the United States, playing a fly

on the wall, visiting the labs every day for months, and later extended the
work to more labs in the United States, Canada, and Italy. He became such
a familiar presence that scientists called him to make sure he knew about
impromptu meetings. The surface features of the labs were very different.
One had dozens of members, others were small. A few were all men, one
was all women. All had international reputations.
The weekly lab meetings made the most interesting viewing. Once a
week, the entire team came together—lab director, grad students,
postdoctoral fellows, technicians—to discuss some challenge a lab member
was facing. The meetings were nothing like the heads-down, solitary work
in stereotypical portrayals of scientists, huddled over their test tubes.
Dunbar saw free-flowing and spontaneous exchange. Ideas were batted
back and forth, new experiments proposed, obstacles discussed. “Those are
some of the most creative moments in science,” he told me. So he recorded
them.
The first fifteen minutes could be housekeeping—whose turn it was to
order supplies, or who had left a mess. Then the action started. Someone
presented an unexpected or confusing finding, their version of Kepler’s
Mars orbit. Prudently, scientists’ first instinct was to blame themselves,
some error in calculation or poorly calibrated equipment. If it kept up, the
lab accepted the result as real, and ideas about what to try and what might
be======================================================== deeply
entrenched that conmen know to begin by asking their marks for several
small favors or investments before progressing to large asks. Once a mark
has invested energy or money, rather than walking away from sunk costs he
will continue investing, more than he ever wanted to, even as, to any
rational observer, disaster becomes imminent. “The more we have invested
and even lost,” Konnikova wrote, “the longer we will persist in insisting it
will all work out.”
Steven Naifeh spent a decade researching Van Gogh’s life, so I asked him
to fill out the grit questionnaire on the painter’s behalf. Van Gogh’s work
ethic stretched belief. He was intoxicated with an image his father had used
in a sermon of the sower, who must put in work now so that he can reap
later. “Think of all the fields that were turned down by shortsighted
people,” Dorus van Gogh preached. He invoked that image, Naifeh and

Smith wrote, as “a paragon of persistence in the face of adversity.” At every
job he had, Vincent was convinced that if he outworked everyone around
him, he would succeed. But then he would fail. His interests whipsawed
constantly. Even once he’d set himself on being an artist, he would devote
all his energy to one style or medium only to completely disavow it soon
thereafter. Naifeh and Smith used an elegant phrase to describe Van Gogh’s
pliable passions: his “altered gospel.” The Grit Scale statement “I have been
obsessed with a certain idea or project for a short time but later lost
interest” is Van Gogh in a nutshell, at least up until the final few years of his
life when he settled on his unique style and creatively erupted. Van Gogh
was an example of match quality optimization, Robert Miller’s multi-armed
bandit process come to life. He tested options with maniacal intensity and
got the maximum information signal about his fit as quickly as possible,
and then moved to something else and repeated, until he had zigzagged his
way to a place no one else had ever been, and where he alone excelled. Van
Gogh’s Grit Scale score, according to Naifeh’s assessment, was flush with
hard work but low on sticking with every goal or project. He landed in the
40th percentile.
Beginning in 2017, to my great honor, I was invited to work with veterans
to review applications for the Pat Tillman Foundation, the organization I
had begun speaking to in 2015 and that provides scholarships to veterans,
active-duty military, and military spouses. A lot of applications come from
ambitious West Point alumni.
The essays were fascinating and inspiring. Nearly every single one spoke
of some formative lesson learned in Afghanistan, or on a domestic
hurricane rescue team, or while translating languages under pressure, or as a
spouse moving again and again and arranging services for other military
spouses, or even while becoming increasingly frustrated with some aspect
of military conflict or bureaucratic dysfunction. The crux was that some
unanticipated experience had led to an unexpected new goal or the
discovery of an unexplored talent.
Applicants who receive funding join the community of Tillman Scholars,
the group of high achievers whose concern about changing directions later
than their peers helped inspire this book. Discussing late specialization was

practically a catharsis for their anxiety about having taken time to do and
learn things they were grateful to have done and learned.
No one in their right mind would argue that passion and perseverance are
unimportant, or that a bad day is a cue to quit. But the idea that a change of
interest, or a recalibration of focus, is an imperfection and competitive
disadvantage leads to a simple, one-size-fits-all Tiger story: pick and stick,
as soon as possible. Responding to lived experience with a change of
direction, like Van Gogh did habitually, like West Point graduates have been
doing since the dawn of the knowledge economy, is less tidy but no less
important. It involves a particular behavior that improves your chances of
finding the best match, but that at first blush sounds like a terrible life
strategy: short-term planning.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 7
Flirting with Your Possible Selves
FRANCES HESSELBEIN GREW UP in the mountains of western Pennsylvania,
among families drawn by steel mills and coal mines. “In Johnstown, 5:30
means 5:30,” she often says. So if the executives, military officers, and
legislators who line up outside the door of her Manhattan office seeking
leadership advice want their full hour, they’d better be on time. Even with
her hundredth birthday behind her, she is in the office every weekday with
more work than she can finish. Hesselbein is fond of telling visitors that she
has had four professional positions, all president or CEO, and never applied
for one. In fact, she attempted to turn down three of them. When she
guessed where life would take her, she was pretty much always wrong.
In high school, she dreamed of a bookish life as a playwright. After
graduation, she enrolled in the University of Pittsburgh’s Junior College,
“Junior Pitt.” She loved experimenting with different classes, but her father
fell ill during her first year. Hesselbein was seventeen, the oldest of three,
stroking her father’s cheek in the hospital when he passed away. She kissed
him on the forehead and promised to take care of the family. She finished
the semester, and then dropped out to work as an adman’s assistant at the
Penn Traffic Company department store .
Soon she got married, and had a son just in time for her husband, John, to
report to the Navy during World War II. John served as a combat aircrew
photographer, and upon return set up a studio, doing everything from high
school portraits to documentary films. Hesselbein had a protean job she
called “helping John.” When a customer wanted a photo of a dog to look
like a painting, she grabbed oil paints and colored it, voilà.

Hesselbein adored Johnstown’s rich diversity, but it afforded some ugly
lessons. As part of the newly formed Pennsylvania Human Relations
Commission, John responded to acts of discrimination in town, like a
barbershop that would not cut black customers’ hair. “I don’t have the right
tools,” the barber complained. John’s response: “Then you will have to buy
the right tools.” When John confronted a teacher who kicked two black
children off a playground, the teacher called him a “traitor.” Hesselbein
decided then that a community that valued inclusiveness should answer
“yes” to the question, “When they look at us, can they find themselves?”
When Hesselbein was thirty-four, a prominent woman in the community
stopped by her home and asked her to lead Girl Scout Troop 17 as a
volunteer. The previous leader had left to become a missionary in India, and
other neighbors had turned down the request. So did Hesselbein, three
times. She had an eight-year-old boy, and professed to know nothing about
little girls. Finally, the woman said that the group of thirty ten-year-old girls
from modest families who met in a church basement would just have to be
disbanded. Hesselbein agreed to stand in for six weeks, until a real leader
was found.
In preparation, she read up on the Girl Scouts. She learned that the
organization was founded eight years before women could vote in the
United States, and that the founder had reminded girls that they could be “a
doctor, a lawyer, an aviatrix, or a hot-air balloonist.” Hesselbein thought
back to second grade, when she announced that she wanted to be a pilot and
her classmates laughed. So she showed up in the church basement to start
her six weeks. She ended up staying with Troop 17 for eight years, until
they graduated high school.
Afterward, Hesselbein kept picking up Girl Scout roles she neither
sought nor intended to keep. She was in her midforties when she left the
country for the first time, for an international Girl Scout meeting in Greece.
More trips followed—India, Thailand, Kenya. Hesselbein realized she
loved volunteering.
She was asked to chair the local United Way campaign at a time when
that role was as foreign for women as aviatrix had been. It was a volunteer
job, so she figured she had nothing to lose. But when she appointed as her
vice chairman the president of the local United Steelworkers of America,
suddenly the United Way president decided that wasn’t such a good idea
and he had better check with Bethlehem Steel, a major supporter.

Hesselbein stood fast, and managed to get both the company and the union
behind her. That year, little Johnstown, Pennsylvania, had the highest per
capita giving of any United Way campaign in the country. Of course, it was
a temp role as far as Hesselbein was concerned, so the following year she
handed it off.
In 1970, a trio of Johnstown business leaders who supported the Girl
Scouts invited Hesselbein to lunch. They told her that they had chosen a
new executive director of the local Girl Scout council. The previous one
had left and the council was in serious financial trouble.
“How wonderful, who is it?” she asked.
“You,” they replied.
“I would never take a professional job,” she told them. “I am a
volunteer.”
One of the businessmen was on the United Way board, and he said that if
Hesselbein did not take the job and straighten out the finances, the Girl
Scouts would lose the United Way partnership. She agreed to fill in for six
months only, and then to step aside for an experienced professional. At
fifty-four, she began what she calls her first professional job. She devoured
management books, and a month in realized that the work fit her. She
stayed for four years.
But even as her work was going well, the backdrop was dire. In the late
1960s and early 1970s, society changed dramatically. The Girl Scouts did
not. Girls were preparing for college and careers in unprecedented numbers,
and they needed information on thorny topics like sex and drugs. The
organization was in existential crisis. Membership fell off a cliff. The CEO
position went vacant for======================================================== up. The cause, it seemed, was some ineffable
thing in modern air. Not only that, but the mystery air additive somehow
supercharged modern brains specifically for the most abstract tests. What
manner of change, Flynn wondered, could be at once so large and yet so
particular?
Through the late 1920s and early 1930s, remote reaches of the Soviet Union
were forced through social and economic changes that would normally take
generations. Individual farmers in isolated areas of what is now Uzbekistan
had long survived by cultivating small gardens for food, and cotton for
everything else. Nearby in the mountain pasturelands of present-day
Kyrgyzstan, herders kept animals. The population was entirely illiterate, and
a hierarchical social structure was enforced by strict religious rules. The
socialist revolution dismantled that way of life almost overnight.
The Soviet government forced all that agricultural land to become large
collective farms and began industrial development. The economy quickly
became interconnected and complex. Farmers had to form collective work
strategies, plan ahead for production, divvy up functions, and assess work

along the way. Remote villages began communicating with distant cities. A
network of schools opened in regions with 100 percent illiteracy, and adults
began learning a system of matching symbols to sounds. Villagers had used
numbers before, but only in practical transactions. Now they were taught the
concept of a number as an abstraction that existed even without reference to
counting animals or apportioning food. Some village women remained fully
illiterate but took short courses on how to teach kindergartners. Other
women were admitted for longer study at a teachers’ school. Classes in
preschool education and the science and technology of agriculture were
offered to students who had no formal education of any kind. Secondary
schools and technical institutes soon followed. In 1931, amid that incredible
transformation, a brilliant young Russian psychologist named Alexander
Luria recognized a fleeting “natural experiment,” unique in the history of the
world. He wondered if changing citizens’ work might also change their
minds.
When Luria arrived, the most remote villages had not yet been touched by
the warp-speed restructuring of traditional society. Those villages gave him a
control group. He learned the local language and brought fellow
psychologists to engage villagers in relaxed social situations—teahouses or
pastures—and discuss questions or tasks designed to discern their habits of
mind.
Some were very simple: present skeins of wool or silk in an array of hues
and ask participants to describe them. The collective farmers and farm
leaders, as well as the female students, easily picked out blue, red, and
yellow, sometimes with variations, like dark blue or light yellow. The most
remote villagers, who were still “premodern,” gave more diversified
descriptions: cotton in bloom, decayed teeth, a lot of water, sky, pistachio.
Then they were asked to sort the skeins into groups. The collective farmers,
and young people with even a little formal education, did so easily, naturally
forming color groups. Even when they did not know the name of a particular
color, they had little trouble putting together darker and lighter shades of the
same one. The remote villagers, on the other hand, refused, even those
whose work was embroidery. “It can’t be done,” they said, or, “None of
them are the same, you can’t put them together.” When prodded vigorously,
and only if they were allowed to make many small groups, some relented
and created sets that were apparently random. A few others appeared to sort
the skeins according to color saturation, without regard to the color.

Geometric shapes followed suit. The greater the dose of modernity, the
more likely an individual grasped the abstract concept of “shapes” and made
groups of triangles, rectangles, and circles, even if they had no formal
education and did not know the shapes’ names. The remote villagers,
meanwhile, saw nothing alike in a square drawn with solid lines and the
same exact square drawn with dotted lines. To Alieva, a twenty-six-year-old
remote villager, the solid-line square was obviously a map, and the dotted-
line square was a watch. “How can a map and a watch be put together?” she
asked, incredulous. Khamid, a twenty-four-year-old remote villager, insisted
that filled and unfilled circles could not go together because one was a coin
and the other a moon.
The pattern continued for every genre of question. Pressed to make
conceptual groupings—akin to the similarities questions on IQ tests—remote
villagers reverted to practical narratives based on their direct experience.
When psychologists attempted to explain a “which one does not belong”
grouping exercise to thirty-nine-year-old Rakmat, they gave him the
example of three adults and one child, with the child obviously different
from the others. Except Rakmat could not see it that way. “The boy must
stay with the others!” he argued. The adults are working, “and if they have to
keep running out to fetch things, they’ll never get the job done, but the boy
can do the running for them.” Okay, then, how about a hammer, a saw, a
hatchet, and a log—three of them are tools. They are not a group, Rakmat
replied, because they are useless without the log, so why would they be
together?
Other villagers removed either the hammer or the hatchet, which they saw
as less versatile for use with the log, unless they considered pounding the
hatchet into the log with the hammer, in which case it could stay. Perhaps,
then, bird/ rifle/ dagger/ bullet? You can’t possibly remove one and have a
group, a remote villager insisted. The bullet must be loaded in the rifle to kill
the bird, and “then you have to cut the bird up with the dagger, since there’s
no other way to do it.” These were just the introductions explaining the
grouping task, not the actual questions. No amount of cajoling, explanation,
or examples could get remote villagers to use reasoning based on any
concept that was not a concrete part of their daily lives .
The farmers and students who had begun to join the modern world were
able to practice a kind of thinking called “eduction,” to work out guiding
principles when given facts or materials, even in the absence of instructions,

and even when they had never seen the material before. This, it turns out, is
precisely what Raven’s Progressive Matrices tests. Imagine presenting the
villagers living in premodern circumstances with abstract designs from the
Raven’s test.
Some of the changes wrought by modernity and collective culture seem
almost magical. Luria found that most remote villagers were not subject to
the same optical illusions as citizens of the industrialized world, like the
Ebbinghaus illusion. Which middle circle below looks bigger?
If you said the one on the right, you’re probably a citizen of the
industrialized world. The remote villagers saw, correctly, that they are the
same, while the collective farmers and women in teachers’ school picked the
one on the right. Those findings have been repeated in other traditional
societies, and scientists have suggested it may reflect the fact that premodern
people are not as drawn to the holistic context—the relationship of the
various circles to one another—so their perception is not changed by the
presence of extra circles. To use a common metaphor, premodern people
miss the forest for the trees; modern people miss the trees for the forest.
Since Luria’s voyage to the interior, scientists have replicated his work in
other cultures. The Kpelle people in Liberia were subsistence rice farmers,

but in the 1970s roads began snaking toward them, connecting the Kpelle to
cities. Given similarities tests, teenagers who were engaged with modern
institutions grouped items by abstract categories (“All of these things can
keep us warm”), while the traditional teens generated groups that were
comparatively arbitrary, and changed frequently even when they were asked
to repeat the exact same task. Because the touched-by-modernity teens had
constructed meaningful thematic groups, they also had far superior recall
when asked later to recount the items. The more they had moved toward
modernity, the more powerful their abstract thinking, and the less they had to
rely on their concrete experience of the world as a reference point.
In Flynn’s terms, we now see the world through “scientific spectacles.” He
means that rather than relying on our own direct experiences, we make sense
of reality through classification schemes, using layers of abstract concepts to
understand how pieces of information relate to one another. We have grown
up in a world of classification schemes totally foreign to the remote
villagers; we classify some animals as mammals, and inside of that class
make more detailed connections based on the similarity of their physiology
and DNA.
Words that represent concepts that were previously the domain of scholars
became widely understood in a few generations. The word “percent” was
almost absent from books in 1900. By 2000 it appeared about once every
five thousand words. (This chapter is 5,500 words long.) Computer
programmers pile layers of abstraction. (They do very well on Raven’s.) In
the progress bar on your computer screen that fills up to indicate a
download, abstractions are legion, from the fundamental—the programming
language that created it is a representation of binary code, the raw 1s and 0s
the computer uses—to the psychological: the bar is a visual projection of
time that provides peace of mind by estimating the progress of an immense
number of underlying activities.
Lawyers might consider how results of one court case brought by an
individual in Oklahoma could be relevant to a different one brought by a
company in California. In order to prep, they might try out different
hypothetical arguments while putting themselves in the======================================================== of a naval clash
claiming more than ten lives in the East China Sea? Forecasters could
update predictions as often as they wanted, but the scoring system rewarded
accuracy over time, so a great prediction at the last minute before a
question’s end date was of limited value.
The team run by Tetlock and Mellers was called the Good Judgment
Project. Rather than recruit decorated experts, in the first year of the
tournament they made an open call for volunteers. After a simple screening,
they invited thirty-two hundred to start forecasting. From those, they
identified a small group of the foxiest forecasters—just bright people with
wide-ranging interests and reading habits but no particular relevant
background—and weighted team forecasts toward them. They destroyed the
competition.
In year two, the Good Judgment Project randomly arranged the top
“superforecasters” into online teams of twelve, so that they could share
information and ideas. They beat the other university-run teams so badly
that IARPA dropped those lesser competitors from the tournament. The
volunteers drawn from the general public beat experienced intelligence
analysts with access to classified data “by margins that remain classified,”

according to Tetlock. (He has, though, referenced a Washington Post report
indicating that the Good Judgment Project performed about 30 percent
better than a collection of intelligence community analysts.)
Not only were the best forecasters foxy as individuals, they had qualities
that made them particularly effective collaborators—partners in sharing
information and discussing predictions. Every team member still had to
make individual predictions, but the team was scored by collective
performance. On average, forecasters on the small superteams became 50
percent more accurate in their individual predictions. Superteams beat the
wisdom of much larger crowds—in which the predictions of a large group
of people are averaged—and they also beat prediction markets, where
forecasters “trade” the outcomes of future events like stocks, and the market
price represents the crowd prediction.
It might seem like the complexity of predicting geopolitical and
economic events would necessitate a group of narrow specialists, each
bringing to the team extreme depth in one area. But it was actually the
opposite. As with comic book creators and inventors patenting new
technologies, in the face of uncertainty, individual breadth was critical. The
foxiest forecasters were impressive alone, but together they exemplified the
most lofty ideal of teams: they became more than the sum of their parts. A
lot more.
A few of the qualities that make the best Good Judgment Project forecasters
valuable teammates are obvious from talking to them. They are bright, but
so were the hedgehog experts Tetlock started with. They toss around
numbers easily, estimating this country’s poverty rate or that state’s
proportion of farmland. And they have range.
Scott Eastman told me that he “never completely fit in one world.” He
grew up in Oregon and competed in math and science contests, but in
college he studied English literature and fine arts. He has been a bicycle
mechanic, a housepainter, founder of a housepainting company, manager of
a multimillion-dollar trust, a photographer, a photography teacher, a lecturer
at a Romanian university—in subjects ranging from cultural anthropology
to civil rights—and, most unusually, chief adviser to the mayor of Avrig, a
small town in the middle of Romania. In that role, he did everything from

helping integrate new technologies into the local economy to dealing with
the press and participating in negotiations with Chinese business leaders.
Eastman narrates his life like a book of fables; each experience comes
with a lesson. “I think that housepainting was probably one of the greatest
helps,” he told me. It afforded him the chance to interact with a diverse
palette of colleagues and clients, from refugees seeking asylum to Silicon
Valley billionaires whom he would chat with if he had a long project
working on their homes. He described it as fertile ground for collecting
perspectives. But housepainting is probably not a singular education for
geopolitical prediction. Eastman, like his teammates, is constantly
collecting perspectives anywhere he can, always adding to his intellectual
range, so any ground is fertile for him.
Eastman was uncannily accurate at predicting developments in Syria, and
surprised to learn that Russia was his weak spot. He studied Russian and
has a friend who was a former ambassador to Russia. “I should have every
leg up there, but I saw over a large series of questions, it was one of my
weakest areas,” he told me. He learned that specializing in a topic
frequently did not bear fruit in the forecasts. “So if I know somebody [on
the team] is a subject area expert, I am very, very happy to have access to
them, in terms of asking questions and seeing what they dig up. But I’m not
going to just say, ‘Okay, the biochemist said a certain drug is likely to come
to market, so he must be right.’ Often if you’re too much of an insider, it’s
hard to get good perspective.” Eastman described the core trait of the best
forecasters to me as: “genuinely curious about, well, really everything.”
Ellen Cousins researches fraud for trial lawyers. Her research naturally
roams from medicine to business. She has wide-ranging interests on the
side, from collecting historical artifacts to embroidery, laser etching, and
lock picking. She conducts pro bono research on military veterans who
should (and sometimes do) get upgraded to the Medal of Honor. She felt
exactly the same as Eastman. Narrow experts are an invaluable resource,
she told me, “but you have to understand that they may have blinders on. So
what I try to do is take facts from them, not opinions.” Like polymath
inventors, Eastman and Cousins take ravenously from specialists and
integrate.
Superforecasters’ online interactions are exercises in extremely polite
antagonism, disagreeing without being disagreeable. Even on a rare
occasion when someone does say, “ ‘You’re full of beans, that doesn’t make

sense to me, explain this,’” Cousins told me, “they don’t mind that.”
Agreement is not what they are after; they are after aggregating
perspectives, lots of them. In an impressively unsightly image, Tetlock
described the very best forecasters as foxes with dragonfly eyes. Dragonfly
eyes are composed of tens of thousands of lenses, each with a different
perspective, which are then synthesized in the dragonfly’s brain.
One forecast discussion I saw was a team trying to predict the highest
single-day close for the exchange rate between the U.S. dollar and
Ukrainian hryvnia during an extremely volatile stretch in 2014. Would it be
less than 10, between 10 and 13, or more than 13? The discussion started
with a team member offering percentage predictions for each of the three
possibilities, and sharing an Economist article. Another team member
chimed in with a Bloomberg link and online historical data, and offered
three different probability predictions, with “between 10 and 13” favored. A
third teammate was convinced by the second’s argument. A fourth shared
information about the dire state of Ukrainian finances. A fifth addressed the
broader issue of how exchange rates change, or don’t, in relation to world
events. The teammate who started the conversation then posted again; he
was persuaded by the previous arguments and altered his predictions, but
still thought they were overrating the possibility of “more than 13.” They
continued to share information, challenge one another, and update their
forecasts. Two days later, a team member with specific expertise in finance
saw that the hryvnia was strengthening amid events he thought would
surely weaken it. He chimed in to inform his teammates that this was
exactly the opposite of what he expected, and that they should take it as a
sign of something wrong in his understanding. In contrast to politicians, the
most adept predictors flip-flop like crazy. The team finally homed in on
“between 10 and 13” as the heavy favorite, and they were correct.
In separate work, from 2000 to 2010 German psychologist Gerd
Gigerenzer compiled annual dollar-euro exchange rate predictions made by
twenty-two of the most prestigious international banks—Barclays,
Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America Merrill Lynch, and others.
Each year, every bank predicted the end-of-year exchange rate.
Gigerenzer’s simple conclusion about those projections, from some of the
world’s most prominent specialists: “Forecasts of dollar-euro exchange
rates are worthless.” In six of the ten years, the true exchange rate fell
outside the entire range of all twenty-two bank forecasts. Where a

superforecaster quickly highlighted a change in exchange rate direction that
confused him, and adjusted, major bank forecasts missed every single
change of direction in the decade Gigerenzer analyzed.
A hallmark of interactions on the best teams is what psychologist Jonathan
Baron termed “active open-mindedness.” The best forecasters view their
own ideas as hypotheses in need of testing. Their aim is not to convince
their teammates of their own expertise, but to encourage their teammates to
help them falsify their own notions. In the sweep of humanity, that is not
normal. Asked a difficult question—for example, “Would providing more
money for public schools significantly improve the quality of teaching and
learning?”—people naturally come up with a deluge of “myside” ideas.
Armed with a web browser, they don’t start searching for why they are
probably wrong. It is not that we are unable to come up with contrary ideas,
it is just that our strong instinct is not to.
Researchers in Canada and the United States began a 2017 study by
asking a politically diverse and well-educated group of adults to read
arguments confirming their beliefs about controversial issues. When
participants======================================================== technology” concept to be
approved for the Game Boy. “It was difficult to get Nintendo to
understand,” he said later. Yokoi was convinced, though, that if users were
drawn into the games, technological power would be an afterthought. “If
you draw two circles on a blackboard, and say, ‘That’s a snowman,’
everyone who sees it will sense the white color of the snow,” he argued.
When the Game Boy was released, Yokoi’s colleague came to him “with
a grim expression on his face,” Yokoi recalled, and reported that a
competitor handheld had hit the market. Yokoi asked him if it had a color
screen. The man said that it did. “Then we’re fine,” Yokoi replied.
Yokoi’s strategy of finding novel uses for technology, after others had
moved on, smacks of exactly what a well-known psychological creativity
exercise asks for. In the Unusual (or Alternative) Uses Task, test takers have
to come up with original uses for an object. Given the prompt “brick,” a test
taker will generate familiar uses first (part of a wall, a doorstop, a weapon).
To score higher, they have to generate uses that are conceptually distant and
rarely given by other test takers, but still feasible. For the brick: a
paperweight; a nutcracker; a theatrical coffin at a doll’s funeral; a water
displacement device dropped in a toilet tank to use less per flush. (In 2015,
Ad Age awarded “Pro Bono Campaign of the Year” to the cheeky lateral
thinkers of the “Drop-A-Brick” project, which manufactured rubber bricks
for use in California toilets during a drought.)

There is, to be sure, no comprehensive theory of creativity. But there is a
well-documented tendency people have to consider only familiar uses for
objects, an instinct known as functional fixedness. The most famous
example is the “candle problem,” in which participants are given a candle, a
box of tacks, and a book of matches and told to attach the candle to the wall
such that wax doesn’t drip on the table below. Solvers try to melt the candle
to the wall or tack it up somehow, neither of which work. When the
problem is presented with the tacks outside of their box, solvers are more
likely to view the empty box as a potential candle holder, and to solve the
problem by tacking it to the wall and placing the candle inside. For Yokoi,
the tacks were always outside the box.
Unquestionably, Yokoi needed narrow specialists. The first true electrical
engineer Nintendo hired was Satoru Okada, who said bluntly, “Electronics
was not Yokoi’s strong point.” Okada was Yokoi’s codesigner on the Game
& Watch and Game Boy. “I handled more of the internal systems of the
machine,” he recalled, “with Yokoi handling more of the design and
interface aspects.” Okada was the Steve Wozniak to Yokoi’s Steve Jobs.
Yokoi was the first to admit it. “I don’t have any particular specialist
skills,” he once said. “I have a sort of vague knowledge of everything.” He
advised young employees not just to play with technology for its own sake,
but to play with ideas. Do not be an engineer, he said, be a producer. “The
producer knows that there’s such a thing as a semiconductor, but doesn’t
need to know its inner workings. . . . That can be left to the experts.” He
argued, “Everyone takes the approach of learning detailed, complex skills.
If no one did this then there wouldn’t be people who shine as engineers. . . .
Looking at me, from the engineer’s perspective, it’s like, ‘Look at this
idiot,’ but once you’ve got a couple hit products under your belt, this word
‘idiot’ seems to slip away somewhere.”
He spread his philosophy as his team grew, and asked everyone to
consider alternate uses for old technology. He realized that he had been
fortunate to come to a playing card company rather than an established
electronic toymaker with entrenched solutions, so his ideas were not
thwarted because of his technical limitations. As the company grew, he
worried that young engineers would be too concerned about looking stupid
to share ideas for novel uses of old technology, so he began intentionally
blurting out crazy ideas at meetings to set the tone. “Once a young person

starts saying things like, ‘Well, it’s not really my place to say . . .’ then it’s
all over,” he said.
Tragically, Yokoi died in a traffic accident in 1997. But his philosophy
survived. In 2006, Nintendo’s president said that the Nintendo Wii was a
direct outgrowth of Yokoi’s doctrine. “If I can speak without fear of being
misunderstood,” the president explained, “I would like to say that Nintendo
is not producing next-generation game consoles.” The Wii used extremely
simple games and technology from a previous console, but motion-based
controls were a literal game changer. Given its basic hardware, the Wii was
criticized as not innovative. Harvard Business School professor Clayton
Christensen argued that it was actually the most important kind of
innovation, an “empowering innovation”—one that creates both new
customers and new jobs, like the rise of personal computers before it—
because it brought video games to an entirely new (often older) audience.
Nintendo “simply innovated in a different way,” Christensen and a
colleague wrote. “It understood that the barrier to new consumers using
video game systems was the complexity of game play, not the quality of
existing graphics.” Queen Elizabeth II of England made headlines when she
saw her grandson Prince William playing Wii Bowling and decided to get in
on the action herself.
Yokoi’s greatest failure came when he departed from his own design
tenets. One of his last Nintendo projects was the Virtual Boy, a gaming
headset that employed experimental technology. It relied on a processor that
produced high radio emissions, and before cell phones, no one knew if that
was safe so close to a user’s head. A metal plate had to be constructed
around the processor, which in turn made the unit too heavy to work as
goggles. It was transformed into a device that sat on a table and required the
user to assume an unnatural posture to see the screen. It was ahead of its
time, but nobody bought it.
Yokoi’s greatest triumphs occurred when he thought laterally. He needed
specialists, but his concern was that as companies grew and technology
progressed, vertical-thinking hyperspecialists would continue to be valued
but lateral-thinking generalists would not. “The shortcut [for a lack of
ideas] is competition in the realm of computing power,” Yokoi explained.
“When it comes to that . . . the screen manufacturers and expert graphics
designers come out on top. Then Nintendo’s reason for existence

disappears.” He felt that the lateral and vertical thinkers were best together,
even in highly technical fields.
Eminent physicist and mathematician Freeman Dyson styled it this way:
we need both focused frogs and visionary birds. “Birds fly high in the air
and survey broad vistas of mathematics out to the far horizon,” Dyson
wrote in 2009. “They delight in concepts that unify our thinking and bring
together diverse problems from different parts of the landscape. Frogs live
in the mud below and see only the flowers that grow nearby. They delight in
the details of particular objects, and they solve problems one at a time.” As
a mathematician, Dyson labeled himself a frog, but contended, “It is stupid
to claim that birds are better than frogs because they see farther, or that
frogs are better than birds because they see deeper.” The world, he wrote, is
both broad and deep. “We need birds and frogs working together to explore
it.” Dyson’s concern was that science is increasingly overflowing with
frogs, trained only in a narrow specialty and unable to change as science
itself does. “This is a hazardous situation,” he warned, “for the young
people and also for the future of science.”
Fortunately, it is possible, even today, even at the cutting edge, even in
the most hyperspecialized specialties, to cultivate land where both birds and
frogs can thrive.
Andy Ouderkirk laughed as he recalled the story. “It was with three
gentlemen who owned the company, and I’ll just forever remember them
holding up a vial and just looking at me and saying, ‘This is a breakthrough
in glitter.’”
Standard glitter sparkles; this glitter blazed, as if the vial held a colony of
magical prismatic fireflies. Ouderkirk envisioned a lot of applications for
multilayer optical film, but glitter was a pleasant surprise. “Here I am, a
physical chemist,” he told me. “I usually think of breakthroughs as being
very sophisticated advanced technologies.”
Ouderkirk was an inventor at Minnesota-based 3M, one of twenty-eight
“corporate scientists,” the highest title among the company’s sixty-five
hundred scientists and engineers. The road to breakthrough glitter began
when he endeavored to challenge the conception of a two-hundred-year-old
principle of physics known as Brewster’s law, which had been interpreted to
mean that no surface could reflect light near perfectly at every angle.

Ouderkirk wondered if layering many thin plastic surfaces on top of one
another, each with distinct optical qualities, could create a film that custom-
reflected and -refracted various wavelengths of light in all directions. A
group of optics specialists he consulted assured him it could not be done,
which was exactly what he wanted to hear. “If they say, ‘It’s a great idea, go
for it, makes sense,’ what is the chance you’re the first person to come up
with it? Precisely zero,” he told me.
In fact, he was certain it was physically possible. Mother Nature offered
proof of concept. The iridescent blue morpho butterfly has no blue pigment
whatsoever; its wings glow azure and sapphire from thin layers of scales
that refract and reflect particular wavelengths of blue light. There were
more pedestrian examples too. The plastic of a water bottle refracts light
differently depending on the light’s angle. “Everybody knows this, that
knows anything about polymers,” Ouderkirk said. “It’s in front of you
literally every day. But nobody ever======================================================== OceanofPDF.com



OceanofPDF.com

For Elizabeth,
this one and any other one
OceanofPDF.com

Contents
INTRODUCTION: Roger vs. Tiger
CHAPTER 1: The Cult of the Head Start
CHAPTER 2: How the Wicked World Was Made
CHAPTER 3: When Less of the Same Is More
CHAPTER 4: Learning, Fast and Slow
CHAPTER 5: Thinking Outside Experience
CHAPTER 6: The Trouble with Too Much Grit
CHAPTER 7: Flirting with Your Possible Selves
CHAPTER 8: The Outsider Advantage
CHAPTER 9: Lateral Thinking with Withered Technology
CHAPTER 10: Fooled by Expertise
CHAPTER 11: Learning to Drop Your Familiar Tools
CHAPTER 12: Deliberate Amateurs
CONCLUSION: Expanding Your Range
AFTERWORD
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
NOTES
INDEX
OceanofPDF.com

And he refused to specialize in anything, preferring to keep an eye on the
overall estate rather than any of its parts. . . . And Nikolay’s management
produced the most brilliant results.
—Leo Tolstoy, War and Peace
No tool is omnicompetent. There is no such thing as a master-key that will unlock all doors.
—Arnold Toynbee, A Study of History
OceanofPDF.com

INTRODUCTION
Roger vs. Tiger
LET’S START WITH a couple of stories from the world of sports. This first one,
you probably know.
The boy’s father could tell something was different. At six months old, the
boy could balance on his father’s palm as he walked through their home. At
seven months, his father gave him a putter to fool around with, and the boy
dragged it everywhere he went in his little circular baby walker. At ten
months, he climbed down from his high chair, trundled over to a golf club
that had been cut down to size for him, and imitated the swing he’d been
watching in the garage. Because the father couldn’t yet talk with his son, he
drew pictures to show the boy how to place his hands on the club. “It is very
difficult to communicate how to putt when the child is too young to talk,” he
would later note.
At two—an age when the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention list
physical developmental milestones like “kicks a ball” and “stands on
tiptoe”—he went on national television and used a club tall enough to reach
his shoulder to drive a ball past an admiring Bob Hope. That same year, he
entered his first tournament, and won the ten-and-under division.
There was no time to waste. By three, the boy was learning how to play
out of a “sand twap,” and his father was mapping out his destiny. He knew
his son had been chosen for this, and that it was his duty to guide him. Think
about it: if you felt that certain about the path ahead, maybe you too would
start prepping your three-year-old to handle the inevitable and insatiable
media that would come. He quizzed the boy, playing reporter, teaching him
how to give curt answers, never to offer more than precisely what was asked.

That year, the boy shot 48, eleven over par, for nine holes at a course in
California.
When the boy was four, his father could drop him off at a golf course at
nine in the morning and pick him up eight hours later, sometimes with the
money he’d won from those foolish enough to doubt.
At eight, the son beat his father for the first time. The father didn’t mind,
because he was convinced that his boy was singularly talented, and that he
was uniquely equipped to help him. He had been an outstanding athlete
himself, and against enormous odds. He played baseball in college when he
was the only black player in the entire conference. He understood people,
and discipline; a sociology major, he served in Vietnam as a member of the
Army’s elite Green Berets, and later taught psychological warfare to future
officers. He knew he hadn’t done his best with three kids from a previous
marriage, but now he could see that he’d been given a second chance to do
the right thing with number four. And it was all going according to plan.
The boy was already famous by the time he reached Stanford, and soon
his father opened up about his importance. His son would have a larger
impact than Nelson Mandela, than Gandhi, than Buddha, he insisted. “He
has a larger forum than any of them,” he said. “He’s the bridge between the
East and the West. There is no limit because he has the guidance. I don’t
know yet exactly what form this will take. But he is the Chosen One.”
This second story, you also probably know. You might not recognize it at
first .
His mom was a coach, but she never coached him. He would kick a ball
around with her when he learned to walk. As a boy, he played squash with
his father on Sundays. He dabbled in skiing, wrestling, swimming, and
skateboarding. He played basketball, handball, tennis, table tennis,
badminton over his neighbor’s fence, and soccer at school. He would later
give credit to the wide range of sports he played for helping him develop his
athleticism and hand-eye coordination.
He found that the sport really didn’t matter much, so long as it included a
ball. “I was always very much more interested if a ball was involved,” he
would remember. He was a kid who loved to play. His parents had no
particular athletic aspirations for him. “We had no plan A, no plan B,” his
mother would later say. She and the boy’s father encouraged him to sample a

wide array of sports. In fact, it was essential. The boy “became unbearable,”
his mother said, if he had to stay still for too long.
Though his mother taught tennis, she decided against working with him.
“He would have just upset me anyway,” she said. “He tried out every strange
stroke and certainly never returned a ball normally. That is simply no fun for
a mother.” Rather than pushy, a Sports Illustrated writer would observe that
his parents were, if anything, “pully.” Nearing his teens, the boy began to
gravitate more toward tennis, and “if they nudged him at all, it was to stop
taking tennis so seriously.” When he played matches, his mother often
wandered away to chat with friends. His father had only one rule: “Just don’t
cheat.” He didn’t, and he started getting really good.
As a teenager, he was good enough to warrant an interview with the local
newspaper. His mother was appalled to read that, when asked what he would
buy with a hypothetical first paycheck from playing tennis, her son
answered, “a Mercedes.” She was relieved when the reporter let her listen to
a recording of the interview and they realized there’d been a mistake: the
boy had said “Mehr CDs ,” in Swiss German. He simply wanted “more CDs.
”
The boy was competitive, no doubt. But when his tennis instructors
decided to move him up to a group with older players, he asked to move
back so he could stay with his friends. After all, part of the fun was hanging
around after his lessons to gab about music, or pro wrestling, or soccer.
By the time he finally gave up other sports—soccer, most notably—to
focus on tennis, other kids had long since been working with strength
coaches, sports psychologists, and nutritionists. But it didn’t seem to hamper
his development in the long run. In his midthirties, an age by which even
legendary tennis players are typically retired, he would still be ranked
number one in the world.
In 2006, Tiger Woods and Roger Federer met for the first time, when both
were at the apex of their powers. Tiger flew in on his private jet to watch the
final of the U.S. Open. It made Federer especially nervous, but he still won,
for the third year in a row. Woods joined him in the locker room for a
champagne celebration. They connected as only they could. “I’ve never
spoken with anybody who was so familiar with the feeling of being
invincible,” Federer would later describe it. They quickly became friends, as

well as focal points of a debate over who was the most dominant athlete in
the world.
Still, the contrast was not lost on Federer. “His story is completely
different from mine,” he told a biographer in 2006. “Even as a kid his goal
was to break the record for winning the most majors. I was just dreaming of
just once meeting Boris Becker or being able to play at Wimbledon some
time.”
It seems pretty unusual for a child with “pully” parents, and who first took
his sport lightly, to grow into a man who dominates it like no one before
him. Unlike Tiger, thousands of kids, at least, had a head start on Roger.
Tiger’s incredible upbringing has been at the heart of a batch of bestselling
books on the development of expertise, one of which was a parenting
manual written by Tiger’s father, Earl. Tiger was not merely playing golf. He
was engaging in “deliberate practice,” the only kind that counts in the now-
ubiquitous ten-thousand-hours rule to expertise. The “rule” represents the
idea that the number of accumulated hours of highly specialized training is
the sole factor in skill development, no matter the domain. Deliberate
practice, according to the study of thirty violinists that spawned the rule,
occurs when learners are “given explicit instructions about the best method,”
individually supervised by an instructor, supplied with “immediate
informative feedback and knowledge of the results of their performance,”
and “repeatedly perform the same or similar tasks.” Reams of work on
expertise development shows that elite athletes spend more time in highly
technical, deliberate practice each week than those who plateau at lower
levels:

Tiger has come to symbolize the idea that the quantity of deliberate
practice determines success—and its corollary, that the practice must start as
early as possible.
The push to focus early and narrowly extends well beyond sports. We are
often taught that the more competitive and complicated the world gets, the
more specialized we all must become (and the earlier we must start) to
navigate it. Our best-known icons of success are elevated for their precocity
and their head starts—Mozart at the keyboard, Facebook CEO Mark
Zuckerberg at the other kind of keyboard. The response, in every field, to a
ballooning library of human knowledge and an interconnected world has
been to exalt increasingly narrow focus. Oncologists no longer specialize======================================================== OceanofPDF.com



OceanofPDF.com

For Elizabeth,
this one and any other one
OceanofPDF.com

Contents
INTRODUCTION: Roger vs. Tiger
CHAPTER 1: The Cult of the Head Start
CHAPTER 2: How the Wicked World Was Made
CHAPTER 3: When Less of the Same Is More
CHAPTER 4: Learning, Fast and Slow
CHAPTER 5: Thinking Outside Experience
CHAPTER 6: The Trouble with Too Much Grit
CHAPTER 7: Flirting with Your Possible Selves
CHAPTER 8: The Outsider Advantage
CHAPTER 9: Lateral Thinking with Withered Technology
CHAPTER 10: Fooled by Expertise
CHAPTER 11: Learning to Drop Your Familiar Tools
CHAPTER 12: Deliberate Amateurs
CONCLUSION: Expanding Your Range
AFTERWORD
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
NOTES
INDEX
OceanofPDF.com

And he refused to specialize in anything, preferring to keep an eye on the
overall estate rather than any of its parts. . . . And Nikolay’s management
produced the most brilliant results.
—Leo Tolstoy, War and Peace
No tool is omnicompetent. There is no such thing as a master-key that will unlock all doors.
—Arnold Toynbee, A Study of History
OceanofPDF.com

INTRODUCTION
Roger vs. Tiger
LET’S START WITH a couple of stories from the world of sports. This first one,
you probably know.
The boy’s father could tell something was different. At six months old, the
boy could balance on his father’s palm as he walked through their home. At
seven months, his father gave him a putter to fool around with, and the boy
dragged it everywhere he went in his little circular baby walker. At ten
months, he climbed down from his high chair, trundled over to a golf club
that had been cut down to size for him, and imitated the swing he’d been
watching in the garage. Because the father couldn’t yet talk with his son, he
drew pictures to show the boy how to place his hands on the club. “It is very
difficult to communicate how to putt when the child is too young to talk,” he
would later note.
At two—an age when the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention list
physical developmental milestones like “kicks a ball” and “stands on
tiptoe”—he went on national television and used a club tall enough to reach
his shoulder to drive a ball past an admiring Bob Hope. That same year, he
entered his first tournament, and won the ten-and-under division.
There was no time to waste. By three, the boy was learning how to play
out of a “sand twap,” and his father was mapping out his destiny. He knew
his son had been chosen for this, and that it was his duty to guide him. Think
about it: if you felt that certain about the path ahead, maybe you too would
start prepping your three-year-old to handle the inevitable and insatiable
media that would come. He quizzed the boy, playing reporter, teaching him
how to give curt answers, never to offer more than precisely what was asked.

That year, the boy shot 48, eleven over par, for nine holes at a course in
California.
When the boy was four, his father could drop him off at a golf course at
nine in the morning and pick him up eight hours later, sometimes with the
money he’d won from those foolish enough to doubt.
At eight, the son beat his father for the first time. The father didn’t mind,
because he was convinced that his boy was singularly talented, and that he
was uniquely equipped to help him. He had been an outstanding athlete
himself, and against enormous odds. He played baseball in college when he
was the only black player in the entire conference. He understood people,
and discipline; a sociology major, he served in Vietnam as a member of the
Army’s elite Green Berets, and later taught psychological warfare to future
officers. He knew he hadn’t done his best with three kids from a previous
marriage, but now he could see that he’d been given a second chance to do
the right thing with number four. And it was all going according to plan.
The boy was already famous by the time he reached Stanford, and soon
his father opened up about his importance. His son would have a larger
impact than Nelson Mandela, than Gandhi, than Buddha, he insisted. “He
has a larger forum than any of them,” he said. “He’s the bridge between the
East and the West. There is no limit because he has the guidance. I don’t
know yet exactly what form this will take. But he is the Chosen One.”
This second story, you also probably know. You might not recognize it at
first .
His mom was a coach, but she never coached him. He would kick a ball
around with her when he learned to walk. As a boy, he played squash with
his father on Sundays. He dabbled in skiing, wrestling, swimming, and
skateboarding. He played basketball, handball, tennis, table tennis,
badminton over his neighbor’s fence, and soccer at school. He would later
give credit to the wide range of sports he played for helping him develop his
athleticism and hand-eye coordination.
He found that the sport really didn’t matter much, so long as it included a
ball. “I was always very much more interested if a ball was involved,” he
would remember. He was a kid who loved to play. His parents had no
particular athletic aspirations for him. “We had no plan A, no plan B,” his
mother would later say. She and the boy’s father encouraged him to sample a

wide array of sports. In fact, it was essential. The boy “became unbearable,”
his mother said, if he had to stay still for too long.
Though his mother taught tennis, she decided against working with him.
“He would have just upset me anyway,” she said. “He tried out every strange
stroke and certainly never returned a ball normally. That is simply no fun for
a mother.” Rather than pushy, a Sports Illustrated writer would observe that
his parents were, if anything, “pully.” Nearing his teens, the boy began to
gravitate more toward tennis, and “if they nudged him at all, it was to stop
taking tennis so seriously.” When he played matches, his mother often
wandered away to chat with friends. His father had only one rule: “Just don’t
cheat.” He didn’t, and he started getting really good.
As a teenager, he was good enough to warrant an interview with the local
newspaper. His mother was appalled to read that, when asked what he would
buy with a hypothetical first paycheck from playing tennis, her son
answered, “a Mercedes.” She was relieved when the reporter let her listen to
a recording of the interview and they realized there’d been a mistake: the
boy had said “Mehr CDs ,” in Swiss German. He simply wanted “more CDs.
”
The boy was competitive, no doubt. But when his tennis instructors
decided to move him up to a group with older players, he asked to move
back so he could stay with his friends. After all, part of the fun was hanging
around after his lessons to gab about music, or pro wrestling, or soccer.
By the time he finally gave up other sports—soccer, most notably—to
focus on tennis, other kids had long since been working with strength
coaches, sports psychologists, and nutritionists. But it didn’t seem to hamper
his development in the long run. In his midthirties, an age by which even
legendary tennis players are typically retired, he would still be ranked
number one in the world.
In 2006, Tiger Woods and Roger Federer met for the first time, when both
were at the apex of their powers. Tiger flew in on his private jet to watch the
final of the U.S. Open. It made Federer especially nervous, but he still won,
for the third year in a row. Woods joined him in the locker room for a
champagne celebration. They connected as only they could. “I’ve never
spoken with anybody who was so familiar with the feeling of being
invincible,” Federer would later describe it. They quickly became friends, as

well as focal points of a debate over who was the most dominant athlete in
the world.
Still, the contrast was not lost on Federer. “His story is completely
different from mine,” he told a biographer in 2006. “Even as a kid his goal
was to break the record for winning the most majors. I was just dreaming of
just once meeting Boris Becker or being able to play at Wimbledon some
time.”
It seems pretty unusual for a child with “pully” parents, and who first took
his sport lightly, to grow into a man who dominates it like no one before
him. Unlike Tiger, thousands of kids, at least, had a head start on Roger.
Tiger’s incredible upbringing has been at the heart of a batch of bestselling
books on the development of expertise, one of which was a parenting
manual written by Tiger’s father, Earl. Tiger was not merely playing golf. He
was engaging in “deliberate practice,” the only kind that counts in the now-
ubiquitous ten-thousand-hours rule to expertise. The “rule” represents the
idea that the number of accumulated hours of highly specialized training is
the sole factor in skill development, no matter the domain. Deliberate
practice, according to the study of thirty violinists that spawned the rule,
occurs when learners are “given explicit instructions about the best method,”
individually supervised by an instructor, supplied with “immediate
informative feedback and knowledge of the results of their performance,”
and “repeatedly perform the same or similar tasks.” Reams of work on
expertise development shows that elite athletes spend more time in highly
technical, deliberate practice each week than those who plateau at lower
levels:

Tiger has come to symbolize the idea that the quantity of deliberate
practice determines success—and its corollary, that the practice must start as
early as possible.
The push to focus early and narrowly extends well beyond sports. We are
often taught that the more competitive and complicated the world gets, the
more specialized we all must become (and the earlier we must start) to
navigate it. Our best-known icons of success are elevated for their precocity
and their head starts—Mozart at the keyboard, Facebook CEO Mark
Zuckerberg at the other kind of keyboard. The response, in every field, to a
ballooning library of human knowledge and an interconnected world has
been to exalt increasingly narrow focus. Oncologists no longer specialize======================================================== Engineering
Management 38, no. 1 (1991): 63–74. Boisjoly’s “away from goodness” quote is from transcripts of
the Feb 25, 1986 hearing of the presidential commission.
Boisjoly had personally inspected: R. P. Boisjoly et al. “Roger Boisjoly and the Challenger
Disaster,” Journal of Business Ethics 8, no. 4 (1989): 217–230. Boisjoly’s “away from goodness”
quote is from transcripts of the Feb 25, 1986 hearing of the presidential commision.
most complex machine ever built: J. M. Logsdon, “Was the Space Shuttle a Mistake?,” MIT
Technology Review, July 6, 2011.
McDonald and two Thiokol VPs: Transcripts of presidential commission hearings, which provided
information and quotes in this chapter are available at
https://history.nasa.gov/rogersrep/genindex.htm . Allan McDonald also gives a fascinating account of
the investigation and the return of the shuttle to flight in Truth, Lies, and O-Rings (Gainesville:
University Press of Florida, 2009).
“They said because they had flown”: From Diane Vaughan’s book, which includes a fascinating
exploration of “the normalization of deviance” in decision making: The Challenger Launch Decision:
Risky Technology, Culture, and Deviance at NASA (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996).
“In God We Trust, All Others Bring Data”: A number of background interviews with current and
former NASA managers and engineers—especially during a visit to NASA’s Johnson Space Center in
2017—provided helpful context. NASA’s own APPEL Knowledge Services portal was extremely
helpful. It is an incredible repository of information that links to NASA’s voluminous “Lessons
Learned System.” 245 Karl Weick noticed something unusual: K. E. Weick, “The Collapse of
Sensemaking in Organizations: The Mann Gulch Disaster,” Administrative Science Quarterly 38, no.
4 (1993): 628–52.; K. E. Weick, “Drop Your Tools: An Allegory for Organizational Studies,”
Administrative Science Quarterly 41, no. 2 (1996): 301–13; K. E. Weick, “Drop Your Tools: On
Reconfiguring Management Education,” Journal of Management Education 31, no. 1 (2007): 5–16.
eleven feet per second : R. C. Rothermel, “Mann Gulch Fire: A Race That Couldn’t Be Won,”
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, General Technical
Report INT-299, May 1993.
wildland firefighters continued to lose races with fires: K. E. Weick, “Tool Retention and
Fatalities in Wildland Fire Settings,” in Linking Expertise and Naturalistic Decision Making, ed. E.
Salas and G. A. Klein (New York: Psychology Press, 2001 [Kindle ebook]).
“like a jet during take off”: USDA, USDI, and USDC, South Canyon Fire Investigation (Report of
the South Canyon Fire Accident Investigation Team), U.S. Government Printing Office, Region 8,
Report 573-183, 1994.

“still wearing his backpack”; “then I realized I still had my saw”; twenty-three . . . perished
beside them: Weick, “Tool Retention and Fatalities in Wildland Fire Settings.”
grabbed it again in the air; “proxy for unlearning”; “regress to what they know best”;
“existential crisis”: Weick, “Drop Your Tools: An Allegory for Organizational Studies.”
“a common pattern”: J. Orasanu and L. Martin, “Errors in Aviation Decision Making,” Proceedings
of the HESSD ’98 (Workshop on Human Error, Safety and System Development) (1998): 100–107; J.
Orasanu et al., “Errors in Aviation Decision Making,” Fourth Conference on Naturalistic Decision
Making, 1998.
“If I make a decision”: Weick, “Tool Retention and Fatalities in Wildland Fire Settings.”
“Between the lines, it suggested”: M. Kohut, “Interview with Bryan O’Connor,” NASA’s ASK
(Academy Sharing Knowledge ) magazine, issue 45 (January 2012).
“you have to use reason”: transcript, Hearings of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle
Challenger Accident Vol. 4, February 25, 1986.
“must have been really hard”: Several members of the 48th Rescue Squadron provided invaluable
background and corroboration.
“live in the real world”: C. Grupen, Introduction to Radiation Protection (Berlin: Springer, 2010),
90. Shafer’s entire original message is preserved at https:// yarchive.net/ air/ perfect_ safety.html .
But in the first study: K. S. Cameron and S. J. Freeman, “Cultural Congruence, Strength, and Type:
Relationships to Effectiveness,” Research in Organizational Change and Development 5 (1991): 23–
58.
effective leaders and organizations had range: K. S. Cameron and R. E. Quinn, Diagnosing and
Changing Organizational Culture , 3rd Edition (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2011).
In one experiment: S. V. Patil et al., “Accountability Systems and Group Norms: Balancing the
Risks of Mindless Conformity and Reckless Deviation,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 30
(2017): 282–303.
Gene Kranz: G. Kranz, Failure Is Not an Option (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2000). See also: M.
Dunn, “Remaking NASA one step at a time,” Associated Press, October 12, 2003.
“Monday Notes”; William Lucas . . . “often grew angry”: S. J. Dick, ed., NASA’s First 50 Years
(Washington, DC: NASA, 2011 [ebook]). Also, von Braun’s weekly notes are archived at
https://history.msfc.nasa.gov/vonbraun/ vb_ weekly_ notes.html .
“the quality of the notes fell”: R. Launius, “Comments on a Very Effective Communications
System: Marshall Space Flight Center’s Monday Notes,” Roger Launius’s Blog, February 28, 2011.
“proper channels”; “stringent and inhibiting”: Columbia Accident Investigation Board, “History
as Cause: Columbia and Challenger ,” in Columbia Accident Investigation Board Report, vol. 1,
August 2003.
Gravity Probe B: Stanford University maintains an archive with copious information (both technical
and written for the public) on GP-B, at einstein.stanford.edu . For a scientific deep dive, a special
issue of the journal Classical and Quantum Gravity was devoted to GP-B (vol. 32, no. 22 [November
2015]).
technology took twenty years: T. Reichhardt, “Unstoppable Force,” Nature 426 (2003): 380–81.
“was confident that we could succeed”: NASA Case Study, “The Gravity Probe B Launch
Decisions,” NASA, Academy of Program/ Project and Engineering Leadership.
“a healthy tension in the system”: Geveden also discusses healthy tension in R. Wright et al., eds.,
NASA at 50: Interviews with NASA’s Senior Leadership (Washington, DC: NASA, 2012).

first direct test: J. Overduin, “The Experimental Verdict on Spacetime from Gravity Probe B,” in
Vesselin Petkov, ed., Space, Time, and Spacetime (Berlin: Springer, 2010).
Himalayan mountain climbers: E.M. Anicich et al., “Hierarchical Cultural Values Predict Success
and Mortality in High-Stakes Teams,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 112, no. 5 (2015): 1338–43.
“oculostenotic reflex”: Eric Topol is the cardiologist who coined that term. (For a patient who is
actually having a heart attack, a stent can be lifesaving.)
one in fifty patients: K. Stergiopoulos and D. L. Brown, “Initial Coronary Stent Implantation With
Medical Therapy vs Medical Therapy Alone for Stable Coronary Artery Disease: Meta-analysis of
Randomized Controlled Trials,” Archives of Internal Medicine 172, no. 4 (2012): 312–19.
cannot believe that stenting: G. A. Lin et al., “Cardiologists’ Use of Percutaneous Coronary
Interventions for Stable Coronary Artery Disease,” Archives of Internal Medicine 167, no. 15 (2007):
1604–09.
were less likely to die: A. B. Jena et al., “Mortality and Treatment Patterns among Patients
Hospitalized with Acute Cardiovascular Conditions during Dates of National Cardiology Meetings,”
JAMA Internal Medicine 175, no. 2 (2015): 44. See also: A. B. Jena et al., “Acute Myocardial
Infarction during Dates of National Interventional Cardiology Meetings,” Journal of the American
Heart Association 7, no. 6 (2018): e008230.
“At large cardiology conventions”: R. F. Redberg, “Cardiac Patient Outcomes during National
Cardiology Meetings,” JAMA Internal Medicine 175, no. 2 (2015): 245.
compared the surgery with “sham surgery”: R. Sihvonen et al., “Arthroscopic Partial
Meniscectomy Versus Sham Surgery for a Degenerative Meniscal Tear,” New England Journal of
Medicine 369 (2013): 2515–24. Hyperlinks to several other studies with supporting findings can be
found in: D. Epstein, “When Evidence Says No, But Doctors Say Yes,” ProPublica, February 22,
2017.
CHAPTER 12: DELIBERATE AMATEURS
“Very promising!”: Smithies discussed some of his work and notebook pages in his publicly
available Nobel Lecture, “Turning Pages” (December 7, 2007). The University of North Carolina
maintains an extraordinary online archive of digitized versions of more than sixty years of Smithies’s
notebooks, along with audio recordings of Smithies himself going through them and providing
commentary. (Smithies told me that one should always have a notebook, even on Saturday.) The
archive was a wonderful resource for interview preparation, and can be found at
smithies.lib.unc.edu/notebooks .
A 2016 analysis of ten thousand researchers’ careers: A. Clauset et al., “ Data-Driven Predictions
in the Science of Science,” Science 355 (2017): 477–80.
had reportedly tested 240,000 compounds: P. McKenna, “Nobel Prize Goes to Modest Woman
Who Beat Malaria for China,” New Scientist, November 9, 2011, online ed.
a fourth-century Chinese alchemist: Alchemist and herbalist Ge Hong wrote A Handbook of
Prescriptions for Emergencies in the fourth century, during the Jin dynasty. Tu gives background in
her Nobel Lecture: “ Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World”
(December 7, 2015). She shares a photo of a sixteenth-century copy of the handbook in: Y. Tu, “The
Discovery of Artemisinin (Qinghaosu) and Gifts from Chinese Medicine,” Nature Medicine 17, no.
10 (2011): 1217–20.
A study on the decline of malaria: Bhatt et al., “The Effect of Malaria Control on Plasmodium
falciparum in Africa Between 2000 and 2015,” Nature 526 (2015): 207–11.

the label NBGBOKFO: G. Watts, “Obituary: Oliver Smithies,” Lancet 389 (2017): 1004.
Scotch tape to rip thin layers of graphite: Geim details the======================================================== pivot after
another, applying the lessons as he went.
Ogas uses the shorthand “standardization covenant” for the cultural
notion that it is rational to trade a winding path of self-exploration for a
rigid goal with a head start because it ensures stability. “The people we
study who are fulfilled do pursue a long-term goal, but they only formulate
it after a period of discovery,” he told me. “Obviously, there’s nothing
wrong with getting a law or medical degree or PhD. But it’s actually riskier
to make that commitment before you know how it fits you. And don’t
consider the path fixed. People realize things about themselves halfway
through medical school.” Charles Darwin, for example.

At his father’s behest he planned to be a doctor, but he found medical
lectures “intolerably dull,” and partway through his education he walked
out of an operation at the grind of the surgical saw. “Nor did I ever attend
again,” Darwin wrote, “for hardly any inducement would have been strong
enough to make me do so.” Darwin was a Bible literalist at the time, and
figured he would become a clergyman. He bounced around classes,
including a botany course with a professor who subsequently recommended
him for an unpaid position aboard the HMS Beagle . After convincing his
father (with his uncle’s help) that he would not become a deadbeat if he
took this one detour, Darwin began perhaps the most impactful post-college
gap year in history. His father’s wishes eventually “died a natural death.”
Decades later, Darwin reflected on the process of self-discovery. “It seems
ludicrous that I once intended to be a clergyman,” he wrote. His father, a
doctor for more than sixty years, detested the sight of blood. “If his father
had given him any choice,” Darwin wrote, “nothing should have induced
him to follow it.”
Michael Crichton started with medicine too, after learning how few
writers make a living. With medicine, “I would never have to wonder if the
work was worthwhile,” he wrote. Except, a few years in he became
disenchanted with medical practice. He graduated from Harvard Medical
School, but decided to become a writer. His medical education was not
remotely wasted. He used it to craft some of the most popular stories in the
world—the novel Jurassic Park, and the TV series ER, with its record-
setting 124 Emmy nominations.
Career goals that once felt safe and certain can appear ludicrous, to use
Darwin’s adjective, when examined in the light of more self-knowledge.
Our work preferences and our life preferences do not stay the same, because
we do not stay the same.
Psychologist Dan Gilbert called it the “end of history illusion.” From
teenagers to senior citizens, we recognize that our desires and motivations
sure changed a lot in the past (see: your old hairstyle), but believe they will
not change much in the future. In Gilbert’s terms, we are works in progress
claiming to be finished.
Gilbert and colleagues measured the preferences, values, and
personalities of more than nineteen thousand adults aged eighteen to sixty-

eight. Some were asked to predict how much they would change over the
next decade, others to reflect about how much they had changed in the
previous one. Predictors expected that they would change very little in the
next decade, while reflectors reported having changed a lot in the previous
one. Qualities that feel immutable changed immensely. Core values—
pleasure, security, success, and honesty—transformed. Preferences for
vacations, music, hobbies, and even friends were transfigured. Hilariously,
predictors were willing to pay an average of $129 a ticket for a show ten
years away by their current favorite band, while reflectors would only pay
$80 to see a show today by their favorite band from ten years ago. The
precise person you are now is fleeting, just like all the other people you’ve
been. That feels like the most unexpected result, but it is also the most well
documented.
It is definitely true that a shy child is more likely to foreshadow a shy
adult, but it is far from a perfect correlation. And if one particular
personality trait does not change, others will. The only certainty is change,
both on average as a generation ages, and within each individual. University
of Illinois psychologist Brent W. Roberts specializes in studying personality
development. He and another psychologist aggregated the results of ninety-
two studies and revealed that some personality traits change over time in
fairly predictable ways. Adults tend to become more agreeable, more
conscientious, more emotionally stable, and less neurotic with age, but less
open to experience. In middle age, adults grow more consistent and
cautious and less curious, open-minded, and inventive. 
*
 The changes have
well-known impacts, like the fact that adults generally become less likely to
commit violent crimes with age, and more able to create stable
relationships. The most momentous personality changes occur between age
eighteen and one’s late twenties, so specializing early is a task of predicting
match quality for a person who does not yet exist. It could work, but it
makes for worse odds. Plus, while personality change slows, it does not
stop at any age. Sometimes it can actually happen instantly.
Thanks to YouTube, the “marshmallow test” could be the most famous
scientific experiment in the world. It was actually a series of experiments
starting in the 1960s. The original premise was simple: An experimenter
places a marshmallow (or a cookie, or a pretzel) in front of a nursery school

child; before leaving, the experimenter tells the child that if she can wait
until the experimenter returns, she’ll get that marshmallow plus a second
one. If the child can’t wait, she can eat the marshmallow. The children were
not told how long the wait would be (it was fifteen to twenty minutes,
depending on age), so they just had to hold out if they wanted the maximum
reward.
Psychologist Walter Mischel and his research team followed up with the
children years later, and found that the longer a child had been able to wait,
the more likely she was to be successful socially, academically, and
financially, and the less likely she was to abuse drugs.
The marshmallow test was already a celebrity as scientific experiments
go, but it became the Beyoncé of studies when media outlets and parents
eager to foretell their child’s destiny started posting DIY marshmallow tests
online. The videos are by turns adorable and intriguing. Nearly all kids wait
at least a little. Some stare at the marshmallow, touch it, sniff it, delicately
tap their tongue to it and pull back as if it were hot. Maybe they even put it
in their mouth, pull it out, and simulate a big bite. Some tear a barely
noticeable piece off for a micro test taste. Before the end of the video, the
kids who start by touching it will have eaten the marshmallow. The kids
who successfully hold out wield all manner of distraction, from looking
away to shoving the plate away, covering their eyes, turning and screaming,
singing, talking to themselves, counting, generally thrashing around in the
chair, or (boys) hitting themselves in the face. One little boy who spent his
time looking in every direction except at the marshmallow is so ravenous
when the experimenter returns with his second treat that he mashes them
both into his mouth immediately.
The crystal ball allure of the marshmallow test is undeniable, and also
misconstrued. Mischel’s collaborator Yuichi Shoda has repeatedly made a
point of saying that plenty of preschoolers who ate the marshmallow turned
out just fine. 
*
 Shoda maintained that the most exciting aspect of the studies
was demonstrating how easily children could learn to change a specific
behavior with simple mental strategies, like thinking about the
marshmallow as a cloud rather than food. Shoda’s post-marshmallow-test
work has been one part of a bridge in psychology between extreme
arguments in the debate about the roles of nature and nurture in personality.
One extreme suggests that personality traits are almost entirely a function of
one’s nature, and the other that personality is entirely a function of the

environment. Shoda argued that both sides of the so-called person-situation
debate were right. And wrong. At a given point in life, an individual’s
nature influences how they respond to a particular situation, but their nature
can appear surprisingly different in some other situation. With Mischel, he
began to study “if-then signatures.” If David is at a giant party, then he
seems introverted, but if David is with his team at work, then he seems
extroverted. (True.) So is David introverted or extroverted? Well, both, and
consistently so.
Ogas and Rose call this the “context principle.” In 2007, Mischel wrote,
“The gist of such findings is that the child who is aggressive at home may
be less aggressive than most when in school; the man exceptionally hostile
when rejected in love may be unusually tolerant about criticism of his work;
the one who melts with anxiety in the doctor’s office may be a calm
mountain climber; the risk-taking entrepreneur may take few social risks.”
Rose framed it more colloquially: “If you are conscientious and neurotic
while driving today, it’s a pretty safe bet you will be conscientious and
neurotic while driving tomorrow. At the same time . . . you may not be
conscientious and neurotic when you are playing Beatles cover songs with
your band in the context of the local pub.” Perhaps that is one reason Daniel
Kahneman and his colleagues in the military (chapter 1 ) failed to predict
who would be a leader in battle based on who had been a leader in an
obstacle course exercise. When I was a college runner, I had teammates
whose drive and determination seemed almost boundless on the track, and
nearly absent in the classroom, and vice versa. Instead of asking whether
someone is gritty, we should ask when they are. “If you get someone into a
context that suits them,” Ogas said,======================================================== pails or do whatever,
grunt work,” he told me. “I’m not a super-strong guy, so I wasn’t really
awesome at that, I’ll be honest.”
Concrete was unloaded at the top of the hill and sent sluicing down a
chute when it was needed at the bottom. Davis was standing at the top,
concerned about a massive mound of concrete that was already hardening
while it baked in the sun. He alerted his friend’s brother. “Watch this,” the
brother told him. He grabbed a rod attached to a motor and touched it to the
mound of concrete. “It fluidized instantly, just like whoooosh ,” Davis
recalled. The rod was a concrete vibrator, which is just what it sounds like,
a shaking piece of metal that keeps the components of concrete from

sticking together. “When it came to my mind it was a eureka moment,”
Davis told me.
He called a company that sold concrete vibrators to learn a few details,
and then made a diagram of how the vibrators could easily attach to a barge
and do to “chocolate mousse” what they already do with concrete. Counting
diagrams, the solution was a total of three pages.
“Sometimes you just slap your head and go, ‘Well why didn’t I think of
that?’ If it was easily solved by people within the industry, it would have
been solved by people within the industry,” Pegau said. “I think it happens
more often than we’d love to admit, because we tend to view things with all
the information we’ve gathered in our industry, and sometimes that puts us
down a path that goes into a wall. It’s hard to back up and find another
path.” Pegau was basically describing the Einstellung effect, a psychology
term for the tendency of problem solvers to employ only familiar methods
even if better ones are available. Davis subsequently earned another cash
award in a challenge that sought help with a hair removal product; a
memory of rolling chewing gum on his leg as a kid led him to a solution.
When I asked Davis if he was prone to framing problems with distant
analogies from random experiences outside his field, he had to ponder it for
a moment. Does he do that in his daily chemistry problems, I asked? “You
know, I don’t, not really,” he said. “It’s these other puzzles or problems
where you have to think outside the box.”
InnoCentive works in part because, as specialists become more narrowly
focused, “the box” is more like Russian nesting dolls. Specialists divide into
subspecialties, which soon divide into sub-subspecialties. Even if they get
outside the small doll, they may get stuck inside the next, slightly larger
one. Cragin and Davis were outside the box to begin with, and saw
straightforward solutions that eluded insiders with seemingly every training
and resource advantage. Solvers themselves were often bewildered when
they overcame a challenge that stumped entire companies or industries.
“It took me three evenings to write it up,” an outside solver told the
journal Science after he answered Johnson & Johnson’s request for help
with a production problem in the manufacture of tuberculosis medication. “I
think it’s strange that a major pharma company cannot solve this kind of
problem.” Karim Lakhani, codirector of the Laboratory for Innovation

Science at Harvard, had InnoCentive solvers rate problems on how relevant
they were to their own field of specialization, and found that “the further
the problem was from the solver’s expertise, the more likely they were to
solve it.”
As organizational boxes get smaller and smaller, and as outsiders are
more easily engaged online, “exploration [of new solutions] now
increasingly resides outside the boundaries of the traditional firm,” Lakhani
and colleagues wrote. Our intuition might be that only hyperspecialized
experts can drive modern innovation, but increasing specialization actually
creates new opportunities for outsiders.
As Alph Bingham noticed, for difficult challenges organizations tend
toward local search. They rely on specialists in a single knowledge domain,
and methods that have worked before. (Think about the lab with only E.
coli specialists from chapter 5 .) If those fail, they’re stuck. For the most
intractable problems, “our research shows that a domain-based solution is
often inferior,” according to Lakhani. “Big innovation most often happens
when an outsider who may be far away from the surface of the problem
reframes the problem in a way that unlocks the solution.”
Since InnoCentive demonstrated the concept, other organizations have
arisen to capitalize on outside-in solvers in normally highly specialized
fields. Kaggle is like InnoCentive but specifically for posting challenges in
the area of machine learning—artificial intelligence designed to teach itself
without human intervention.
Shubin Dai, who lives in Changsha, China, was the top-ranked Kaggle
solver in the world as of this writing, out of more than forty thousand
contributors. His day job is leading a team that processes data for banks, but
Kaggle competitions gave him an opportunity to dabble in machine
learning. His favorite problems involve human health or nature
conservation, like a competition in which he won $30,000 by wielding
satellite imagery to distinguish human-caused from natural forest loss in the
Amazon. Dai was asked, for a Kaggle blog post, how important domain
expertise is for winning competitions. “To be frank, I don’t think we can
benefit from domain expertise too much. . . . It’s very hard to win a
competition just by using [ well-known] methods,” he replied. “We need
more creative solutions.”
“The people who win a Kaggle health competition have no medical
training, no biology training, and they’re also often not real machine

learning experts,” Pedro Domingos, a computer science professor and
machine learning researcher, told me. “Knowledge is a double-edged
sword. It allows you to do some things, but it also makes you blind to other
things that you could do.”
Don Swanson saw it coming—the opportunities for people like Bruce
Cragin and John Davis, outsiders who merge strands of disparate
knowledge. Swanson earned a physics PhD in 1952, and then worked as an
industry computer systems analyst, where he became fascinated with
organizing information. In 1963, the University of Chicago took a chance
on him as dean of the Graduate Library School. As a thirty-eight-year-old
from private industry, he was an oddball. The hiring announcement
declared, “Swanson is the first physical scientist to head a professional
library school in this country.”
Swanson became concerned about increasing specialization, that it would
lead to publications that catered only to a very small group of specialists
and inhibit creativity. “The disparity between the total quantity of recorded
knowledge . . . and the limited human capacity to assimilate it, is not only
enormous now but grows unremittingly,” he once said. How can frontiers
be pushed, Swanson wondered, if one day it will take a lifetime just to
reach them in each specialized domain? In 1960, the U.S. National Library
of Medicine used about one hundred unique pairs of terms to index articles.
By 2010, it was nearing one hundred thousand. Swanson felt that if this big
bang of public knowledge continued apace, subspecialties would be like
galaxies, flying away from one another until each is invisible to every other.
Given that he knew interdisciplinary problem solving was important, that
was a conundrum.
In crisis, Swanson saw opportunity. He realized he could make
discoveries by connecting information from scientific articles in
subspecialty domains that never cited one another and that had no scientists
who worked together. For example, by systematically cross-referencing
databases of literature from different disciplines, he uncovered “eleven
neglected connections” between magnesium deficiency and migraine
research, and proposed that they be tested. All of the information he found
was in the public domain; it had just never been connected. “Undiscovered
public knowledge,” Swanson called it. In 2012, the American Headache

Society and the American Academy of Neurology reviewed all the research
on migraine prevention and concluded that magnesium should be
considered as a common treatment. The evidence for magnesium was as
strong as the evidence for the most common remedies, like ibuprofen.
Swanson wanted to show that areas of specialist literature that never
normally overlapped were rife with hidden interdisciplinary treasures
waiting to be connected. He created a computer system, Arrowsmith, that
helped other users do what he did—devise searches that might turn up
distant but relevant sets of scientific articles, and ignited a field of
information science that grapples with connecting diverse areas of
knowledge, as specialties that can inform one another drift apart.
Swanson passed away in 2012, so I contacted his daughter, political
philosophy professor Judy Swanson, to see if she had ever discussed with
him his concerns about specialization. When I reached her, she was at a
conference, “as it happens, one related to overspecialization in the social
sciences,” she told me. From the outside, Judy Swanson looks pretty
specialized. Her faculty web page listed forty-four of her articles and books,
every single one of which had “Aristotle” in the title. So I asked how she
felt about her own specialization, and she seemed surprised. She did not
consider herself specialized compared to her peers, she told me, partly
because she spends time teaching undergraduates, which requires more than
Aristotle. “There is this feeling of frustration,” she told me, “that I should
be doing something more specialized.” Academic departments no longer
merely fracture naturally into subspecialties, they elevate narrowness as an
ideal.
That is counterproductive. As Karim Lakhani put it after his Inno-Centive
research, a key to creative problem solving is tapping outsiders who use
different approaches “so that the ‘home field’ for the problem does not end
up constraining the solution.” Sometimes, the======================================================== McDonald told me that
engineers who pushed to abort might have been cast as “Chicken Littles.”
Chicken Little doesn’t fare well in the space business. As NASA engineer
Mary Shafer once articulated, “Insisting on perfect safety is for people who
don’t have the balls to live in the real world.” It is no wonder that
organizations struggle to cultivate experts who are both proficient with their
tools and prepared to drop them. But there is an organizational strategy that
can help. The strategy, strange as it sounds, is to send a mixed message.
“Congruence” is a social science term for cultural “fit” among an
institution’s components—values, goals, vision, self-concepts, and
leadership styles. Since the 1980s, congruence has been a pillar of
organizational theory. An effective culture is both consistent and strong.
When all signals point clearly in the same direction, it promotes self-
reinforcing consistency, and people like consistency.
Plenty of profiles of individual businesses were written in support of
congruence. But in the first study that systematically examined a broad
swath of organizations across an industry, researchers who studied cultural
congruence at 334 institutions of higher education found that it had no
influence on any measure of organizational success whatsoever.
Administrators, department heads, and trustees in strongly congruent
institutions did have an easier time classifying the culture when asked, but
there was no impact at all on performance, from the academic and career
development of students to the satisfaction of faculty and the financial
health of the college. The researcher who led that work went on to study

thousands of businesses. She found that the most effective leaders and
organizations had range; they were, in effect, paradoxical. They could be
demanding and nurturing, orderly and entrepreneurial, even hierarchical
and individualistic all at once. A level of ambiguity, it seemed, was not
harmful. In decision making, it can broaden an organization’s toolbox in a
way that is uniquely valuable .
Philip Tetlock and Barbara Mellers showed that thinkers who tolerate
ambiguity make the best forecasts; one of Tetlock’s former graduate
students, University of Texas professor Shefali Patil, spearheaded a project
with them to show that cultures can build in a form of ambiguity that forces
decision makers to use more than one tool, and to become more flexible and
learn more readily.
In one experiment, subjects played the role of corporate human resources
managers who had to predict the performance of job applicants. The
managers were presented with a standard evaluation process that showed
them how a candidate’s skills were typically weighted, and then told that
they would be evaluated (and paid) based on how they made decisions. In a
sped-up simulation of real life, after each prediction they could see how the
candidate actually performed according to company records. In some
batches of applications, the candidates performed as the standard evaluation
process predicted; in others, they weren’t even close. Yet, over and over, the
individual managers conformed to standard procedure no matter what the
results told them, even when it clearly was not working, and even when a
better system was easily discoverable. They failed to learn with experience.
Until a wrinkle was added. Conformist managers were given fake Harvard
Business Review research proclaiming that successful groups prioritize
independence and dissent. Miraculously, their minds were opened and they
started learning. They began to see when the standard evaluation process
clearly needed to be modified or discarded. They were learning with
experience, and their predictions became more accurate. The managers
were benefitting from incongruence . The formal, conformist company
process rules were balanced out by an informal culture of individual
autonomy in decision making and dissent from the typical way of doing
things.
Incongruence worked in the other direction as well. HR managers who
were given a standard evaluation process but told that only the accuracy of
their predictions mattered began by ditching the process and making up

their own rules. They never learned when the standard process did indeed
work. In that case, the cure was fake Harvard Business Review research
indicating that successful groups prioritize cohesion, loyalty, and finding
common ground. Again, the HR managers became learning machines; they
suddenly hewed closer to the traditional process when it had value, but
continued to deviate readily when it didn’t, as NASA should have.
Business school students are widely taught to believe the congruence
model, that a good manager can always align every element of work into a
culture where all influences are mutually reinforcing—whether toward
cohesion or individualism. But cultures can actually be too internally
consistent. With incongruence, “you’re building in cross-checks,” Tetlock
told me.
The experiments showed that an effective problem-solving culture was
one that balanced standard practice—whatever it happened to be—with
forces that pushed in the opposite direction. If managers were used to
process conformity, encouraging individualism helped them to employ
“ambidextrous thought,” and learn what worked in each situation. If they
were used to improvising, encouraging a sense of loyalty and cohesion did
the job. The trick was expanding the organization’s range by identifying the
dominant culture and then diversifying it by pushing in the opposite
direction.
By the time of the Challenger launch, NASA’s “can do” culture
manifested as extreme process accountability combined with collectivist
social norms. Everything was congruent for conformity to the standard
procedures. The process was so rigid it spurned evidence that didn’t
conform to the usual rules, and so sacred that Larry Mulloy felt protected
by a signed piece of paper testifying that he had followed the usual process.
Dissent was valued at flight readiness reviews, but at the most important
moment, the most important engineering group asked for an offline caucus
where they found a way, in private, to conform. Like the one engineer said,
without data, “the boss’s opinion is better than mine. ”
The more I spoke with Captain Lesmes, the more it seemed to me that he
had felt strongly outcome accountable—searching for a solution even if it
deviated from standard procedure—within an extraordinarily potent
collective culture that ensured he would not make the decision to deviate
easily. He had, as Patil, Tetlock, and Mellers wrote, harnessed “the power of
cross-pressures in promoting flexible, ambidextrous thought.” The subtitle

of that paper: “Balancing the Risks of Mindless Conformity and Reckless
Deviation.”
Superforecasting teams harnessed the same cultural cross-pressure. A
team was judged purely by the accuracy of its members’ forecasts. But
internally the Good Judgment Project incentivized collective culture.
Commenting was an expectation; teammates were encouraged to vote for
useful comments and recognized for process milestones, like a certain
number of lifetime comments.
Prior to Challenger, there was a long span when NASA culture harnessed
incongruence. Gene Kranz, the flight director when Apollo 11 first landed
on the moon, lived by that same mantra, the valorized process—“In God
We Trust, All Others Bring Data”—but he also made a habit of seeking out
opinions of technicians and engineers at every level of the hierarchy. If he
heard the same hunch twice, it didn’t take data for him to interrupt the usual
process and investigate.
Wernher von Braun, who led the Marshall Space Flight Center’s
development of the rocket that propelled the moon mission, balanced
NASA’s rigid process with an informal, individualistic culture that
encouraged constant dissent and cross-boundary communication. Von
Braun started “Monday Notes”: every week engineers submitted a single
page of notes on their salient issues. Von Braun handwrote comments in the
margins, and then circulated the entire compilation. Everyone saw what
other divisions were up to, and how easily problems could be raised.
Monday Notes were rigorous, but informal.
On a typed page of notes from two days after the moon landing in 1969,
von Braun homed in on a short section in which an engineer guessed why a
liquid oxygen tank unexpectedly lost pressure. The issue was already
irrelevant for the moon mission, but could come up again in future flights.
“Let’s pin this down as precisely as possible,” von Braun wrote. “We must
know whether there’s more behind this, that calls for checks or remedies.”
Like Kranz, von Braun went looking for problems, hunches, and bad news.
He even rewarded those who exposed problems. After Kranz and von
Braun’s time, the “All Others Bring Data” process culture remained, but the
informal culture and power of individual hunches shriveled.
In 1974, William Lucas took over the Marshall Space Flight Center. A
NASA chief historian wrote that Lucas was a brilliant engineer but “often
grew angry when he learned of problems.” Allan McDonald described him

to me as a “ shoot-the-messenger type guy.” Lucas transformed von Braun’s
Monday Notes into a system purely for upward communication. He did not
write feedback and the notes did not circulate. At one point they morphed
into standardized forms that had to be filled out. Monday Notes became one
more rigid formality in a process culture. “Immediately, the quality of the
notes fell,” wrote another official NASA historian.
Lucas retired shortly after the Challenger disaster, but the entrenched
process culture persisted. NASA’s only other fatal shuttle accident, the
space shuttle Columbia disintegration in 2003, was a cultural carbon copy
of the Challenger . NASA clung to its usual process tools in an unusual
circumstance. The Columbia disaster engendered an even stronger ill-fated
congruence between process accountability and group-focused======================================================== proxy for population effects, particularly over a
single decade. The variable that both men were certain would vindicate
their worldviews actually had little to do with them. Commodity prices
waxed and waned with macroeconomic cycles, and a recession during the
bet brought the prices down. Ehrlich and Simon might as well have flipped
a coin and both declared victory.
Both men dug in. Each declared his faith in science and the undisputed
primacy of facts. And each continued to miss the value of the other’s ideas.
Ehrlich was wrong about population (and the apocalypse), but right on
aspects of environmental degradation. Simon was right about the influence
of human ingenuity on the food and energy supply, but wrong in claiming
that improvements in air and water quality also vindicated his predictions.
Ironically, those improvements failed to arise naturally from technological
initiative and markets, and rather were bolstered through regulations
pressed by Ehrlich and others.
Ideally, intellectual sparring partners “hone each other’s arguments so
that they are sharper and better,” Yale historian Paul Sabin wrote. “The
opposite happened with Paul Ehrlich and Julian Simon.” As each man

amassed more information for his own view, each became more dogmatic,
and the inadequacies in their models of the world more stark.
There is a particular kind of thinker, one who becomes more entrenched
in their single big idea about how the world works even in the face of
contrary facts, whose predictions become worse, not better, as they amass
information for their mental representation of the world. They are on
television and in the news every day, making worse and worse predictions
while claiming victory, and they have been rigorously studied.
It started at the 1984 meeting of the National Research Council’s committee
on American-Soviet relations. Newly tenured psychologist and political
scientist Philip Tetlock was thirty years old, by far the most junior
committee member. He listened intently as members discussed Soviet
intentions and American policies. Renowned experts confidently delivered
authoritative predictions, and Tetlock was struck by the fact that they were
often perfectly contradictory to one another, and impervious to
counterarguments.
Tetlock decided to put expert predictions to the test. With the Cold War in
full swing, he began a study to collect short-and long-term forecasts from
284 highly educated experts (most had doctorates) who averaged more than
twelve years of experience in their specialties. The questions covered
international politics and economics, and in order to make sure the
predictions were concrete, the experts had to give specific probabilities of
future events. Tetlock had to collect enough predictions over enough time
that he could separate lucky and unlucky streaks from true skill. The project
lasted twenty years, and comprised 82,361 probability estimates about the
future. The results limned a very wicked world.
The average expert was a horrific forecaster. Their areas of specialty,
years of experience, academic degrees, and even (for some) access to
classified information made no difference. They were bad at short-term
forecasting, bad at long-term forecasting, and bad at forecasting in every
domain. When experts declared that some future event was impossible or
nearly impossible, it nonetheless occurred 15 percent of the time. When
they declared a sure thing, it failed to transpire more than one-quarter of the
time. The Danish proverb that warns “It is difficult to make predictions,
especially about the future,” was right. Dilettantes who were pitted against

the experts were no more clairvoyant, but at least they were less likely to
call future events either impossible or sure things, leaving them with fewer
laugh-out-loud errors to atone for—if, that was, the experts had believed in
atonement.
Many experts never admitted systematic flaws in their judgment, even in
the face of their results. When they succeeded, it was completely on their
own merits—their expertise clearly enabled them to figure out the world.
When they missed wildly, it was always a near miss; they had certainly
understood the situation, they insisted, and if just one little thing had gone
differently, they would have nailed it. Or, like Ehrlich, their understanding
was correct; the timeline was just a bit off. Victories were total victories,
and defeats were always just a touch of bad luck away from having been
victories too. Experts remained undefeated while losing constantly. “There
is often a curiously inverse relationship,” Tetlock concluded, “between how
well forecasters thought they were doing and how well they did.”
There was also a “perverse inverse relationship” between fame and
accuracy. The more likely an expert was to have his or her predictions
featured on op-ed pages and television, the more likely they were always
wrong. Or, not always wrong. Rather, as Tetlock and his coauthor succinctly
put it in their book Superforecasting, “roughly as accurate as a dart-
throwing chimpanzee.”
Early predictions in Tetlock’s research pertained to the future of the
Soviet Union. There were experts (usually liberal) who saw Mikhail
Gorbachev as an earnest reformer who would be able to change the Soviet
Union and keep it intact for a while, and experts (usually conservative) who
felt that the Soviet Union was immune to reform, ruinous by its very nature,
and losing legitimacy. Both sides were partly right and partly wrong.
Gorbachev did bring real reform, opening the Soviet Union to the world and
empowering citizens. But those reforms uncorked bottled-up forces in the
republics outside of Russia, where the system had lost legitimacy. Starting
with Estonia declaring its sovereignty, the forces blew the Soviet Union
apart. Both camps of experts were completely taken by surprise at the swift
end of the USSR, and their predictions about the course of events were
terrible. There was, however, one subgroup within the experts that managed
to see more of what was coming.
Unlike Ehrlich and Simon, they were not vested in a single approach.
They were able to take from each argument and integrate apparently

contradictory worldviews. They agreed that Gorbachev was a real reformer,
and that the Soviet Union had lost legitimacy outside of Russia. Some of
those integrators actually foresaw that the end of the Soviet Union was
close at hand, and that real reforms would be the catalyst.
The integrators outperformed their colleagues on pretty much everything,
but they especially trounced them on long-term predictions. Eventually,
Tetlock conferred nicknames (borrowed from philosopher Isaiah Berlin)
that became famous throughout the psychology and intelligence-gathering
communities: the narrow-view hedgehogs, who “know one big thing,” and
the integrator foxes, who “know many little things.”
Hedgehog experts were deep but narrow. Some had spent their careers
studying a single problem. Like Ehrlich and Simon, they fashioned tidy
theories of how the world works through the single lens of their specialty,
and then bent every event to fit them. The hedgehogs, according to Tetlock,
“toil devotedly” within one tradition of their specialty, “and reach for
formulaic solutions to ill-defined problems.” Outcomes did not matter; they
were proven right by both successes and failures, and burrowed further into
their ideas. It made them outstanding at predicting the past, but dart-
throwing chimps at predicting the future. The foxes, meanwhile, “draw
from an eclectic array of traditions, and accept ambiguity and
contradiction,” Tetlock wrote. Where hedgehogs represented narrowness,
foxes ranged outside a single discipline or theory and embodied breadth.
Incredibly, the hedgehogs performed especially poorly on long-term
predictions within their domain of expertise. They actually got worse as
they accumulated credentials and experience in their field. The more
information they had to work with, the more they could fit any story to their
worldview. This did give hedgehogs one conspicuous advantage. Viewing
every world event through their preferred keyhole made it easy to fashion
compelling stories about anything that occurred, and to tell the stories with
adamant authority. In other words, they make great TV .
Tetlock is clearly a fox. He is a professor at Penn, and when I visited his
home in Philadelphia I was enveloped in a casual conversation about
politics he was having with colleagues, including his wife and collaborator,
Barbara Mellers, also a psychologist and eminent scholar of decision
making. Tetlock would start in one direction, then interrogate himself and

make an about-face. He drew on economics, political science, and history to
make one quick point about a current debate in psychology, and then
stopped on a dime and noted, “But if your assumptions about human nature
and how a good society needs to be structured are different, you would see
this completely differently.” When a new idea entered the conversation, he
was quick with “Let’s say for the sake of argument,” which led to him
playing out viewpoints from different disciplines or political or emotional
perspectives. He tried on ideas like Instagram filters until it was hard to tell
which he actually believed.
In 2005, he published the results of his long study of expert judgment,
and they caught the attention of the Intelligence Advanced Research
Projects Activity (IARPA), a government organization that supports
research on the U.S. intelligence community’s most difficult challenges. In
2011, IARPA launched a four-year prediction tournament in which five
researcher-led teams competed. Each team could recruit, train, and
experiment however it saw fit. Every day for four years, predictions were
due at 9 a.m. Eastern time. The questions were hard. What is the chance that
a member will withdraw from the European Union by a target date? Will
the Nikkei close above 9,500? What is the likelihood======================================================== domains, microbiology and immunology. He has studied AIDS and
anthrax, and has illuminated important aspects of how fungal diseases
work. His “h-index,” a measure of a scientist’s productivity and how often
they are cited, recently surpassed Albert Einstein’s. 
*
 So his peers took it
seriously when he arrived at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health in 2015, as chair of molecular microbiology and
immunology, and warned that scientific research is in crisis.
In a lecture to his new colleagues, Casadevall declared that the pace of
progress had slowed, while the rate of retractions in scientific literature had
accelerated, proportionally outpacing the publication of new studies. “If this

continues unabated,” he said, “the entire literature will be retracted in a few
years.” It was science gallows humor, but grounded in data. Part of the
problem, he argued, is that young scientists are rushed to specialize before
they learn how to think; they end up unable to produce good work
themselves and unequipped to spot bad (or fraudulent) work by their
colleagues.
The reason Casadevall came to Hopkins, from a comfy post at New York
City’s Albert Einstein College of Medicine, is that the new gig offered him
the chance to create a prototype of what he thinks graduate science
education, and eventually all education, should be.
Counter to the prevailing trend, Casadevall—with Gundula Bosch, a
professor of both biology and education—is despecializing training, even
for students who plan to become the most specialized of specialists. The
program, known as the R3 Initiative (Rigor, Responsibility,
Reproducibility), starts with interdisciplinary classes that include
philosophy, history, logic, ethics, statistics, communication, and leadership.
A course titled “How Do We Know What Is True?” examines types of
evidence through history and across disciplines. In “Anatomy of Scientific
Error,” students are detectives, hunting for signs of misconduct or poor
methods in real research, while also learning how errors and serendipity
have led to momentous discoveries.
When Casadevall described his vision of broad education on a
professional panel in 2016, a copanelist and editor of the New England
Journal of Medicine (an extremely prestigious and retraction-prone journal)
countered that it would be absurd to add more training time to the already
jam-packed curricula for doctors and scientists. “I would say keep the same
time, and deemphasize all the other didactic material,” Casadevall said. “Do
we really need to go through courses with very specialized knowledge that
often provides a huge amount of stuff that is very detailed, very specialized,
very arcane, and will be totally forgotten in a couple of weeks? Especially
now, when all the information is on your phone. You have people walking
around with all the knowledge of humanity on their phone, but they have no
idea how to integrate it. We don’t train people in thinking or reasoning.”
Doctors and scientists frequently are not even trained in the basic
underlying logic of their own tools. In 2013, a group of doctors and
scientists gave physicians and medical students affiliated with Harvard and
Boston University a type of problem that appears constantly in medicine:

If a test to detect a disease whose prevalence is 1/ 1000 has a false positive rate of 5%, what is
the chance that a person found to have a positive result actually has the disease, assuming you
know nothing about the person’s symptoms or signs?
Assuming the test detects every true case, the correct answer is that there
is about a 2 percent chance (1.96 to be exact) that the patient actually has
the disease. Only a quarter of the physicians and physicians-in-training got
it right. The most common answer was 95 percent. It should be a very
simple problem for professionals who rely on diagnostic tests for a living:
in a sample of 10,000 people, 10 have the disease and get a true positive
result; 5 percent, or 500, will get a false positive; out of 510 people who test
positive, only 10, or 1.96 percent, are actually sick. The problem is not
intuitive, but nor is it difficult. Every medical student and physician has the
numerical ability to solve it. So, as James Flynn observed when he tested
bright college students in basic reasoning, they must not be primed to use
the broader reasoning tools of their trade, even though they are capable.
“I would argue, at least in medicine and basic science where we fill
people up with facts from courses, that what is needed is just some
background, and then the tools for thinking,” Casadevall told me. Currently,
“everything is configuring in the wrong way.”
He compared the current system to medieval guilds. “The guild system in
Europe arose in the Middle Ages as artisans and merchants sought to
maintain and protect specialized skills and trades,” he wrote with a
colleague. “Although such guilds often produced highly trained and
specialized individuals who perfected their trade through prolonged
apprenticeships, they also encouraged conservatism and stifled innovation.”
Both training and professional incentives are aligning to accelerate
specialization, creating intellectual archipelagos.
There is a growth industry of conferences that invite only scientists who
work on a single specific microorganism. Meanwhile, a complete
understanding of the body’s response to a paper cut was hampered because
hyperspecialists in hematology and immunology focus on pieces of the
puzzle in isolation, even though the immune response is an integrated
system.
“You can do your entire career on one cell type and it’s more likely you
keep your job by getting grants,” Casadevall told me. “There is not even
pressure to integrate. In fact, if you write a grant proposal about how the B
cell is integrating with the macrophage [a basic interaction of the immune

system], 
*
 there may be no one to review it. If it goes to the macrophage
people, they say, ‘Well, I don’t know anything about it. Why B cells?’ The
system maintains you in a trench. You basically have all these parallel
trenches, and it’s very rare that anybody stands up and actually looks at the
next trench to see what they are doing, and often it’s related.” 
*
Substitute a few specific terms, and the system of parallel trenches he
described could fit many industries. While I was researching this book, an
official with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission learned I was
writing about specialization and contacted me to make sure I knew that
specialization had played a critical role in the 2008 global financial crisis.
“Insurance regulators regulated insurance, bank regulators regulated banks,
securities regulators regulated securities, and consumer regulators regulated
consumers,” the official told me. “But the provision of credit goes across all
those markets. So we specialized products, we specialized regulation, and
the question is, ‘Who looks across those markets?’ The specialized
approach to regulation missed systemic issues.”
In 2015, Casadevall showed that biomedical research funding rose
exponentially over a recent thirty-five-year period, while discovery slowed
down. Life expectancy in countries at the biomedical cutting edge, like the
United Kingdom and the United States, recently declined after decades of
improvement. The flu annually kills hundreds of thousands of people
worldwide while humanity fights it with a cumbersomely produced vaccine
from the 1940s. Casadevall’s mother is ninety-three, and on five
medications that were available when he was a medical resident in the
1980s. “Two of them are older than I am,” he said, and two others are
barely younger. “I cannot believe we can’t do better.” He paused for a
moment, tilted his head, and leaned forward. “If you write an
interdisciplinary grant proposal, it goes to people who are really, really
specialized in A or B, and maybe if you’re lucky they have the capacity to
see the connections at the interface of A and B,” he told me. “Everyone
acknowledges that great progress is made at the interface, but who is there
to defend the interface?”
The interface between specialties, and between creators with disparate
backgrounds, has been studied, and it is worth defending .

When Northwestern and Stanford researchers analyzed the networks that
give rise to creative triumph, they found what they deemed a “universal”
setup. Whether they looked at research groups in economics or ecology, or
the teams that write, compose, and produce Broadway musicals, thriving
ecosystems had porous boundaries between teams.
In professional networks that acted as fertile soil for successful groups,
individuals moved easily among teams, crossing organizational and
disciplinary boundaries and finding new collaborators. Networks that
spawned unsuccessful teams, conversely, were broken into small, isolated
clusters in which the same people collaborated over and over. Efficient and
comfortable, perhaps, but apparently not a creative engine. “The entire
network looks different when you compare a successful team with an
unsuccessful team,” according to Luís A. Nunes Amaral, a Northwestern
physicist who studies networks. Amaral’s remark does not compare
individual teams, but rather the larger ecosystems that foster the formation
of successful teams.
The commercial fate of Broadway during any particular era, be it
unusually prosperous or exceptionally flop-ridden, had less to do with
specific famous names and more to do with whether collaborators mixed
and matched vibrantly. The 1920s featured dozens of shows with Cole
Porter, Irving Berlin, George Gershwin, Rodgers and Hammerstein (albeit
not yet in collaboration), and also an unusually high overall flop rate of 90
percent for new shows. It was an era of stagnant teams, rife with repeat
collaborations and scant boundary crossing.
New collaborations allow creators “to take ideas that are conventions in
one area and bring them into a new area, where they’re======================================================== proxy for population effects, particularly over a
single decade. The variable that both men were certain would vindicate
their worldviews actually had little to do with them. Commodity prices
waxed and waned with macroeconomic cycles, and a recession during the
bet brought the prices down. Ehrlich and Simon might as well have flipped
a coin and both declared victory.
Both men dug in. Each declared his faith in science and the undisputed
primacy of facts. And each continued to miss the value of the other’s ideas.
Ehrlich was wrong about population (and the apocalypse), but right on
aspects of environmental degradation. Simon was right about the influence
of human ingenuity on the food and energy supply, but wrong in claiming
that improvements in air and water quality also vindicated his predictions.
Ironically, those improvements failed to arise naturally from technological
initiative and markets, and rather were bolstered through regulations
pressed by Ehrlich and others.
Ideally, intellectual sparring partners “hone each other’s arguments so
that they are sharper and better,” Yale historian Paul Sabin wrote. “The
opposite happened with Paul Ehrlich and Julian Simon.” As each man

amassed more information for his own view, each became more dogmatic,
and the inadequacies in their models of the world more stark.
There is a particular kind of thinker, one who becomes more entrenched
in their single big idea about how the world works even in the face of
contrary facts, whose predictions become worse, not better, as they amass
information for their mental representation of the world. They are on
television and in the news every day, making worse and worse predictions
while claiming victory, and they have been rigorously studied.
It started at the 1984 meeting of the National Research Council’s committee
on American-Soviet relations. Newly tenured psychologist and political
scientist Philip Tetlock was thirty years old, by far the most junior
committee member. He listened intently as members discussed Soviet
intentions and American policies. Renowned experts confidently delivered
authoritative predictions, and Tetlock was struck by the fact that they were
often perfectly contradictory to one another, and impervious to
counterarguments.
Tetlock decided to put expert predictions to the test. With the Cold War in
full swing, he began a study to collect short-and long-term forecasts from
284 highly educated experts (most had doctorates) who averaged more than
twelve years of experience in their specialties. The questions covered
international politics and economics, and in order to make sure the
predictions were concrete, the experts had to give specific probabilities of
future events. Tetlock had to collect enough predictions over enough time
that he could separate lucky and unlucky streaks from true skill. The project
lasted twenty years, and comprised 82,361 probability estimates about the
future. The results limned a very wicked world.
The average expert was a horrific forecaster. Their areas of specialty,
years of experience, academic degrees, and even (for some) access to
classified information made no difference. They were bad at short-term
forecasting, bad at long-term forecasting, and bad at forecasting in every
domain. When experts declared that some future event was impossible or
nearly impossible, it nonetheless occurred 15 percent of the time. When
they declared a sure thing, it failed to transpire more than one-quarter of the
time. The Danish proverb that warns “It is difficult to make predictions,
especially about the future,” was right. Dilettantes who were pitted against

the experts were no more clairvoyant, but at least they were less likely to
call future events either impossible or sure things, leaving them with fewer
laugh-out-loud errors to atone for—if, that was, the experts had believed in
atonement.
Many experts never admitted systematic flaws in their judgment, even in
the face of their results. When they succeeded, it was completely on their
own merits—their expertise clearly enabled them to figure out the world.
When they missed wildly, it was always a near miss; they had certainly
understood the situation, they insisted, and if just one little thing had gone
differently, they would have nailed it. Or, like Ehrlich, their understanding
was correct; the timeline was just a bit off. Victories were total victories,
and defeats were always just a touch of bad luck away from having been
victories too. Experts remained undefeated while losing constantly. “There
is often a curiously inverse relationship,” Tetlock concluded, “between how
well forecasters thought they were doing and how well they did.”
There was also a “perverse inverse relationship” between fame and
accuracy. The more likely an expert was to have his or her predictions
featured on op-ed pages and television, the more likely they were always
wrong. Or, not always wrong. Rather, as Tetlock and his coauthor succinctly
put it in their book Superforecasting, “roughly as accurate as a dart-
throwing chimpanzee.”
Early predictions in Tetlock’s research pertained to the future of the
Soviet Union. There were experts (usually liberal) who saw Mikhail
Gorbachev as an earnest reformer who would be able to change the Soviet
Union and keep it intact for a while, and experts (usually conservative) who
felt that the Soviet Union was immune to reform, ruinous by its very nature,
and losing legitimacy. Both sides were partly right and partly wrong.
Gorbachev did bring real reform, opening the Soviet Union to the world and
empowering citizens. But those reforms uncorked bottled-up forces in the
republics outside of Russia, where the system had lost legitimacy. Starting
with Estonia declaring its sovereignty, the forces blew the Soviet Union
apart. Both camps of experts were completely taken by surprise at the swift
end of the USSR, and their predictions about the course of events were
terrible. There was, however, one subgroup within the experts that managed
to see more of what was coming.
Unlike Ehrlich and Simon, they were not vested in a single approach.
They were able to take from each argument and integrate apparently

contradictory worldviews. They agreed that Gorbachev was a real reformer,
and that the Soviet Union had lost legitimacy outside of Russia. Some of
those integrators actually foresaw that the end of the Soviet Union was
close at hand, and that real reforms would be the catalyst.
The integrators outperformed their colleagues on pretty much everything,
but they especially trounced them on long-term predictions. Eventually,
Tetlock conferred nicknames (borrowed from philosopher Isaiah Berlin)
that became famous throughout the psychology and intelligence-gathering
communities: the narrow-view hedgehogs, who “know one big thing,” and
the integrator foxes, who “know many little things.”
Hedgehog experts were deep but narrow. Some had spent their careers
studying a single problem. Like Ehrlich and Simon, they fashioned tidy
theories of how the world works through the single lens of their specialty,
and then bent every event to fit them. The hedgehogs, according to Tetlock,
“toil devotedly” within one tradition of their specialty, “and reach for
formulaic solutions to ill-defined problems.” Outcomes did not matter; they
were proven right by both successes and failures, and burrowed further into
their ideas. It made them outstanding at predicting the past, but dart-
throwing chimps at predicting the future. The foxes, meanwhile, “draw
from an eclectic array of traditions, and accept ambiguity and
contradiction,” Tetlock wrote. Where hedgehogs represented narrowness,
foxes ranged outside a single discipline or theory and embodied breadth.
Incredibly, the hedgehogs performed especially poorly on long-term
predictions within their domain of expertise. They actually got worse as
they accumulated credentials and experience in their field. The more
information they had to work with, the more they could fit any story to their
worldview. This did give hedgehogs one conspicuous advantage. Viewing
every world event through their preferred keyhole made it easy to fashion
compelling stories about anything that occurred, and to tell the stories with
adamant authority. In other words, they make great TV .
Tetlock is clearly a fox. He is a professor at Penn, and when I visited his
home in Philadelphia I was enveloped in a casual conversation about
politics he was having with colleagues, including his wife and collaborator,
Barbara Mellers, also a psychologist and eminent scholar of decision
making. Tetlock would start in one direction, then interrogate himself and

make an about-face. He drew on economics, political science, and history to
make one quick point about a current debate in psychology, and then
stopped on a dime and noted, “But if your assumptions about human nature
and how a good society needs to be structured are different, you would see
this completely differently.” When a new idea entered the conversation, he
was quick with “Let’s say for the sake of argument,” which led to him
playing out viewpoints from different disciplines or political or emotional
perspectives. He tried on ideas like Instagram filters until it was hard to tell
which he actually believed.
In 2005, he published the results of his long study of expert judgment,
and they caught the attention of the Intelligence Advanced Research
Projects Activity (IARPA), a government organization that supports
research on the U.S. intelligence community’s most difficult challenges. In
2011, IARPA launched a four-year prediction tournament in which five
researcher-led teams competed. Each team could recruit, train, and
experiment however it saw fit. Every day for four years, predictions were
due at 9 a.m. Eastern time. The questions were hard. What is the chance that
a member will withdraw from the European Union by a target date? Will
the Nikkei close above 9,500? What is the likelihood======================================================== home field can be so
constrained that a curious outsider is truly the only one who can see the
solution.
The email subject line caught my eye: “Olympic medalist and muscular
dystrophy patient with the same mutation.”
I had just written a book on genetics and athleticism, and figured it would
point to some journal article I had missed. Instead, it was a note from the

muscular dystrophy patient herself, Jill Viles, a thirty-nine-year-old woman
in Iowa. She had an elaborate theory connecting the gene mutation that
withered her muscles to those of an Olympic sprinter, and she offered to
send more info.
I expected a letter, maybe some news clippings. I got a stack of original
family photos, a detailed medical history, and a nineteen-page, bound and
illustrated packet that referenced gene mutations by their specific DNA
locations. She had done some serious homework.
On page 14 there was a photo of Jill in a blue bikini, blonde hair tousled,
smiling and sitting in the sand. Her torso looks normal, but her arms are
strikingly skinny, like twigs jabbed into a snowman. Her legs did not look
like they could possibly hold her, the thigh no wider than her knee joint.
Beside that photo was one of Priscilla Lopes-Schliep, one of the best
sprinters in Canadian history. At the 2008 Olympics in Beijing, she won a
bronze medal in the 100-meter hurdles. The juxtaposition was breathtaking.
Priscilla is midstride, ropes of muscle winding down her legs, veins
bursting from her forearms. She’s like the vision of a superhero a second
grader might draw. I could hardly have imagined two women who looked
less likely to share a biological blueprint.
In online pictures of Priscilla, Jill recognized something in her own,
vastly scrawnier physique—a familiar pattern of missing fat on her limbs.
Her theory was that she and Priscilla have the same mutated gene, but
because Priscilla doesn’t have muscular dystrophy, her body had found
some way “to go around it,” as Jill put it, and was instead making gigantic
muscles. If her theory was right, Jill hoped, scientists would want to study
her and Priscilla to figure out how to help people with muscles like Jill have
muscles a little more toward the Priscilla end of the human physique
spectrum. She wanted my help convincing Priscilla to get a genetic test.
The idea that a part-time substitute teacher, wielding the cutting-edge
medical instrument known as Google Images, would make a discovery
about a pro athlete who is examined by doctors as part of her job struck me
as somewhere between extremely unlikely and patently nuts. I consulted a
Harvard geneticist. He was concerned. “Empowering a relationship
between these two women could end badly,” he told me. “People go off the
deep end when they are relating to celebrities they think they have a
connection to.”

I hadn’t even considered that before; I certainly didn’t want to facilitate a
stalker. It took time for Jill to convince me that because of her unique life
experience, she could see what no specialist could .
When Jill was four, a preschool teacher noticed her stumbling. Jill told her
mother she was afraid of “witches’ fingers” that were grabbing her shins
and tripping her. Her pediatrician sent the family to the Mayo Clinic.
Blood tests showed that Jill, her father, and her brother had higher than
normal levels of creatine kinase, an enzyme that spills from damaged
muscles. Doctors thought some sort of muscular dystrophy might run in the
family, but it didn’t normally show up that way in little girls, and Jill’s
brother and father seemed fine.
“They said our family was extremely unique,” Jill told me. “That’s good
in one way because they’re being honest. But on the other hand, it was
terrifying.”
Jill returned to Mayo every summer, and it was always the same. She had
stopped falling, but by the time she was eight the fat on her limbs was
vanishing. Other kids could wrap their fingers around her arm, and when
veins started protruding from her legs, they asked her how it felt to be old.
Jill’s mother was so worried about her daughter’s social life that she
clandestinely paid another girl to hang out with her. At twelve, she began
struggling to hold her body upright on her bicycle, and had to cling to the
railing at a roller skating rink.
Jill began to hunt for answers, kid style. She checked out library books
on poltergeists. “It really freaked out my dad,” she told me. “He was like,
‘Well, are you into the occult, or what?’ It was nothing of the sort.” She just
could not explain what was happening to her, so when she read stories of
people with inexplicable afflictions, “Ya know, I believed them.”
By the time she left for college, Jill was five foot three and eighty-seven
pounds. She hit the library, poring over any scientific journal she could find
on muscle disease.
She came upon a paper in Muscle and Nerve, on a rare type of muscular
dystrophy called Emery-Dreifuss, and was startled by an accompanying
photo. That’s my dad’s arm, she thought .
Her dad was thin but his forearm muscles were unusually well defined.
Jill called it “Popeye arm” when she was little. Another paper describing

Emery-Dreifuss patients actually referred to a Popeye arm deformity. The
Muscle and Nerve paper reported that Emery-Dreifuss patients have
“contractures” that affect joint mobility.
“I’m getting chills reading this,” Jill recalled. She described her own
contractures as just like a Barbie doll: arms always bent, neck stiff, feet
perma-slanted for high heels. The research indicated that Emery-Dreifuss
only occurred in males, but Jill was certain she had it, and she was afraid. It
comes with heart problems.
She stuffed her bag with articles to bring home over college break. One
day, she found her father flipping through them. He had all the symptoms,
he told her. “Well, yeah, I know . . . the arm, and the neck,” Jill replied. No,
he said: the cardiac symptoms.
For years Jill’s father had been told that his irregular heart rhythms were
due to a virus. “It’s not,” Jill told him instantly. “We have Emery-Dreifuss.”
She took her forty-five-year-old father to the Iowa Heart Center and insisted
that a cardiologist see him. Nurses demanded a referral, but Jill was so
persistent that they relented. The cardiologist put a monitor on her dad that
tracked his heart’s electrical activity for a day, during which his pulse
dropped into the twenties. He was either ready to win the Tour de France or
about to drop dead. He was rushed into emergency surgery for a pacemaker.
“She saved her dad’s life,” Jill’s mother, Mary, told me.
Still, the Iowa Heart Center could not confirm the family condition. In
her reading, Jill came across an Italian research group searching for families
with Emery-Dreifuss. They were hoping to locate a gene mutation that
caused it.
Nineteen-year-old Jill put on her most imposing navy pantsuit, took her
papers to a neurologist in Des Moines, and asked to be connected to the
Italian study. “No, you don’t have that,” she recalled the neurologist saying
sternly. She refused even to look at the papers. In fairness, Jill was a
teenager self-diagnosing an extremely rare disease known to occur only in
men. So in 1995 she wrote to the Italians, and included a picture of herself.
The response she got from the Istituto di Genetica Biochimica ed
Evoluzionistica was clearly meant for a scientist. Please send DNA from the
entire family, it read. “If you cannot prepare DNA, just send fresh blood.”
Jill convinced a nurse friend to smuggle needles and test tubes to her house.
Fortunately, Italy accepted blood by normal mail.

It would be years before Jill heard from the Italians again, but she had
made up her mind. On her annual trip to the Mayo Clinic, against her
mother’s protestations she took her own pen and wrote “ Emery-Dreifuss”
on her medical chart.
In 1999, she got an email from Italy. She let the moment sink in, and then
clicked. She had a mutation on a gene known as LMNA, or the lamin gene,
colloquially. Her father did too. So did two brothers and a sister. So did four
other families in the study with Emery-Dreifuss. Jill had been right.
The lamin gene carries a recipe for constructing a tangle of proteins at the
center of every cell that influences how other genes are switched on or off,
like lights, changing how the body builds fat and muscle. Somewhere along
the three billion Gs, Ts, As, and Cs in Jill’s genome, a single-letter typo just
happened to be very poorly placed.
Jill was happy to have helped discover a new disease-causing mutation.
And yet “it’s almost darkly comical,” she told me. “It comes down to a G
that was changed to a C.”
Jill’s father was sixty-three, in 2012, when his heart finally failed.
By then, Jill had transitioned to a motorized scooter, gotten married and
had a son, and retired from her medical detective work .
Days after their father passed, her younger sister showed her a picture
online of an extremely muscular Olympic sprinter who was conspicuously
missing fat. “I took one look at it, and just . . . what?! We don’t have that.
What are you talking about?” Jill said. Then she got curious.
Jill had actually wondered about fat for a long time. Like muscle, it was
noticeably absent from her limbs. More than a decade earlier, when she was
twenty-five, a lab director at Johns Hopkins heard about her and, wanting a
real-life lamin mutant in the lab, offered her a summer internship perusing
journals for any condition caused by a lamin mutation. She came across an
incredibly rare disease called partial lipodystrophy, which causes fat on the
limbs to disappear, leaving veins and muscles shrink-wrapped in skin.
Again, Jill saw her family. Could she have not one, but two ridiculously
rare genetic diseases? She pestered doctors at a medical conference with
photos. They assured her she did not have lipodystrophy, and diagnosed her
with something more common: intern syndrome. “Where you have a

medical student introduced to a lot of new======================================================== In the face
of an unfamiliar challenge, NASA managers failed to drop their familiar
tools.
Psychologist and organizational behavior expert Karl Weick noticed
something unusual in the deaths of smokejumpers and “hotshot” wilderness
firefighters: they held on to their tools, even when ditching equipment
would have allowed them to run away from an advancing fire. For Weick, it
was emblematic of something larger.
In Montana’s 1949 Mann Gulch fire, made famous in Norman Maclean’s
Young Men and Fire, smokejumpers parachuted in expecting to face a “ten
o’clock fire,” meaning they would have it contained by 10 a.m. the next
morning. Until the fire jumped across the gulch from one forested hill slope
to the steep slope where the firefighters were, and chased them uphill
through dry grass at eleven feet per second. Crew foreman Wagner Dodge
yelled at the men to drop their tools. Two did so immediately and sprinted
over the ridge to safety. Others ran with their tools and were caught by the
flames. One firefighter stopped fleeing and sat down, exhausted, never
having removed his heavy pack. Thirteen firefighters died. The Mann Gulch

tragedy led to reforms in safety training, but wildland firefighters continued
to lose races with fires when they did not drop their tools.
In 1994, on Colorado’s Storm King Mountain, hotshots and
smokejumpers faced a Mann Gulch situation when a fire jumped a canyon
and erupted through a stand of gambel oak below them. The sound in the
canyon was “like a jet during take off,” according to a survivor. Fourteen
men and women lost the race with a wall of flame. “[Victim] was still
wearing his backpack,” reads an analysis from the body recovery operation.
“Victim has chainsaw handle still in hand.” He was just 250 feet from a safe
zone. Survivor Quentin Rhoades had already run nine hundred feet uphill,
“then realized I still had my saw over my shoulder! I irrationally started
looking for a place to put it down where it wouldn’t get burned. . . . I
remember thinking I can’t believe I’m putting down my saw.” Two separate
analyses conducted for the U.S. Forest Service and the Bureau of Land
Management concluded that the crew would have made it out intact had
they simply dropped their tools and run from the start.
In four separate fires in the 1990s, twenty-three elite wildland firefighters
refused orders to drop their tools and perished beside them. Even when
Rhoades eventually dropped his chainsaw, he felt like he was doing
something unnatural. Weick found similar phenomena in Navy seamen who
ignored orders to remove steel-toed shoes when abandoning a ship, and
drowned or punched holes in life rafts; fighter pilots in disabled planes
refusing orders to eject; and Karl Wallenda, the world-famous high-wire
performer, who fell 120 feet to his death when he teetered and grabbed first
at his balance pole rather than the wire beneath him. He momentarily lost
the pole while falling, and grabbed it again in the air. “Dropping one’s tools
is a proxy for unlearning, for adaptation, for flexibility,” Weick wrote. “It is
the very unwillingness of people to drop their tools that turns some of these
dramas into tragedies.” For him, firefighters were an example, and a
metaphor for what he learned while studying normally reliable
organizations that clung to trusty methods, even when they led to
bewildering decisions.
Rather than adapting to unfamiliar situations, whether airline accidents or
fire tragedies, Weick saw that experienced groups became rigid under
pressure and “regress to what they know best.” They behaved like a
collective hedgehog, bending an unfamiliar situation to a familiar comfort
zone, as if trying to will it to become something they actually had

experienced before. For wildland firefighters, their tools are what they
know best. “Firefighting tools define the firefighter’s group membership,
they are the firefighter’s reason for being deployed in the first place,” Weick
wrote. “Given the central role of tools in defining the essence of a
firefighter, it is not surprising that dropping one’s tools creates an existential
crisis.” As Maclean succinctly put it, “When a firefighter is told to drop his
firefighting tools, he is told to forget he is a firefighter.”
Weick explained that wildland firefighters have a firm “can do” culture,
and dropping tools was not part of it, because it meant they had lost control.
Quentin Rhoades’s chainsaw was such a part of his firefighting self that he
did not even realize he still had it, any more than he realized he still had his
arms. When it became utterly ludicrous to carry the saw further, Rhoades
still “could not believe” he was parting with it. He felt naked, just as Larry
Mulloy said he would have without a quantitative argument for a last-
second launch reversal. At NASA, accepting a qualitative argument was
like being told to forget you are an engineer.
When sociologist Diane Vaughan interviewed NASA and Thiokol
engineers who had worked on the rocket boosters, she found that NASA’s
own famous can-do culture manifested as a belief that everything would be
fine because “we followed every procedure”; because “the [flight readiness
review] process is aggressive and adversarial”; because “we went by the
book.” NASA’s tools were its familiar procedures. The rules had always
worked before. But with Challenger they were outside their usual bounds,
where “can do” should have been swapped for what Weick calls a “make
do” culture. They needed to improvise rather than throw out information
that did not fit the established rubric.
Roger Boisjoly’s unquantifiable argument that the cold weather was
“away from goodness” was considered an emotional argument in NASA
culture. It was based on interpretation of a photograph. It did not conform to
the usual quantitative standards, so it was deemed inadmissible evidence
and disregarded. The can-do attitude among the rocket-booster group,
Vaughan observed, “was grounded in conformity.” After the tragedy, it
emerged that other engineers on the teleconference agreed with Boisjoly,
but knew they could not muster quantitative arguments, so they remained
silent. Their silence was taken as consent. As one engineer who was on the
Challenger conference call later said, “If I feel like I don’t have data to
back me up, the boss’s opinion is better than mine.”

Dropping familiar tools is particularly difficult for experienced
professionals who rely on what Weick called overlearned behavior. That is,
they have done the same thing in response to the same challenges over and
over until the behavior has become so automatic that they no longer even
recognize it as a situation-specific tool. Research on aviation accidents, for
example, found that “a common pattern was the crew’s decision to continue
with their original plan” even when conditions changed dramatically.
When Weick spoke with hotshot Paul Gleason, one of the best wildland
firefighters in the world, Gleason told him that he preferred to view his
crew leadership not as decision making, but as sensemaking. “If I make a
decision, it is a possession, I take pride in it, I tend to defend it and not
listen to those who question it,” Gleason explained. “If I make sense, then
this is more dynamic and I listen and I can change it.” He employed what
Weick called “hunches held lightly.” Gleason gave decisive directions to his
crew, but with transparent rationale and the addendum that the plan was ripe
for revision as the team collectively made sense of a fire .
On the night of the Challenger conference call, following procedure in
the face of uncertainty was so paramount that NASA’s Mulloy asked
Thiokol to put its final launch recommendation and rationale on paper and
sign it. Last-minute sign-off had always been verbal in the past. Thiokol’s
Allan McDonald was in the room with Mulloy, and refused. One of
McDonald’s bosses in Utah signed and faxed the document instead. Even
Mulloy, who had demanded data, must have felt uneasy with the decision,
while at the same time feeling protected by NASA’s ultimate tool—its
hallowed process. The process culminated with more concern for being able
to defend a decision than with using all available information to make the
right one. Like the firefighters, NASA managers had merged with their
tools. As McDonald said, looking only at the quantitative data actually
supported NASA’s stance that there was no link between temperature and
failure. NASA’s normal quantitative standard was a dearly held tool, but the
wrong one for the job. That night, it should have been dropped.
It is easy to say in retrospect. A group of managers accustomed to
dispositive technical information did not have any; engineers felt like they
should not speak up without it. Decades later, an astronaut who flew on the
space shuttle, both before and after Challenger, and then became NASA’s
chief of safety and mission assurance, recounted what the “In God We
Trust, All Others Bring Data” plaque had meant to him: “Between the lines

it suggested that, ‘We’re not interested in your opinion on things. If you
have data, we’ll listen, but your opinion is not requested here.’”
Physicist and Nobel laureate Richard Feynman was one of the members
of the commission that investigated the Challenger, and in one hearing he
admonished a NASA manager for repeating that Boisjoly’s data did not
prove his point. “When you don’t have any data,” Feynman said, “you have
to use reason.”
These are, by definition, wicked situations. Wildland firefighters and
space shuttle engineers do not have the liberty to train for their most
challenging moments by trial and error. A team or organization that is both
reliable and flexible, according to Weick, is like a jazz group. There are
fundamentals—scales and chords—that every member must overlearn, but
those are just tools for sensemaking in a dynamic environment. There are
no tools that cannot be dropped, reimagined, or repurposed in order to
navigate an unfamiliar======================================================== Engineering
Management 38, no. 1 (1991): 63–74. Boisjoly’s “away from goodness” quote is from transcripts of
the Feb 25, 1986 hearing of the presidential commission.
Boisjoly had personally inspected: R. P. Boisjoly et al. “Roger Boisjoly and the Challenger
Disaster,” Journal of Business Ethics 8, no. 4 (1989): 217–230. Boisjoly’s “away from goodness”
quote is from transcripts of the Feb 25, 1986 hearing of the presidential commision.
most complex machine ever built: J. M. Logsdon, “Was the Space Shuttle a Mistake?,” MIT
Technology Review, July 6, 2011.
McDonald and two Thiokol VPs: Transcripts of presidential commission hearings, which provided
information and quotes in this chapter are available at
https://history.nasa.gov/rogersrep/genindex.htm . Allan McDonald also gives a fascinating account of
the investigation and the return of the shuttle to flight in Truth, Lies, and O-Rings (Gainesville:
University Press of Florida, 2009).
“They said because they had flown”: From Diane Vaughan’s book, which includes a fascinating
exploration of “the normalization of deviance” in decision making: The Challenger Launch Decision:
Risky Technology, Culture, and Deviance at NASA (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996).
“In God We Trust, All Others Bring Data”: A number of background interviews with current and
former NASA managers and engineers—especially during a visit to NASA’s Johnson Space Center in
2017—provided helpful context. NASA’s own APPEL Knowledge Services portal was extremely
helpful. It is an incredible repository of information that links to NASA’s voluminous “Lessons
Learned System.” 245 Karl Weick noticed something unusual: K. E. Weick, “The Collapse of
Sensemaking in Organizations: The Mann Gulch Disaster,” Administrative Science Quarterly 38, no.
4 (1993): 628–52.; K. E. Weick, “Drop Your Tools: An Allegory for Organizational Studies,”
Administrative Science Quarterly 41, no. 2 (1996): 301–13; K. E. Weick, “Drop Your Tools: On
Reconfiguring Management Education,” Journal of Management Education 31, no. 1 (2007): 5–16.
eleven feet per second : R. C. Rothermel, “Mann Gulch Fire: A Race That Couldn’t Be Won,”
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, General Technical
Report INT-299, May 1993.
wildland firefighters continued to lose races with fires: K. E. Weick, “Tool Retention and
Fatalities in Wildland Fire Settings,” in Linking Expertise and Naturalistic Decision Making, ed. E.
Salas and G. A. Klein (New York: Psychology Press, 2001 [Kindle ebook]).
“like a jet during take off”: USDA, USDI, and USDC, South Canyon Fire Investigation (Report of
the South Canyon Fire Accident Investigation Team), U.S. Government Printing Office, Region 8,
Report 573-183, 1994.

“still wearing his backpack”; “then I realized I still had my saw”; twenty-three . . . perished
beside them: Weick, “Tool Retention and Fatalities in Wildland Fire Settings.”
grabbed it again in the air; “proxy for unlearning”; “regress to what they know best”;
“existential crisis”: Weick, “Drop Your Tools: An Allegory for Organizational Studies.”
“a common pattern”: J. Orasanu and L. Martin, “Errors in Aviation Decision Making,” Proceedings
of the HESSD ’98 (Workshop on Human Error, Safety and System Development) (1998): 100–107; J.
Orasanu et al., “Errors in Aviation Decision Making,” Fourth Conference on Naturalistic Decision
Making, 1998.
“If I make a decision”: Weick, “Tool Retention and Fatalities in Wildland Fire Settings.”
“Between the lines, it suggested”: M. Kohut, “Interview with Bryan O’Connor,” NASA’s ASK
(Academy Sharing Knowledge ) magazine, issue 45 (January 2012).
“you have to use reason”: transcript, Hearings of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle
Challenger Accident Vol. 4, February 25, 1986.
“must have been really hard”: Several members of the 48th Rescue Squadron provided invaluable
background and corroboration.
“live in the real world”: C. Grupen, Introduction to Radiation Protection (Berlin: Springer, 2010),
90. Shafer’s entire original message is preserved at https:// yarchive.net/ air/ perfect_ safety.html .
But in the first study: K. S. Cameron and S. J. Freeman, “Cultural Congruence, Strength, and Type:
Relationships to Effectiveness,” Research in Organizational Change and Development 5 (1991): 23–
58.
effective leaders and organizations had range: K. S. Cameron and R. E. Quinn, Diagnosing and
Changing Organizational Culture , 3rd Edition (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2011).
In one experiment: S. V. Patil et al., “Accountability Systems and Group Norms: Balancing the
Risks of Mindless Conformity and Reckless Deviation,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 30
(2017): 282–303.
Gene Kranz: G. Kranz, Failure Is Not an Option (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2000). See also: M.
Dunn, “Remaking NASA one step at a time,” Associated Press, October 12, 2003.
“Monday Notes”; William Lucas . . . “often grew angry”: S. J. Dick, ed., NASA’s First 50 Years
(Washington, DC: NASA, 2011 [ebook]). Also, von Braun’s weekly notes are archived at
https://history.msfc.nasa.gov/vonbraun/ vb_ weekly_ notes.html .
“the quality of the notes fell”: R. Launius, “Comments on a Very Effective Communications
System: Marshall Space Flight Center’s Monday Notes,” Roger Launius’s Blog, February 28, 2011.
“proper channels”; “stringent and inhibiting”: Columbia Accident Investigation Board, “History
as Cause: Columbia and Challenger ,” in Columbia Accident Investigation Board Report, vol. 1,
August 2003.
Gravity Probe B: Stanford University maintains an archive with copious information (both technical
and written for the public) on GP-B, at einstein.stanford.edu . For a scientific deep dive, a special
issue of the journal Classical and Quantum Gravity was devoted to GP-B (vol. 32, no. 22 [November
2015]).
technology took twenty years: T. Reichhardt, “Unstoppable Force,” Nature 426 (2003): 380–81.
“was confident that we could succeed”: NASA Case Study, “The Gravity Probe B Launch
Decisions,” NASA, Academy of Program/ Project and Engineering Leadership.
“a healthy tension in the system”: Geveden also discusses healthy tension in R. Wright et al., eds.,
NASA at 50: Interviews with NASA’s Senior Leadership (Washington, DC: NASA, 2012).

first direct test: J. Overduin, “The Experimental Verdict on Spacetime from Gravity Probe B,” in
Vesselin Petkov, ed., Space, Time, and Spacetime (Berlin: Springer, 2010).
Himalayan mountain climbers: E.M. Anicich et al., “Hierarchical Cultural Values Predict Success
and Mortality in High-Stakes Teams,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 112, no. 5 (2015): 1338–43.
“oculostenotic reflex”: Eric Topol is the cardiologist who coined that term. (For a patient who is
actually having a heart attack, a stent can be lifesaving.)
one in fifty patients: K. Stergiopoulos and D. L. Brown, “Initial Coronary Stent Implantation With
Medical Therapy vs Medical Therapy Alone for Stable Coronary Artery Disease: Meta-analysis of
Randomized Controlled Trials,” Archives of Internal Medicine 172, no. 4 (2012): 312–19.
cannot believe that stenting: G. A. Lin et al., “Cardiologists’ Use of Percutaneous Coronary
Interventions for Stable Coronary Artery Disease,” Archives of Internal Medicine 167, no. 15 (2007):
1604–09.
were less likely to die: A. B. Jena et al., “Mortality and Treatment Patterns among Patients
Hospitalized with Acute Cardiovascular Conditions during Dates of National Cardiology Meetings,”
JAMA Internal Medicine 175, no. 2 (2015): 44. See also: A. B. Jena et al., “Acute Myocardial
Infarction during Dates of National Interventional Cardiology Meetings,” Journal of the American
Heart Association 7, no. 6 (2018): e008230.
“At large cardiology conventions”: R. F. Redberg, “Cardiac Patient Outcomes during National
Cardiology Meetings,” JAMA Internal Medicine 175, no. 2 (2015): 245.
compared the surgery with “sham surgery”: R. Sihvonen et al., “Arthroscopic Partial
Meniscectomy Versus Sham Surgery for a Degenerative Meniscal Tear,” New England Journal of
Medicine 369 (2013): 2515–24. Hyperlinks to several other studies with supporting findings can be
found in: D. Epstein, “When Evidence Says No, But Doctors Say Yes,” ProPublica, February 22,
2017.
CHAPTER 12: DELIBERATE AMATEURS
“Very promising!”: Smithies discussed some of his work and notebook pages in his publicly
available Nobel Lecture, “Turning Pages” (December 7, 2007). The University of North Carolina
maintains an extraordinary online archive of digitized versions of more than sixty years of Smithies’s
notebooks, along with audio recordings of Smithies himself going through them and providing
commentary. (Smithies told me that one should always have a notebook, even on Saturday.) The
archive was a wonderful resource for interview preparation, and can be found at
smithies.lib.unc.edu/notebooks .
A 2016 analysis of ten thousand researchers’ careers: A. Clauset et al., “ Data-Driven Predictions
in the Science of Science,” Science 355 (2017): 477–80.
had reportedly tested 240,000 compounds: P. McKenna, “Nobel Prize Goes to Modest Woman
Who Beat Malaria for China,” New Scientist, November 9, 2011, online ed.
a fourth-century Chinese alchemist: Alchemist and herbalist Ge Hong wrote A Handbook of
Prescriptions for Emergencies in the fourth century, during the Jin dynasty. Tu gives background in
her Nobel Lecture: “ Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World”
(December 7, 2015). She shares a photo of a sixteenth-century copy of the handbook in: Y. Tu, “The
Discovery of Artemisinin (Qinghaosu) and Gifts from Chinese Medicine,” Nature Medicine 17, no.
10 (2011): 1217–20.
A study on the decline of malaria: Bhatt et al., “The Effect of Malaria Control on Plasmodium
falciparum in Africa Between 2000 and 2015,” Nature 526 (2015): 207–11.

the label NBGBOKFO: G. Watts, “Obituary: Oliver Smithies,” Lancet 389 (2017): 1004.
Scotch tape to rip thin layers of graphite: Geim details the======================================================== norms.
Engineers grew concerned about a technical problem they did not fully
understand, but they could not make a quantitative case. When they went to
the Department of Defense to request high-resolution photographs of a part
of the shuttle they thought was damaged, not only did NASA managers
block outside assistance, but they apologized to DoD for contact outside
“proper channels.” NASA administrators promised the violation of protocol
would not happen again. The Columbia Accident Investigation Board
concluded that NASA’s culture “emphasized chain of command, procedure,
following the rules, and going by the book. While rules and procedures
were essential for coordination, they had an unintended negative effect.”
Once again, “allegiance to hierarchy and procedure” had ended in disaster.
Again, lower ranking engineers had concerns they could not quantify; they
stayed silent because “the requirement for data was stringent and
inhibiting.”
The management and culture aspects of the Challenger and Columbia
disasters were so eerily similar that the investigation board decreed that
NASA was not functioning as “a learning organization.” In the absence of
cultural cross-pressures, NASA had failed to learn, just like the subjects in
Patil’s work who were placed in strongly congruent cultures.
There were, though, individuals in NASA who learned vital culture
lessons, and when the time came, put them to use.
In the spring of 2003, just two months after NASA lost the space shuttle
Columbia, it had to decide whether to scrap a high-profile project that had

been forty years and three-quarters of a billion dollars in the making.
Gravity Probe B was a technological marvel designed for a direct test of
Einstein’s general theory of relativity. It would be launched into space to
measure how Earth’s mass and rotation warped the fabric of space-time,
like a bowling ball twirling in a vat of honey. GP-B had the distinction of
being the longest-running project in the history of NASA. That was not a
compliment.
It was conceived one year after the founding of NASA itself. The launch
was delayed numerous times for technical problems, and the project was
nearly cancelled on three separate occasions. There were staff members at
NASA who no longer thought its mission was possible, and funding had to
be rescued repeatedly by a Stanford physicist with a knack for lobbying
Congress.
The technological challenges were immense. The probe required the
roundest objects ever manufactured—quartz gyroscope rotors the size of
ping-pong balls and so perfectly spherical that if you blew them up to the
size of Earth, the highest mountain peak would be eight feet tall. The
gyroscopes had to be cooled to −450°F by liquid helium, and the probe
required surgically delicate thrusters for precise maneuvering. The
technology took twenty years in development before it was ready for a test
flight.
Congressional eyes were on NASA. The agency could not afford to
launch the probe and have a high-profile failure right after Columbia . But
if the Gravity Probe B launch had to be delayed once more, it could be the
last time. “There was a huge amount of pressure to get this thing flown,”
Rex Geveden, the GP-B program manager, told me. Unfortunately,
engineers preparing for the prelaunch flight readiness review found a
problem.
The power supply to an electronics box was interfering with a critical
scientific instrument. Thankfully, the box only had to work at the beginning
of the mission, to get the gyroscopes spinning. It could then be turned off,
so it was not a catastrophic issue. But it was unexpected. If there were other
flaws that prevented the box from spinning up the gyroscopes to start the
experiment, the mission would be a total waste.
The giant Thermos-like container holding the gyroscopes had already
been filled with liquid helium, cooled, and sealed for launch. If the box
needed inspection, parts that had taken three months to install would have

to come off the probe; a launch delay would cost $ 10–$20 million. Some
engineers felt there was more risk in removing and potentially damaging
parts than in leaving it all alone. Stanford University was the prime
contractor, and the Stanford team leader “was confident that we could
succeed,” he said, “so I pushed hard that we should go ahead and fly.”
NASA’s chief engineer and head scientist for Gravity Probe B also both
pushed to launch. Plus, the probe had been moved to Vandenberg Air Force
Base in California for launch, and a delay would increase the chance of GP-
B sitting there when an earthquake struck. So: race, or don’t race?
The decision was in Geveden’s hands. “My God, I can’t even express
how stressful it was,” he told me. Even before the latest snafu, he had a
hunch held lightly—he was uneasy about how the electronics box had been
managed. But as long as the box was attached to the probe, there would be
no more information forthcoming.
Geveden joined NASA in 1990, and was a keen observer of the culture.
“When I was coming through NASA,” he said, “I had the intuition that
there’s a real conformance culture.” Early in his tenure, he attended a team-
building class offered by the agency. On the very first day the instructor
asked the class, rhetorically, for the single most important principle in
decision making. His answer: to get consensus. “And I said, ‘I don’t think
the people who launched the space shuttle Challenger agree with that
point,’” Geveden told me. “Consensus is nice to have, but we shouldn’t be
optimizing happiness, we should be optimizing our decisions. I just had a
feeling all along that there was something wrong with the culture. We didn’t
have a healthy tension in the system.” NASA still had its hallowed process,
and Geveden saw everywhere a collective culture that nudged conflict into
darkened corners. “You almost couldn’t go into a meeting without someone
saying, ‘Let’s take that offline,’” he recalled, just as Morton Thiokol had
done for the infamous offline caucus.
Geveden, in his own way, was in favor of balancing the typical, formal
process culture with a dose of informal individualism, as Kranz and von
Braun once had. “The chain of communication has to be informal,” he told
me, “completely different from the chain of command.” He wanted a
culture where everyone had the responsibility to protest if something didn’t
feel right. He decided to go prospecting for doubts.
He deeply respected Stanford’s electronics manager. The manager had
worked with the same kind of power supply before, and viewed it as fragile

technology. After a formal meeting in which NASA’s head engineer and its
head scientist on the project both advocated for leaving the box in place,
Geveden held informal individual meetings. In one of those, he learned
from a member of the NASA team that a manager from Lockheed Martin,
which had built the box, was concerned. Like Challenger ’s O-rings, the
known problem with the box was surmountable, but it was unexpected.
There were unknown unknowns.
Against the recommendation of the chief engineer and the Stanford team
leader, Geveden decided to scrub the launch and pull the box. Once it came
off, engineers quickly discovered three other design problems that had not
been clear in schematics, including a case of having used the flat-out wrong
parts. The surprises prompted Lockheed to go back over every single circuit
in the box. They found twenty separate issues.
As if Gravity Probe B was required by the space gods to scale every
imaginable obstacle, a month after the box was pulled there was an
earthquake near the launch site. The launch vehicle was slightly damaged,
but fortunately the probe was intact. Four months later, in April 2004, GP-B
finally took off. It was the first direct test to support Einstein’s idea that
Earth drags the fabric of space-time around with it as it spins. The
technology left a greater legacy. Components designed for Gravity Probe B
improved digital cameras and satellites; the centimeter-accurate GPS was
applied to automatic aircraft landing systems and precision farming.
The following year, a new NASA administrator was appointed by the
president. The new administrator demanded the kind of individualism and
opinionated debate that could serve as a cross-pressure for NASA’s robust
process accountability. He made Geveden the associate administrator,
essentially the COO of NASA, and the highest position in the agency that is
not politically appointed .
In 2017, Geveden took his lessons to a new role as CEO of BWX
Technologies, a company whose wide purview includes nuclear propulsion
technology that could power a manned Mars mission. Some of BWX
Technologies’ decision makers are retired military leaders whose dearly
held tool is firm hierarchy. So when Geveden became CEO, he wrote a
short memo on his expectations for teamwork. “I told them I expect
disagreement with my decisions at the time we’re trying to make decisions,

and that’s a sign of organizational health,” he told me. “After the decisions
are made, we want compliance and support, but we have permission to fight
a little bit about those things in a professional way.” He emphasized that
there is a difference between the chain of command and the chain of
communication, and that the difference represents a healthy cross-pressure.
“I warned them, I’m going to communicate with all levels of the
organization down to the shop floor, and you can’t feel suspicious or
paranoid about that,” he said. “I told them I will not intercept your decisions
that belong in your chain of command, but I will give and receive
information anywhere in the organization, at any time. I just can’t get
enough understanding of the organization from listening to the voices at the
top.”
His description reminded me of Girl Scouts CEO Frances Hesselbein’s
“circular management.” Instead of a ladder, the organizational structure was
concentric circles, with Hesselbein in the middle. Information could flow in
many directions,