======================================================== and	so	can't	carry	many	bits
per	second.	"Modems"	(shorthand	for	modulator-demodulators)	are	the
devices	that	connect	phone	lines	to	PCs.	Modems,	by	converting	to	0s	and	1s
into	different	tones,	allow	computers	to	connect	over	phone	lines.	In	the	early
days	of	the	IBM	PC,	modems	typically	carried	data	at	the	rate	of	300	or	1,200
bits	per	seconds	(also	known	as	300	or	1,200	"baud").	Most	of	the	data
transmitted	through	phone	lines	at	these	speeds	was	text,	because	transmitting
pictures	was	painfully	slow	when	so	little	information	could	be	transferred
each	second.	Faster	modems	have	gotten	much	more	affordable.	Today,	many
modems	that	connect	PCs	to	other	computers	via	the	phone	system	can	send
and	receive	14,400	(14.4K)	or	28,800	(28.8K)	bits	per	second.	From	a
practical	standpoint,	this	is	still	insufficient	bandwidth	for	many	kinds	of
transmissions.	A	page	of	text	is	sent	in	a	second,	but	a	complete,	screen-sized
photograph,	even	if	compressed,	requires	perhaps	ten	seconds	at	these	baud
rates.	It	takes	minutes	to	send	a	color	photograph	with	enough	resolution	for	it
to	be	made	into	a	slide.	Motion	video	would	take	so	much	time	to	transmit	it
just	isn't	practical	at	these	speeds.
Already,	anyone	can	send	anyone	else	a	message	on	the	Internet	for	business,

education,	or	just	the	fun	of	it.	Students	around	the	world	can	send	messages
to	one	another.	Shut-ins	can	carry	on	animated	conversations	with	friends
they	might	never	get	out	to	meet.	Correspondents	who	might	be
uncomfortable	talking	to	each	other	in	person	have	forged	bonds	across	a
network.	The	information	highway	will	add	video,	which	unfortunately	will
do	away	with	the	social,	racial,	gender,	and	species	blindness	that	text-only
exchanges	permit.
The	Internet	and	other	information	services	carried	on	telephone	networks
suggest	some	aspects	of	how	the	information	highway	will	operate.	When	I
send	you	a	message,	it	is	transmitted	by	phone	line	from	my	computer	to	the
server	that	has	my	"mailbox,"	and	from	there	it	passes	directly	or	indirectly	to
whichever	server	stores	your	mailbox.	When	you	connect	to	your	server,	via
the	telephone	network	or	a	corporate	computer	network,	you	are	able	to
retrieve	("download")	the	contents	of	your	mailbox,	including	my	message.
That's	how	electronic	mail	works.	You	can	type	a	message	once	and	send	it	to
one	person	or	twenty-five,	or	post	it	on	what	is	called	a	"bulletin	board."
Like	its	namesake,	an	electronic	bulletin	board	is	where	messages	are	left	for
anyone	to	read.	Public	conversations	result,	as	people	respond	to	messages.
These	exchanges	are	usually	asynchronous.	Bulletin	boards	typically	are
organized	by	topics	to	serve	specific	communities	of	interest.	This	makes
them	effective	ways	to	reach	targeted	groups.	Commercial	services	offer
bulletin	boards	for	pilots,	journalists,	teachers,	and	much	smaller
communities.	On	the	Internet,	where	the	often	unedited	and	unmoderated
bulletin	boards	are	called	"usenet	newsgroups,"	there	are	thousands	of
communities	devoted	to	topics	as	narrow	as	caffeine,	Ronald	Reagan,	and
neckties.	You	can	download	all	the	messages	on	a	topic,	or	just	recent
messages,	or	all	messages	from	a	certain	person,	or	those	that	respond	to	a

particular	other	message,	or	that	contain	a	specific	word	in	their	subject	line,
and	so	forth.
In	addition	to	electronic	mail	and	file	exchange,	the	Internet	supports	"Web
browsing,"	one	of	its	most	popular	applications.	The	"World	Wide	Web"
(abbreviated	as	the	Web	or	WWW)	refers	to	those	servers	connected	to	the
Internet	that	offer	graphical	pages	of	information.	When	you	connect	to	one
of	those	servers,	a	screen	of	information	with	a	number	of	hyperlinks	appears.
When	you	activate	a	hyperlink	by	clicking	on	it	with	your	mouse,	you	are
taken	to	another	page	containing	additional	information	and	other	hyperlinks.
That	page	may	be	stored	on	the	same	server	or	any	other	server	on	the
Internet.
1995:	U.S.	Library	of	Congress	home	page	on	the	World	Wide	Web,	showing
hyperlinks
The	main	page	for	a	company	or	an	individual	is	called	the	"home"	page.	If
you	create	one,	you	register	its	electronic	address,	then	Internet	users	can	find
you	by	typing	in	the	address.	In	advertisements	today	we	are	starting	to	see
home	page	citations	as	part	of	the	address	information.	The	software	to	set	up
a	Web	server	is	very	cheap	and	available	for	almost	all	computers.	The
software	to	browse	the	Web	is	also	available	for	all	machines,	generally	for
free.	You	can	Web	browse	using	the	CD	that	comes	with	this	book.	In	the
future,	operating	systems	will	integrate	Internet	browsing.
The	ease	with	which	companies	and	individuals	can	publish	information	on
the	Internet	is	changing	the	whole	idea	of	what	it	means	to	"publish."	The
Internet	has,	on	its	own,	established	itself	as	a	place	to	publish	content.	It	has
enough	users	so	that	it	is	benefiting	from	positive	feedback:	the	more
subscribers	it	gets,	the	more	content	it	gets,	and	the	more	content	it	gets,	the
more	subscribers	it	gets.
The	Internet's	unique	position	arises	from	a	number	of	elements.	The	TCP/IP

protocols	that	define	its	transport	level	support	distributed	computing	and	also
scale	incredibly	well.	The	protocols	that	define	Web	browsing	are	extremely
simple	and	have	allowed	servers	to	handle	immense	amounts	of	traffic
reasonably	well.	Many	of	the	predictions	about	interactive	books	and
hyperlinks—made	decades	ago	by	pioneers	like	Ted	Nelson—are	coming	true
on	the	Web.
Today's	Internet	is	not	the	information	highway	I	imagine,	although	you	can
think	of	it	as	the	beginning	of	the	highway.	An	analogy	is	the	Oregon	Trail.
Between	1841	and	the	early	1860s,	more	than	300,000	hardy	souls	rode
wagon	trains	out	of	Independence,	Missouri,	for	a	dangerous	2,000-mile
journey	across	the	wilderness	to	the	Oregon	Territories	or	the	gold	fields	of
California.	An	estimated	20,000	succumbed	to	marauders,	cholera,	starvation,
or	exposure.	Their	route	was	named	the	Oregon	Trail.	You	could	easily	say
the	Oregon	Trail	was	the	start	of	today's	highway	system.	It	crossed	many
boundaries	and	provided	two-way	traffic	to	travelers	in	wheeled	vehicles.	The
modern	path	of	Interstate	84	and	several	other	highways	follows	the	Oregon
Trail	for	much	of	its	length.	However,	many	conclusions	drawn	from
descriptions	of	the	Oregon	Trail	would	be	misleading	if	applied	to	the	future
system.	Cholera	and	starvation	aren't	a	problem	on	Interstate	84.	Tailgating
and	drunk	drivers	weren't	much	of	a	hazard	for	the	wagon	trains.
The	trail	blazed	by	the	Internet	will	direct	many	elements	of	the	highway.	The
Internet	is	a	wonderful,	critical	development	and	a	very	clear	element	of	the
final	system,	but	it	will	change	significantly	in	the	years	ahead.	The	current
Internet	lacks	security	and	needs	a	billing	system.	Much	of	the	Internet
culture	will	seem	as	quaint	to	future	users	of	the	information	highway	as
stories	of	wagon	trains	and	pioneers	on	the	Oregon	Trail	do	to	us	today.
In	fact,	the	Internet	of	today	is	not	the	Internet	of	even	a	short	time	ago.	The
pace	of	its	evolution	is	so	rapid	that	a	description	of	the	Internet	as	it	existed	a
year	or	even	six	months	ago	might	be	seriously	out-of-date.	This	adds	to	the
confusion.	It	is	very	hard	to	stay	up-to-date	with	something	so	dynamic.
Many	companies,	including	Microsoft,	are	working	together	to	define
standards	in	order	to	extend	the	Internet	and	overcome	its	limitations.
Because	the	Internet	originated	as	a	computer-science	proiect	rather	than	a
communications	utility,	it	has	always	been	a	magnet	for	hackers—
programmers	who	turn	their	talents	toward	mischief	or	malice	by	breaking
into	the	computer	systems	of	others.
On	November	2,	1988,	thousands	of	computers	connected	to	the	network

began	to	slow	down.	Many	eventually	ground	to	a	temporary	halt.	No	data
were	destroyed,	but	millions	of	dollars	of	computing	time	were	lost	as
computer	system	administrators	fought	to	regain	control	of	their	machines.
Much	of	the	public	may	have	heard	of	the	Internet	for	the	first	time	when	this
story	was	widely	covered.	The	cause	turned	out	to	be	a	mischievous	computer
program,	called	a	"worm,"	that	was	spreading	from	one	computer	to	another
on	the	network,	replicating	as	it	went.	(It	was	designated	a	worm	rather	than	a
virus	because	it	didn't	infect	other	programs.)	It	used	an	unnoticed	"back
door"	in	the	systems'	software	to	access	directly	the	memory	of	the	computers
it	was	attacking.	There	it	hid	itself	and	passed	around	misleading	information
that	made	it	harder	to	detect	and	counteract.	Within	a	few	days	The	New	York
Times	identified	the	hacker	as	Robert	Morris,	Jr.,	a	twenty-three-year-old
graduate	student	at	Cornell	University.	Morris	later	testified	that	he	had
designed	and	then	unleashed	the	worm	to	see	how	many	computers	it	would
reach,	but	a	mistake	in	his	programming	caused	the	worm	to	replicate	far
faster	than	he	had	expected.	Morris	was	convicted	of	violating	the	1986
Computer	Fraud	and	Abuse	Act,	a	federal	offense.	He	was	sentenced	to	three
years	of	probation,	a	fine	of	$10,000,	and	400	hours	of	community	service.
There	have	been	occasional	breakdowns	and	security	problems,	but	not	many,
and	the	Internet	has	become	a	reasonably	reliable	communications	channel
for	millions	of	people.	It	provides	worldwide	connections	between	servers,
facilitating	the	exchange	of	electronic	mail,	bulletin	board	items,	and	other
data.	The	exchanges	range	from	short	messages	of	a	few	dozen	characters	to
multimillion-byte	transfers	of	photographs,	software,	and	other	kinds	of	data.
It	costs	no	more	to	request	data	from	a	server	that	is	a	mile	away	than	from
one	that	is	thousands	of	miles	distant.
Already	the	Internet's	pricing	model	has	changed	the	notion	that
communication	has	to	be	paid	for	by	time	and	distance.	The	same	thing
happened	with	computing.	If	you	couldn't	afford	a	big	computer	you	used	to
pay	for	computer	time	by	the	hour.	PCs	changed	that.
Because	the	Internet	is	inexpensive	to	use,	people	assume	it	is	government
funded.	Th======================================================== rted	by	posts	of	Douglas	fir.	The	house	has	lots	of	exposed
horizontal	beams	and	vertical	supports.	You'll	have	a	great	view	of	the	lake.
My	hope	is	that	the	view	and	the	Douglas	fir,	rather	than	the	electronic	pin,

will	be	what	interest	you	most	as	you	descend	toward	the	ground	floor.	Most
of	the	wood	came	from	an	eighty-year-old	Weyerhaeuser	lumber	mill	that	was
being	torn	down	out	on	the	Columbia	River.	This	wood,	harvested	nearly	a
hundred	years	ago,	came	from	trees	that	were	as	much	as	350	feet	tall,
between	8	and	15	feet	in	diameter.	Douglas	fir	is	one	of	the	strongest	woods
in	the	world	for	its	weight.	Unfortunately,	new-growth	Douglas	fir	tends	to
split	if	you	try	to	mill	it	into	beams,	because	the	grain	is	not	as	tight	in	a
seventy-year-old	tree	as	it	is	in	a	five-hundred-year-old	one.	Almost	all	of	the
old-growth	Douglas	fir	has	been	harvested	now,	and	any	that	remains	should
be	preserved.	I	was	lucky	to	find	old-growth	timbers	that	could	be	reused.
The	fir	beams	support	the	two	floors	of	private	living	spaces	you'll	be
descending	past.	Privacy	is	important.	I	want	a	house	that	will	still	feel	like
home	even	when	guests	are	enjoying	other	parts	of	it.
At	the	bottom	of	the	stairs,	the	theater	will	be	on	the	right,	and	to	the	left,	on
the	south	side,	will	be	the	reception	hall.	As	you	step	into	the	reception	hall,
on	your	right	will	be	a	series	of	sliding	glass	doors	that	open	onto	a	terrace
leading	to	the	lake.	Recessed	into	the	east	wall	will	be	twenty-four	video
monitors,	each	with	a	40-inch	picture	tube,	stacked	four	high	and	six	across.
These	monitors	will	work	cooperatively	to	display	large	images	for	artistic,
entertainment,	or	business	purposes.	I	had	hoped	that	when	the	monitors
weren't	in	use	they	could	literally	disappear	into	the	woodwork.	I	wanted	the
screens	to	display	woodgrain	patterns	that	matched	their	surroundings.
Unfortunately	I	could	never	achieve	anything	convincing	with	current
technology,	because	a	monitor	emits	light	while	real	wood	reflects	it.	So	I
settled	for	having	the	monitors	disappear	behind	wood	panels	when	they're
not	in	use.
The	electronic	pin	you	wear	will	tell	the	house	who	and	where	you	are,	and
the	house	will	use	this	information	to	try	to	meet	and	even	anticipate	your
needs—all	as	unobtrusively	as	possible.	Someday,	instead	of	needing	the	pin,
it	might	be	possible	to	have	a	camera	system	with	visual-recognition
capabilities,	but	that's	beyond	current	technology.	When	it's	dark	outside,	the
pin	will	cause	a	moving	zone	of	light	to	accompany	you	through	the	house.
Unoccupied	rooms	will	be	unlit.	As	you	walk	down	a	hallway,	you	might	not
notice	the	lights	ahead	of	you	gradually	coming	up	to	full	brightness	and	the
lights	behind	you	fading.	Music	will	move	with	you,	too.	It	will	seem	to	be
everywhere,	although,	in	fact,	other	people	in	the	house	will	be	hearing
entirely	different	music	or	nothing	at	all.	A	movie	or	the	news	will	be	able	to
follow	you	around	the	house,	too.	If	you	get	a	phone	call,	only	the	handset

nearest	you	will	ring.
Computer	rendering	of	the	Gateses'	future	home,	showing	the	staircase	and
formal	dining	room
You	won't	be	confronted	by	the	technology,	but	it	will	be	readily	and	easily
available.	Handheld	remote	controls	will	put	you	in	charge	of	your	immediate
environment	and	of	the	house's	entertainment	system.	The	remote	will	extend
the	capabilities	of	the	pin.	It	will	not	only	let	the	house	identify	and	locate
you,	it	will	also	allow	you	to	give	instructions.	You'll	use	the	controls	to	tell
the	monitors	in	a	room	to	become	visible	and	what	to	display.	You'll	be	able
to	choose	from	among	thousands	of	pictures,	recordings,	movies,	and
television	programs,	and	you'll	have	all	sorts	of	options	available	for	selecting
information.
A	console,	which	will	be	the	equivalent	of	a	keyboard	that	lets	you	give	very
specific	instructions,	will	be	discreetly	visible	in	each	room.	I	want	consoles
that	are	noticeable	to	those	who	need	them,	but	that	don't	invite	attention.	A
characteristic,	easy-to-identify	feature	will	alert	the	user	to	the	identity	and
whereabouts	of	the	consoles.	The	telephone	has	already	made	this	transition.
It	doesn't	attract	particular	attention	to	itself;	most	of	us	are	comfortable
putting	a	nondescript	phone	on	an	end	table.
Every	computerized	system	should	be	made	so	simple	and	natural	to	use	that
people	don't	give	it	a	second	thought.	But	simple	is	difficult.	Still,	computers
get	easier	to	use	every	year,	and	trial-and-error	in	my	house	will	help	us	learn
how	to	create	a	really	simple	system.	You	will	be	able	to	be	indirect	about
your	instructions	and	requests.	For	example,	you	won't	have	to	ask	for	a	song
by	name.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	the	house	to	play	the	latest	hits,	or	songs	by
a	particular	artist,	or	songs	that	were	performed	at	Woodstock,	or	music
composed	in	eighteenth-century	Vienna,	or	songs	with	the	word	"yellow"	in
their	titles.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	for	songs	that	you	have	categorized	with	a
certain	adjective,	or	songs	that	haven't	been	played	before	when	a	particular

person	was	visiting	the	house.	I	might	program	classical	music	as	background
for	contemplating	and	something	more	modern	and	energetic	to	play	while
I'm	exercising.	If	you	want	to	watch	the	movie	that	won	the	1957	Academy
Award	for	best	picture,	you	can	ask	for	it	that	way—and	see	The	Bridge	on
the	River	Kwai.	You	could	find	the	same	movie	by	asking	for	films	starring
Alec	Guinness	or	William	Holden	or	ones	about	prison	camps.
Prototype	of	a	home	control	console
If	you're	planning	to	visit	Hong	Kong	soon,	you	might	ask	the	screen	in	your
room	to	show	you	pictures	of	the	city.	It	will	seem	to	you	as	if	the
photographs	are	displayed	everywhere,	although	actually	the	images	will
materialize	on	the	walls	of	rooms	just	before	you	walk	in	and	vanish	after	you
leave.	If	you	and	I	are	enjoying	different	things	and	one	of	us	walks	into	a
room	where	the	other	is	sitting,	the	house	will	follow	predetermined	rules
about	what	to	do.	For	example,	the	house	might	continue	the	audio	and	visual
imagery	for	the	person	who	was	in	the	room	first,	or	it	might	change
programming	to	something	it	knows	both	of	us	like.
A	house	that	tracks	its	occupants	in	order	to	meet	their	particular	needs
combines	two	traditions.	The	first	is	the	tradition	of	unobtrusive	service,	and
the	other	is	that	an	object	we	carry	entitles	us	to	be	treated	in	a	certain	way.
You're	already	used	to	the	idea	that	an	object	can	authenticate	you.	It	can
inform	people	or	machinery	that	you	have	permission	to	do	something	such	as
open	a	locked	door,	get	on	an	airplane,	or	use	a	specific	line	of	credit—yours
—to	make	a	purchase.	Keys,	electronic	entry	cards,	driver's	licenses,
passports,	name	badges,	credit	cards,	and	tickets	are	all	forms	of
authentication.	If	I	give	you	the	key	to	my	car,	the	car	allows	you	to	get	in,
start	the	engine,	and	drive	away.	You	might	say	that	the	car	trusts	you	because
you	carry	its	keys.	If	I	give	a	parking	attendant	a	key	that	fits	my	automobile's
ignition	but	not	its	trunk,	the	car	lets	him	drive	but	not	open	the	trunk.	It's	no
different	with	my	house,	which	will	make	various	amenities	available	to	you
based	on	the	electronic	key	you	carry.

None	of	this	is	really	so	radical.	Some	visionaries	are	predicting	that	within
the	next	ten	years	there	will	be	lots	of	robots	wandering	around	helping	us	out
with	various	household	chores.	I	am	certainly	not	preparing	for	that,	because	I
think	it	will	be	many	decades	before	robots	are	practical.	The	only	ones	I
expect	to	see	in	widespread	use	soon	are	intelligent	toys.	Kids	will	be	able	to
program	them	to	respond	to	different	situations	and	even	to	speak	in	the
voices	of	favorite	characters.	These	toy	robots	will	be	able	to	be	programmed
in	a	limited	number	of	ways.	They	will	have	limited	vision,	know	the	distance
to	the	wall	in	each	direction,	the	time,	the	lighting	conditions,	and	accept
limited	speech	input.	I	think	it	would	have	been	cool	to	have	had	a	toy-size
car	I	could	have	talked	to	and	programmed	to	respond	to	my	instructions.
Other	than	toys,	the	other	major	uses	for	robotic	devices	I	see	are	for	military
applications.	The	reason	I	doubt	intelligent	robots	will	provide	much	help	in
actual	housework	in	the	foreseeable	future	is	that	it	takes	a	great	deal	of	visual
intelligence	and	dexterity	to	prepare	food	or	change	diapers.	Pool	cleaning,
lawn	mowing,	and	perhaps	even	vacuum	cleaning	can	be	done	with	a
relatively	dumb	system,	but	once	we	get	beyond	tasks	where	you	just	push
something	around,	it	is	very	hard	to	design	a	machine	that	would	be	able	to
recognize	and	respond	to	all	of	the	contingencies	that	come	along.
The	systems	I	am	building	into	the	house	are	designed	to	make	it	easier	to	live
in,	but	I	won't	know	for	sure	if	they	are	worthwhile	until	I	move	in.	I'm
experimenting	and	learning	all	the	time.	The	design	team	used	my	guest
cottage,	which	was	built	before	the	house,	as	a	sort	of	test	laboratory	for	home
instrumentation.	Because	some	people	like	the	temperature	warmer	than
others	do,	the	cottage's	software	sets	its	temperature	in	reaction	to	who	is
inside,	and	the	time	of	day.	The	cottage	knows	to	make	the	temperature	toasty
on	a	cold	morning	before	a	guest	is	out	of	bed.	In	the	evening,	when	it's	dark
outside,	the	cottage's	lights	dim	if	a	television	is	on.	If	someone	is	in	the
cottage	during	the	day,	the	cottage	matches	its	inside	brightness	to	that	of	the
outdoors.	Of	course	the	occupant	can	always	give	explicit	directions	to
overrule	the	settings.
This	sort	of	instrumentation	can	provide	significant	energy	savings.	A	number
of	electric	utilities	are	testing	a	network	to	monitor	the	use	of	energy	in
individual	homes.	This	would	end	the	expensive	practice	of	having	meter
readers	come	to	each	home	every	month	or	two,	but	more	important,
computers	in	the	home	and	at	the	utility	company	will	be	able	to	manage	the
minute-by-minute	demand	for	power	at	various	times	of	the	day.	Energy-
demand	management	can	save	a	lot======================================================== their	vacations.	However,	to	edit
video	you	have	to	be	a	professional	with	expensive	equipment.	This	will
change.	Advances	in	PC	word	processors	and	desktop-publishing	software
have	already	made	professional-quality	tools	for	creating	simple	paper
documents	available	relatively	inexpensively	to	millions.	Desktop-publishing
software	has	progressed	to	the	point	that	many	magazines	and	newspapers	are
produced	with	the	same	sort	of	PC	and	software	package	you	can	buy	at	any
local	computer	store	and	use	to	design	an	invitation	to	your	daughter's
birthday	party.	PC	software	for	editing	film	and	creating	special	effects	will
become	as	commonplace	as	desktop-publishing	software.	Then	the	difference
between	professionals	and	amateurs	will	be	one	of	talent	rather	than	access	to
tools.
Georges	Méliès	created	one	of	the	first	special	effects	in	movies	when,	in
1899,	he	turned	a	woman	into	feathers	on	the	screen	in	The	Conjurer,	and
moviemakers	have	been	playing	cinematic	tricks	ever	since.	Recently,
special-effects	technology	has	improved	dramatically	through	the	use	of	the
digital	manipulation	of	images.	First	a	photograph	is	converted	into	binary
information,	which,	as	we	have	seen,	software	applications	are	able	to
manipulate	easily.	Then	the	digital	information	is	altered	and	finally	returned
to	photographic	form,	as	a	frame	in	a	movie.	The	alterations	are	nearly
undetectable	if	well	done,	and	the	results	can	be	spectacular.	Computer
software	gave	life	to	the	dinosaurs	in	Jurassic	Park,	the	thundering
wildebeest	herd	in	The	Lion	King,	and	the	crazy	cartoon	effects	in	The	Mask.
As	Moore's	Law	increases	hardware	speed,	and	software	becomes
increasingly	sophisticated,	there	is	virtually	no	limit	to	what	can	be	achieved.
Hollywood	will	continue	to	push	the	state	of	the	art	and	create	amazing	new
effects.
It	will	be	possible	for	a	software	program	to	fabricate	scenes	that	will	look	as
real	as	anything	created	with	a	camera.	Audiences	watching	Forrest	Gump
could	recognize	that	the	scenes	with	Presidents	Kennedy,	Johnson,	and	Nixon
were	fabricated.	Everyone	knew	Tom	Hanks	hadn't	really	been	there.	It	was	a
lot	harder	to	spot	the	digital	processing	that	removed	Gary	Sinise's	two	good
legs	for	his	role	as	an	amputee.	Synthesized	figures	and	digital	editing	are
being	used	to	make	movie	stunts	safer.	You'll	soon	be	able	to	use	a	standard
PC	to	make	the	software	to	create	the	effects.	The	ease	with	which	PCs	and
photo-editing	software	already	manipulate	complex	images	will	make	it	easy
to	counterfeit	photographic	documents	or	alter	photographs	undetectably.	And

as	synthesis	gets	cheaper	it	will	be	used	more	and	more;	if	we	can	bring
Tyrannosaurus	rex	back	to	life,	can	Elvis	be	far	behind?
Even	those	who	don't	aspire	to	becoming	the	next	C.	B.	DeMille	or	Lina
Wertmuller	will	routinely	include	multi-media	in	the	documents	they
construct	every	day.	Someone	might	start	by	typing,	handwriting,	or	speaking
an	electronic	mail	message:	"Lunch	in	the	park	may	not	be	such	a	great	idea.
Look	at	the	forecast."	To	make	the	message	more	informative,	he	could	then
point	his	cursor	at	an	icon	representing	a	local	television	weather	forecast	and
drag	it	across	his	screen	to	move	the	icon	inside	his	document.	When	his
friends	get	the	message,	they	will	be	able	to	look	at	the	forecast	right	on	their
screens—a	professional-looking	communication.
Kids	in	school	will	be	able	to	produce	their	own	albums	or	movies	and	make
them	available	to	friends	and	family	on	the	information	highway.	When	I
have	time,	I	enjoy	making	special	greeting	cards	and	invitations.	If	I'm
making	a	birthday	card	for	my	sister,	for	instance,	to	personalize	it	I
sometimes	add	pictures	reminding	her	of	fun	events	of	the	past	year.	In	the
future	I'll	be	able	to	include	movie	clips	that	I've
customized	with	only	a	few	minutes'	work.	It	will	be	simple	to	create	an
interactive	"album"	of	photographs,	videos,	or	conversations.	Businesses	of
all	types	and	sizes	will	communicate	using	multi-media.	Lovers	will	use
special	effects	to	blend	some	text,	a	video	clip	from	an	old	movie,	and	a
favorite	song	to	create	a	personal	valentine.
As	the	fidelity	of	visual	and	audio	elements	improves,	reality	in	all	its	aspects
will	be	more	closely	simulated.	This	"virtual	reality,"	or	VR,	will	allow	us	to
"go"	places	and	"do"	things	we	never	would	be	able	to	otherwise.
Vehicle	simulators	for	airplanes,	race	cars,	and	spacecraft	already	provide	a
taste	of	virtual	reality.	Some	of	the	most	popular	rides	at	Disneyland	are
simulated	voyages.	Software	vehicle	simulators,	such	as	Microsoft	Flight
Simulator,	are	among	the	most	popular	games	ever	created	for	PCs,	but	they
force	you	to	use	your	imagination.	Multimillion-dollar	flight	simulators	at
companies	such	as	Boeing	give	you	a	much	better	ride.	Viewed	from	the
outside,	they're	boxy,	stilt-legged	mechanical	creatures	that	would	look	at
home	in	a	Star	Wars	movie.	Inside,	the	cockpit	video	displays	offer
sophisticated	data.	Flight	and	maintenance	instruments	are	linked	to	a
computer	that	simulates	flight	characteristics—including	emergencies—with
an	accuracy	pilots	say	is	remarkable.
A	couple	of	friends	and	I	"flew"	a	747	simulator	a	couple	years	ago.	You	sit

down	to	a	control	panel	in	a	cockpit	identical	to	one	in	a	real	plane.	Outside
the	windows,	you	see	computer-generated	color	video	images.	When	you
"take	off"	in	the	simulator,	you	see	an	identifiable	airport	and	its
surroundings.	The	simulation	of	Boeing	Field,	for	instance,	might	show	a	fuel
truck	on	the	runway	and	Mount	Rainier	in	the	distance.	You	hear	the	rush	of
air	around	wings	that	aren't	there,	the	clunk	of	nonexistent	landing	gear
retracting.	Six	hydraulic	systems	under	the	simulator	tilt	and	shake	the
cockpit.	It's	pretty	convincing.
The	main	purpose	of	these	simulators	is	to	give	pilots	a	chance	to	gain
experience	in	handling	emergencies.	When	I	was	using	the	simulator	my
friends	decided	to	give	me	a	surprise	by	having	a	small	plane	fly	by.	While	I
sat	in	the	pilot's	seat	the	all-too-real-looking	image	of	a	Cessna	flashed	into
view.	I	wasn't	prepared	for	the	"emergency"	and	I	crashed	into	it.
A	number	of	companies,	from	entertainment	giants	to	small	start-ups,	are
planning	to	put	smaller-scale	simulator	rides	into	shopping	malls	and	urban
sites.	As	the	price	of	technology	comes	down,	entertainment	simulators	may
become	as	common	as	movie	theaters	are	today.	And	it	won't	be	too	many
years	until	you'll	be	able	to	have	a	high-quality	simulation	in	your	own	living
room.
Want	to	explore	the	surface	of	Mars?	It's	a	lot	safer	to	do	it	via	VR.	How
about	visiting	somewhere	humans	never	will	be	able	to	go?	A	cardiologist
might	be	able	to	swim	through	the	heart	of	a	patient	to	examine	it	in	a	way
she	never	would	have	been	able	to	with	conventional	instrumentation.	A
surgeon	could	practice	a	tricky	operation	many	times,	including	simulated
catastrophes,	before	she	ever	touches	a	scalpel	to	a	real	patient.	Or	you	could
use	VR	to	wander	through	a	fantasy	of	your	own	design.
In	order	to	work,	VR	needs	two	different	sets	of	technology—software	that
creates	the	scene	and	makes	it	respond	to	new	information,	and	devices	that
allow	the	computer	to	transmit	the	information	to	our	senses.	The	software
will	have	to	figure	out	how	to	describe	the	look,	sound,	and	feel	of	the
artificial	world	down	to	the	smallest	detail.	That	might	sound	overwhelmingly
difficult,	but	actually	it's	the	easy	part.	We	could	write	the	software	for	VR
today,	but	we	need	a	lot	more	computer	power	to	make	it	truly	believable.	At
the	pace	technology	is	moving,	though,	that	power	will	be	available	soon.	The
really	hard	part	about	VR	is	getting	the	information	to	convince	the	user's
senses.
Hearing	is	the	easiest	sense	to	fool;	all	you	have	to	do	is	wear	headphones.	In

real	life,	your	two	ears	hear	slightly	different	things	because	of	their	location
on	your	head	and	the	directions	they	point.	Subconsciously	you	use	those
differences	to	tell	where	a	sound	is	coming	from.	Software	can	re-create	this
by	calculating	for	a	given	sound	what	each	ear	would	be	hearing.	This	works
amazingly	well.	You	can	put	on	a	set	of	headphones	connected	to	a	computer
and	hear	a	whisper	in	your	left	ear	or	footsteps	walking	up	behind	you.
Your	eyes	are	harder	to	fool	than	your	ears,	but	vision	is	still	pretty
straightforward	to	simulate.	VR	equipment	almost	always	includes	a	special
set	of	goggles	with	lenses	that	focus	each	eye	on	its	own	small	computer
display.	A	head-tracking	sensor	allows	the	computer	to	figure	out	which
direction	your	head	is	facing,	so	the	computer	can	synthesize	what	you	would
be	seeing.	Turn	your	head	to	the	right,	and	the	scene	portrayed	by	the	goggles
is	farther	to	the	right.	Lift	your	face,	and	the	goggles	show	the	ceiling	or	sky.
Today's	VR	goggles	are	too	heavy,	too	expensive,	and	don't	have	enough
resolution.	The	computer	systems	that	drive	them	are	still	a	bit	too	slow.	If
you	turn	your	head	quickly,	the	scene	lags	somewhat	behind.	This	is	very
disorienting	and	after	a	short	period	of	time	causes	most	people	to	get
headaches.	The	good	news	is	that	size,	speed,	weight,	and	cost	are	precisely
the	kinds	of	things	that	technology	following	Moore's	Law	will	correct	soon.
Other	senses	are	much	more	difficult	to	fool,	because	there	are	no	good	ways
of	connecting	a	computer	to	your	nose	or	tongue,	or	to	the	surface	of	your
skin.	In	the	case	of	touch,	the	prevailing	idea	is	that	a	full	bodysuit	could	be
made	lined	with	tiny	sensor	and	force	feedback	devices	that	would	be	in
contact	with	the	whole	surface	of	your	skin.	I	don't	think	bodysuits	will	be
common,	but	they'll	be	feasible.
There	are	between	72	and	120	tiny	points	of	color	(called	pixels)	per	inch	on	a
typical	computer	monitor,	for	a	total	of	between	300,000	and	1	million.	A	full
bodysuit	would	presumably	be	lined	with	little	touch	sensor	points—each	of
which	could	poke	one	specific	tiny	spot.	Let's	call	these	little	touch	elements
"tactels."
If	the	suit	had	enough	of	these	tactel======================================================== o	every	classroom?	Will	they	be	allowed	to
explore	independently	during	group	discussions?	If	so,	how	much	freedom
should	they	have?	Should	they	be	able	to	look	up	a	word	they	don't
understand?	Should	they	have	access	to	information	that	their	parents	find
objectionable	on	moral,	social,	or	political	grounds?	Be	allowed	to	do
homework	for	an	unrelated	class?	Be	permitted	to	send	notes	to	each	other
during	class?	Should	the	teacher	be	able	to	monitor	what	is	on	every	student's
screen	or	to	record	it	for	later	spot-checking?
Whatever	problems	direct	access	to	unlimited	information	may	cause,	the
benefits	it	will	bring	will	more	than	compensate.	I	enjoyed	school	but	I
pursued	my	strongest	interests	outside	the	classroom.	I	can	only	imagine	how
access	to	this	much	information	would	have	changed	my	own	school
experience.	The	highway	will	alter	the	focus	of	education	from	the	institution
to	the	individual.	The	ultimate	goal	will	be	changed	from	getting	a	diploma	to
enjoying	lifelong	learning.

10
PLUGGED	IN
AT	HOME
One	of	the	many	fears	expressed	about	the	information	highway	is	that	it	will
reduce	the	time	people	spend	socializing.	Some	worry	that	homes	will
become	such	cozy	entertainment	providers	that	we'll	never	leave	them,	and
that,	safe	in	our	private	sanctuaries,	we'll	become	isolated.	I	don't	think	that's
going	to	happen,	and	later	in	this	chapter,	when	I	describe	the	house	I'm
building,	I	think	I	make	my	case.
The	house,	which	has	been	under	construction	for	what	seems	like	most	of
my	life	(and	it	seems	I've	been	reading	about	the	construction	even	longer),	is
full	of	advanced	entertainment	equipment,	such	as	a	small	movie	theater	and	a
video-on-demand	system.	It	should	be	an	interesting	place	to	live,	but	I
certainly	don't	plan	to	stay	home	all	the	time.	Other	people,	when	they	have
entertainment	flowing	into	their	homes,	will	also	continue	to	go	to	theaters,
just	as	they'll	visit	parks,	museums,	and	shops.	As	behaviorists	keep
reminding	us,	we're	social	animals.	We	will	have	the	option	of	staying	home
more	because	the	highway	will	create	so	many	new	options	for	home-based
entertainment,	for	communications—both	personal	and	professional—and	for
employment.	Although	the	mix	of	activities	will	change,	I	think	people	will
decide	to	spend	almost	as	much	time	out	of	their	homes.
In	chapter	1,	I	mentioned	dire	anticultural	predictions	from	the	past	that	didn't
come	about.	More	recently,	in	the	1950s,	there	were	those	who	said	movie
theaters	would	disappear	and	everyone	would	stay	home	watching	the	new
invention,	television.	Pay	TV	and,	later,	movie	video	rentals	provoked	similar
fears.	Why	would	anyone	spend	money	for	parking	and	baby-sitters,	buy	the
most	expensive	soft	drinks	and	candy	bars	in	the	world,	to	sit	in	a	dark	room
with	strangers?	But	popular	movies	continue	to	fill	theaters.	Personally,	I	love
movies	and	enjoy	the	experience	of	going	out	to	see	them.	I	do	it	almost	every
week,	and	I	don't	think	the	information	highway	will	change	that.
The	new	communications	capabilities	will	make	it	far	easier	than	it	is	today	to
stay	in	touch	with	friends	and	relatives	who	are	geographically	distant.	Many
of	us	have	struggled	to	keep	alive	a	friendship	with	someone	far	away.	I	used

to	date	a	woman	who	lived	in	a	different	city.	We	spent	a	lot	of	time	together
on	e-mail.	And	we	figured	out	a	way	we	could	sort	of	go	to	the	movies
together.	We'd	find	a	film	that	was	playing	at	about	the	same	time	in	both	our
cities.	We'd	drive	to	our	respective	theaters,	chatting	on	our	cellular	phones.
We'd	watch	the	movie,	and	on	the	way	home	we'd	use	our	cellular	phones
again	to	discuss	the	show.	In	the	future	this	sort	of	"virtual	dating"	will	be
better	because	the	movie	watching	could	be	combined	with	a
videoconference.
I	already	play	bridge	on	an	on-line	system	that	allows	the	players	to	see	who
else	is	interested	in	joining	a	game	because	it	has	a	waiting	room.	Players
have	a	primitive	ability	to	choose	the	way	they	want	to	appear	to	the	other
players:	their	sex,	hairstyle,	body	build,	etc.	The	first	time	I	connected	to	the
system,	I	was	in	a	rush	to	keep	a	bridge	appointment,	and	I	didn't	spend	any
time	setting	up	my	electronic	appearance.	After	my	friends	and	I	had	started
playing,	they	all	began	to	send	me	messages	about	how	I	was	bald	and	naked
(from	the	waist	up,	the	only	part	of	the	body	it	showed).	Even	though	this
system	didn't	allow	video	or	voice	communication	the	way	future	systems
will,	the	ability	to	send	text	messages	to	each	other	while	we	were	playing
made	it	a	real	blast.
The	highway	will	not	only	make	it	easier	to	keep	up	with	distant	friends,	it
will	also	enable	us	to	find	new	companions.	Friendships	formed	across	the
network	will	lead	naturally	to	getting	together	in	person.	Right	now	our
methods	for	linking	up	with	people	we	might	like	are	pretty	limited,	but	the
network	will	change	that.	We	will	be	meeting	some	of	our	new	friends	in
different	ways	from	the	ones	we	use	today.	This	alone	will	make	life	more
interesting.	Suppose	you	want	to	reach	someone	to	play	bridge	with.	The
information	highway	will	let	you	find	cardplayers	with	the	right	skill	level
and	availability	in	your	neighborhood,	or	in	other	cities	or	nations.	The	idea
of	interactive	games	played	by	far-flung	participants	is	hardly	new.	Chess
players	have	been	carrying	on	games	by	mail,	one	move	at	a	time,	for
generations.	The	difference	will	be	that	applications	running	on	the	network
will	make	it	easy	to	find	others	who	share	similar	interests	and	also	to	play
together	at	the	same	pace	you	would	face-to-face.
Another	difference	will	be	that	while	you	are	playing	a	game—say,	bridge	or
Starfighter—you	will	be	able	to	chat	with	the	other	players.	The	new	DSVD
modems	I	discussed	earlier	will	let	you	use	a	normal	phone	line	to	carry	on	a
voice	conversation	with	the	other	players	while	watching	the	play	unfold	on
your	computer	screen.

The	experience	of	playing	a	friendly	group	game,	as	you	do	at	the	traditional
card	table,	is	pleasurable	as	much	for	the	fellowship	as	for	the	competition.
The	game	is	more	fun	when	you	are	enjoying	the	conversation.	A	number	of
companies	are	taking	this	multiplayer-game	concept	to	a	new	level.	You'll	be
able	to	play	alone,	with	a	few	friends,	or	with	thousands	of	people,	and	it	will
eventually	be	possible	to	see	the	people	you	are	playing	with—if	they	choose
to	permit	you	to.	It	will	be	easy	to	locate	an	expert	and	watch	him	play	or	take
lessons	from	him.	On	the	highway,	you	and	your	friends	will	not	only	be	able
to	gather	around	a	game	table,	you'll	also	be	able	to	"meet"	at	a	real	place,
such	as	Kensington	Gardens,	or	in	an	imaginary	setting.	You'll	be	able	to	play
a	conventional	game	in	a	remarkable	location,	or	play	a	new	kind	of	game	in
which	exploring	the	virtual	setting	is	part	of	the	action.
Warren	Buffett,	who	is	famous	for	his	investment	savvy,	is	a	good	friend	of
mine.	For	years	I	kept	trying	to	think	of	how	to	entice	him	to	use	a	personal
computer.	I	even	offered	to	fly	out	and	get	him	started.	He	wasn't	interested
until	he	found	out	he	could	play	bridge	with	friends	all	over	the	country
through	an	on-line	service.	For	the	first	six	months	he	would	come	home	and
play	for	hours	on	end.	Despite	the	fact	that	he	had	studiously	stayed	away
from	technology	and	technology	investing,	once	he	tried	the	computer,	he	was
hooked.	Now,	many	weeks	Warren	uses	on-line	services	more	than	I	do.	The
present	system	doesn't	require	you	to	enter	your	true	appearance,	or	name,
age,	or	sex.	However,	it	seems	that	most	of	the	users	are	either	kids	or	retirees
—neither	of	which	describes	Warren.	One	feature	that	had	to	be	added	into
the	system	was	a	limit	that	permits	parents	to	restrict	the	amount	of	time	(and
money)	their	kids	spend	on-line.
I	think	on-line	computer-game	playing	will	catch	on	in	a	big	way.	We'll	be
able	to	choose	from	a	rich	set	of	games,	including	all	the	classic	board	and
card	games	as	well	as	action	adventure	and	role-playing	games.	New	styles	of
games	will	be	invented	specifically	for	this	medium.	There	will	be	contests
with	prizes	awarded.	From	time	to	time,	celebrities	and	experts	will	come
onto	the	system	and	everyone	else	will	be	able	to	watch	as	the	celebrities	play,
or	sign	up	to	play	against	them.
TV	game	shows	will	evolve	to	a	new	level	when	viewer	feedback	is	added.
Viewers	will	be	able	to	vote	and	see	the	results	immediately—sort	of	like	the
applause	meter	used	on	the	live	audience	in	old	shows	such	as	Queen	for	a
Day.	This	format	will	also	allow	for	prizes	to	be	given	to	players.	Some
entrepreneurial	companies,	Answer	TV	for	one,	have	already	designed	and
tested	systems	specifically	for	interactive	TV	games,	but	because	the	system
has	only	one	application,	so	far	it	hasn't	caught	on	enough	to	make	money.	On

the	information	highway,	you	won't	have	to	buy	special	hardware	or	software
to	interact	with	a	television	show.	Imagine	the	future	Password	or	Jeopardy!
show	that	will	let	viewers	at	home	participate	and	win	either	cash	or	credits	of
some	sort.	Shows	will	even	be	able	to	keep	track	of	and	reward	their	regular
audience	members	by	giving	them	special	prizes	or	mentioning	them	by	name
if	they	choose	to	join	the	game.
Gambling	is	going	to	be	another	way	to	play	on	the	highway.	It's	a	huge
business	in	Las	Vegas,	Reno,	and	Atlantic	City,	and	it	nearly	supports
Monaco.	The	profits	garnered	by	the	casinos	are	incredible.	Gamblers
continue	to	believe	that	even	though	the	odds	are	against	them,	they're	going
to	win.	When	I	was	in	college	I	enjoyed	playing	poker.	I	think	of	poker	as
mostly	a	game	of	skill.	Although	I	play	blackjack	sometimes	when	I'm	in	Las
Vegas,	the	gambling	games	that	are	mostly	luck	don't	have	a	strong	appeal	for
me.	Perhaps	it's	because	I	am	so	much	more	limited	by	time	than	money.	If
they	had	a	form	of	gambling	that	would	award	the	winners	a	few	more	hours
in	the	day,	I	might	be	drawn	in.
Advances	in	technology	have	already	had	an	impact	on	gambling.	One	of	the
early	uses	of	t======================================================== to	choose	the	camera
angles,	the	replays,	and	even	the	commentators	for	your	version.	You'll	be
able	to	listen	to	any	song,	anytime,	anywhere,	piped	in	from	the	world's
largest	record	store:	the	information	highway.	Perhaps	you'll	hum	a	little	tune
of	your	own	invention	into	a	microphone,	and	then	play	it	back	to	hear	what	it
could	sound	like	if	orchestrated	or	performed	by	a	rock	group.	Or	you'll	watch
Gone	With	the	Wind	with	your	own	face	and	voice	replacing	that	of	Vivien
Leigh	or	Clark	Gable.	Or	see	yourself	walking	down	the	runway	at	a	fashion
show,	wearing	the	latest	Paris	creations	adjusted	to	fit	your	body	or	the	one
you	wish	you	had.
Users	with	curiosity	will	be	mesmerized	by	the	abundance	of	information.
Want	to	know	how	a	mechanical	clock	works?	You'll	peer	inside	one	from
any	vantage	point	and	be	able	to	ask	questions.	Eventually	you	may	even	be
able	to	crawl	around	inside	a	clock,	using	a	virtual-reality	application.	Or
you'll	be	able	to	assume	the	role	of	a	heart	surgeon	or	play	the	drums	at	a
sold-out	rock	concert,	thanks	to	the	information	highway's	ability	to	deliver
rich	simulations	to	home	computers.	Some	of	the	choices	on	the	highway	will
be	supersets	of	today's	software,	but	the	graphics	and	animation	will	be	far,
far	better.
Other	applications	will	be	strictly	practical.	For	example,	when	you	go	on
vacation	a	home-management	application	will	be	able	to	turn	down	the	heat,
notify	the	post	office	to	hold	your	mail	and	the	newspaper	carrier	not	to
deliver	the	printed	paper,	cycle	your	indoor	lighting	so	that	it	appears	you	are
home,	and	automatically	pay	routine	bills.
Still	other	applications	will	be	completely	serious.	My	dad	broke	his	finger
badly	one	weekend	and	went	to	the	nearest	emergency	room,	which	happened
to	be	Children's	Hospital	in	Seattle.	They	refused	to	do	anything	for	him
because	he	was	a	few	decades	too	old.	Had	there	been	an	information
highway	at	the	time,	it	would	have	saved	him	some	trouble	by	telling	him	not
to	bother	trying	that	hospital.	An	application,	communicating	on	the	highway,
would	have	told	him	which	nearby	emergency	rooms	were	in	the	best	position
to	help	him	at	that	particular	time.
If	my	dad	were	to	break	another	finger	a	few	years	from	now,	he	not	only

would	be	able	to	use	an	information	highway	application	to	find	an
appropriate	hospital,	he	might	even	be	able	to	register	electronically	with	the
hospital	while	driving	there	and	avoid	conventional	paperwork	entirely.	The
hospital's	computer	would	match	his	injury	to	a	suitable	doctor,	who	would	be
able	to	retrieve	my	father's	medical	records	from	a	server	on	the	information
highway.	If	the	doctor	called	for	an	X	ray,	it	would	be	stored	in	digital	form
on	a	server,	available	for	immediate	review	by	any	authorized	doctor	or
specialist	throughout	the	hospital	or	the	world.	Comments	made	by	anyone
reviewing	the	X	ray,	whether	oral	or	in	text	form,	would	be	linked	to	Dad's
medical	records.	Afterward	my	father	would	be	able	to	look	at	the	X	rays
from	home	and	listen	to	the	professional	commentary.	He	could	share	the	X
rays	with	his	family:	"Look	at	the	size	of	that	fracture!	Listen	to	what	the
doctor	said	about	it!"
Most	of	these	applications,	from	checking	a	pizza	menu	to	sharing	centralized
medical	records,	are	already	starting	to	appear	on	PCs.	Interactive	information
sharing	is	quickly	moving	closer	to	becoming	a	part	of	everyday	life.
However,	before	that	happens,	a	lot	of	pieces	of	the	highway	still	have	to	be
put	in	place.

5
PATHS	TO	THE	HIGHWAY
Before	we	can	enjoy	the	benefits	of	the	applications	and	appliances	described
in	the	preceding	chapter,	the	information	highway	has	to	exist.	It	doesn't	yet.
This	may	surprise	some	people,	who	hear	everything	from	a	long-distance
telephone	network	to	the	Internet	described	as	"the	information
superhighway."	The	truth	is	that	the	full	highway	is	unlikely	to	be	available	in
homes	for	at	least	a	decade.
Personal	computers,	multi-media	CD-ROM	software,	high-capacity	cable
television	networks,	wired	and	wireless	telephone	networks,	and	the	Internet
are	all	important	precursors	of	the	information	highway.	Each	is	suggestive	of
the	future.	But	none	represents	the	actual	information	highway.
Constructing	the	highway	will	be	a	big	job.	It	will	require	the	installation	not
only	of	physical	infrastructure,	such	as	fiber-optic	cable	and	high-speed
switches	and	servers,	but	also	the	development	of	software	platforms.	In
chapter	3,	I	discussed	the	evolution	of	the	hardware	and	the	software	platform
that	enabled	the	PC.	Applications	for	the	information	highway,	such	as	those	I
described	in	chapter	4,	will	also	have	to	be	built	on	a	platform—one	that	will
evolve	out	of	the	PC	and	the	Internet.	The	same	sort	of	competition	that	took
place	within	the	PC	industry	during	the	1980s	is	taking	place	now	to	create
the	software	components	that	will	constitute	the	information	highway
platform.
The	software	that	runs	the	highway	will	have	to	offer	great	navigation	and
security,	electronic	mail	and	bulletin	board	capabilities,	connections	to
competing	software	components,	and	billing	and	accounting	services.
Component	providers	for	the	highway	will	make	available	tools	and	user-
interface	standards	so	it	will	be	easy	for	designers	to	create	applications,	set
up	forms,	and	manage	databases	of	information	on	the	system.	To	make	it
possible	for	applications	to	work	together	seamlessly,	the	platform	will	have
to	define	a	standard	for	user	profiles	so	that	information	about	user
preferences	can	be	passed	from	one	application	to	another.	This	sharing	of
information	will	enable	applications	to	do	their	best	to	meet	user	needs.
A	number	of	companies,	including	Microsoft,	confident	that	there	will	be	a

profitable	business	in	supplying	software	for	the	highway,	are	competing	to
develop	components	of	the	platform.	These	components	will	be	the
foundation	on	which	information	highway	applications	can	be	built.	There
will	be	more	than	one	successful	software	provider	for	the	highway,	and	their
software	will	interconnect.
The	highway's	platform	will	also	have	to	support	many	different	kinds	of
computers,	including	servers	and	all	the	information	appliances.	The
customers	for	much	of	this	software	will	be	the	cable	systems,	telephone
companies,	and	other	network	providers,	rather	than	individuals,	but
consumers	will	ultimately	decide	which	succeed.	The	network	providers	will
gravitate	toward	the	software	that	offers	consumers	the	best	applications	and
the	broadest	range	of	information.	So	the	first	competition	among	companies
developing	platform	software	will	be	waged	for	the	hearts	and	minds	of
applications	developers	and	information	providers,	because	their	work	will
create	most	of	the	value.
As	applications	develop,	they	will	demonstrate	the	value	of	the	information
highway	to	potential	investors—a	crucial	step,	considering	the	amount	of
money	building	the	highway	will	require.	Today's	estimates	put	the	cost	at
about	$1,200,	give	or	take	a	couple	of	hundred	dollars,	depending	on
architecture	and	equipment	choices,	to	connect	one	information	appliance
(such	as	a	TV	or	a	PC)	in	each	U.S.	home	to	the	highway.	This	price	includes
running	the	fiber	into	every	neighborhood,	the	servers,	the	switches	and
electronics	in	the	home.	With	roughly	100	million	homes	in	the	United	States,
this	works	out	to	around	$120	billion	of	investment	in	one	country	alone.
Nobody	is	going	to	spend	this	kind	of	money	until	it	is	clear	that	the
technology	really	works	and	that	consumers	will	pay	enough	for	the	new
applications.	The	fees	customers	will	pay	for	television	service,	including
video-on-demand,	won't	pay	for	building	the	highway.	To	finance	the
construction,	investors	will	have	to	believe	new	services	will	generate	almost
as	much	revenue	again	as	cable	television	does	today.	If	the	financial	return
on	the	highway	is	not	evident,	investment	money	isn't	going	to	materialize
and	construction	of	the	highway	will	be	delayed.	This	is	just	as	it	should	be.	It
would	be	ridiculous	to	do	the	buildout	until	private	firms	see	the	likelihood	of
a	return	on	their	investment.	I	think	investors	will	become	confident	of	such	a
return	as	innovators	bring	new	ideas	to	the	trials.	Once	investors	begin	to
understand	the	new	applications	and	services	and	the	potential	financial
payback	for	the	highway	infrastructure	is	proven,	there	will	be	little	trouble
raising	the	necessary	capital.	The	outlay	will	be	no	greater	than	that	for	other
infrastructures	we	take	for	granted.	The	roads,	water	mains,	sewers,	and

electrical	connections	that	run	to	a	house	each	costs	as	much.
I'm	optimistic.	The	growth	of	the	Internet	over	the	past	few	years	suggests
that	highway	applications	will	quickly	become	extremely	popular	and	justify
large	investments.	The	"Internet"	refers	to	a	group	of	computers	connected
together,	using	standard	"protocols"	(descriptions	of	technologies)	to
exchange	information.	It's	a	long	way	from	being	the	highway,	but	it's	the
closest	approximation	we	have	today,	and	will	evolve	into	the	highway.
The	popularity	of	the	Internet	is	the	most	important	single	development	in	the
world	of	computing	since	the	IBM	PC	was	introduced	in	1981.	The	PC
analogy	is	apt	for	many	reasons.	The	PC	wasn't	perfect.	Aspects	of	it	were
arbitrary	or	even	poor.	Despite	that,	its	popularity	grew	to	the	point	where	it
became	the	standard	for	applications	development.	Companies	that	tried	to
fight	the	PC	standards	often	had	good	reasons	for	doing	so,	but	their	efforts
failed	because	so	many	other	companies	were	continuing	to	work	to	try	and
improve	the	PC.
Today's	Internet	is	made	up	of	a	loose	collection	of	interconnecting
commercial	and	noncommercial	computer	networks,	including	on-line
information	services	to	which	users	subscribe.	Servers	are	scattered	around
the	world,	linked	to	the	Internet	on	a	variety	of	high-	and	low-capacity	paths.
Most	consumers	use	personal	computers	to	plug	into	the	system	through	the
telephone	network,	which	has	a	low	bandwidth======================================================== up	when	we	could	or	making	the	games	more
difficult.	A	friend	at	Lakeside	developed	a	program	in	BASIC	that	simulated
the	play	of	Monopoly.	BASIC	(Beginner's	All-purpose	Symbolic	Instruction

Code)	is,	as	its	name	suggests,	a	relatively	easy-to-learn	programming
language	we	used	to	develop	increasingly	complex	programs.	He	figured	out
how	to	make	the	computer	play	hundreds	of	games	really	fast.	We	fed	it
instructions	to	test	out	various	methods	of	play.	We	wanted	to	discover	what
strategies	won	most.	And—chug-a-chug,	chug-a-chug—the	computer	told	us.
Like	all	kids,	we	not	only	fooled	around	with	our	toys,	we	changed	them.	If
you've	ever	watched	a	child	with	a	cardboard	carton	and	a	box	of	crayons
create	a	spaceship	with	cool	control	panels,	or	listened	to	their	improvised
rules,	such	as	"Red	cars	can	jump	all	others,"	then	you	know	that	this	impulse
to	make	a	toy	do	more	is	at	the	heart	of	innovative	childhood	play.	It	is	also
the	essence	of	creativity.
Of	course,	in	those	days	we	were	just	goofing	around,	or	so	we	thought.	But
the	toy	we	had—well,	it	turned	out	to	be	some	toy.	A	few	of	us	at	Lakeside
refused	to	quit	playing	with	it.	In	the	minds	of	a	lot	of	people	at	school	we
became	linked	with	the	computer,	and	it	with	us.	I	was	asked	by	a	teacher	to
help	teach	computer	programming,	and	that	seemed	to	be	OK	With	everyone.
But	when	I	got	the	lead	in	the	school	play,	Black	Comedy,	some	students	were
heard	muttering,	"Why	did	they	pick	the	computer	guy?"	That's	still	the	way	I
sometimes	get	identified.
1968:	Bill	Gates	(Standing)	and	Paul	Allen	working	at	the	computer	terminal
at	Lakeside	School.
It	seems	there	was	a	whole	generation	of	us,	all	over	the	world,	who	dragged
that	favorite	toy	with	us	into	adulthood.	In	doing	so,	we	caused	a	kind	of
revolution—peaceful,	mainly—and	now	the	computer	has	taken	up	residence
in	our	offices	and	homes.	Computers	shrank	in	size	and	grew	in	power,	as
they	dropped	dramatically	in	price.	And	it	all	happened	fairly	quickly.	Not	as
quickly	as	I	once	thought,	but	still	pretty	fast.	Inexpensive	computer	chips
now	show	up	in	engines,	watches,	antilock	brakes,	facsimile	machines,
elevators,	gasoline	pumps,	cameras,	thermostats,	treadmills,	vending

machines,	burglar	alarms,	and	even	talking	greeting	cards.	School	kids	today
are	doing	amazing	things	with	personal	computers	that	are	no	larger	than
textbooks	but	outperform	the	largest	computers	of	a	generation	ago.
Now	that	computing	is	astoundingly	inexpensive	and	computers	inhabit	every
part	of	our	lives,	we	stand	at	the	brink	of	another	revolution.	This	one	will
involve	unprecedentedly	inexpensive	communication;	all	the	computers	will
join	together	to	communicate	with	us	and	for	us.	Interconnected	globally,	they
will	form	a	network,	which	is	being	called	the	information	highway.	A	direct
precursor	is	the	present	Internet,	which	is	a	group	of	computers	joined	and
exchanging	information	using	current	technology.
The	reach	and	use	of	the	new	network,	its	promise	and	perils,	is	the	subject	of
this	book.
Every	aspect	of	what's	about	to	happen	seems	exciting.	When	I	was	nineteen	I
caught	a	look	at	the	future,	based	my	career	on	what	I	saw,	and	I	turned	out	to
have	been	right.	But	the	Bill	Gates	of	nineteen	was	in	a	very	different	position
from	the	one	I'm	in	now.	In	those	days,	not	only	did	I	have	all	the	self-
assurance	of	a	smart	teenager,	but	also	nobody	was	watching	me,	and	if	I
failed—so	what?	Today	I'm	much	more	in	the	position	of	the	computer	giants
of	the	seventies,	but	I	hope	I've	learned	some	lessons	from	them.
At	one	time	I	thought	I	might	want	to	major	in	economics	in	college.	I
eventually	changed	my	mind,	but	in	a	way	my	whole	experience	with	the
computer	industry	has	been	a	series	of	economics	lessons.	I	saw	firsthand	the
effects	of	positive	spirals	and	inflexible	business	models.	I	watched	the	way
industry	standards	evolved.	I	witnessed	the	importance	of	compatibility	in
technology,	of	feedback,	and	of	constant	innovation.	And	I	think	we	may	be
about	to	witness	the	realization	of	Adam	Smith's	ideal	market,	at	last.
But	I'm	not	using	those	lessons	just	for	theorizing	about	this	future—I'm
betting	on	it.	Back	when	I	was	a	teenager,	I	envisioned	the	impact	that	low-
cost	computers	could	have.	"A	computer	on	every	desk	and	in	every	home"
became	Microsoft's	corporate	mission,	and	we	have	worked	to	help	make	that
possible.	Now	those	computers	are	being	connected	to	one	another,	and	we're
building	software—the	instructions	that	tell	the	computer	hardware	what	to
do—that	will	help	individuals	get	the	benefits	of	this	connected
communication	power.	It	is	impossible	to	predict	exactly	what	it	will	be	like
to	use	the	network.	We'll	communicate	with	it	through	a	variety	of	devices,
including	some	that	look	like	television	sets,	some	like	today's	PCs;	some	will
look	like	telephones,	and	some	will	be	the	size	and	something	like	the	shape

of	a	wallet.	And	at	the	heart	of	each	will	be	a	powerful	computer,	invisibly
connected	to	millions	of	others.
There	will	be	a	day,	not	far	distant,	when	you	will	be	able	to	conduct
business,	study,	explore	the	world	and	its	cultures,	call	up	any	great
entertainment,	make	friends,	attend	neighborhood	markets,	and	show	pictures
to	distant	relatives—without	leaving	your	desk	or	armchair.	You	won't	leave
your	network	connection	behind	at	the	office	or	in	the	classroom.	It	will	be
more	than	an	object	you	carry	or	an	appliance	you	purchase.	It	will	be	your
passport	into	a	new,	mediated	way	of	life.
Firsthand	experiences	and	pleasures	are	personal	and	unmediated.	No	one,	in
the	name	of	progress,	will	take	away	from	you	the	experience	of	lying	on	a
beach,	walking	in	the	woods,	sitting	in	a	comedy	club,	or	shopping	at	a	flea
market.	But	firsthand	experiences	aren't	always	rewarding.	For	example,
waiting	in	line	is	a	firsthand	experience,	but	we	have	been	trying	to	invent
ways	to	avoid	it	ever	since	we	first	queued	up.
Much	of	human	progress	has	come	about	because	someone	invented	a	better
and	more	powerful	tool.	Physical	tools	speed	up	work	and	rescue	people	from
hard	labor.	The	plow	and	the	wheel,	the	crane	and	the	bulldozer,	amplify	the
physical	abilities	of	those	using	them.
Informational	tools	are	symbolic	mediators	that	amplify	the	intellect	rather
than	the	muscle	of	their	users.	You're	having	a	mediated	experience	as	you
read	this	book:	We're	not	actually	in	the	same	room,	but	you	are	still	able	to
find	out	what's	on	my	mind.	A	great	deal	of	work	now	involves	decision
making	and	knowledge,	so	information	tools	have	become,	and	will	continue
increasingly	to	be,	the	focus	of	inventors.	Just	as	any	text	could	be
represented	with	an	arrangement	of	letters,	these	tools	allow	information	of
all	types	to	be	represented	in	digital	form,	in	a	pattern	of	electrical	pulses	that
is	easy	for	computers	to	deal	with.	The	world	today	has	more	than	100	million
computers	whose	purpose	is	to	manipulate	information.	They	are	helping	us
now	by	making	it	much	easier	to	store	and	transmit	information	that	is	already
in	digital	form,	but	in	the	near	future	they	will	allow	us	access	to	almost	any
information	in	the	world.
In	the	United	States,	the	connecting	of	all	these	computers	has	been	compared
to	another	massive	project:	the	gridding	of	the	country	with	interstate
highways,	which	began	during	the	Eisenhower	era.	This	is	why	the	new
network	was	dubbed	the	"information	superhighway."	The	term	was
popularized	by	then-senator	Al	Gore,	whose	father	sponsored	the	1956

Federal	Aid	Highway	Act.
The	highway	metaphor	isn't	quite	right	though.	The	phrase	suggests	landscape
and	geography,	a	distance	between	points,	and	embodies	the	implication	that
you	have	to	travel	to	get	from	one	place	to	another.	In	fact,	one	of	the	most
remarkable	aspects	of	this	new	communications	technology	is	that	it	will
eliminate	distance.	It	won't	matter	if	someone	you're	contacting	is	in	the	next
room	or	on	another	continent,	because	this	highly	mediated	network	will	be
unconstrained	by	miles	and	kilometers.
The	term	"highway"	also	suggests	that	everyone	is	driving	and	following	the
same	route.	This	network	is	more	like	a	lot	of	country	lanes	where	everyone
can	look	at	or	do	whatever	his	individual	interests	suggest.	Another
implication	is	that	perhaps	it	should	be	built	by	the	government,	which	I	think
would	be	a	major	mistake	in	most	countries.	But	the	real	problem	is	that	the
metaphor	emphasizes	the	infrastructure	of	the	endeavor	rather	than	its
applications.	At	Microsoft	we	talk	about	"Information	At	Your	Fingertips,"
which	spotlights	a	benefit	rather	than	the	network	itself.	A	different	metaphor
that	I	think	comes	closer	to	describing	a	lot	of	the	activities	that	will	take
place	is	that	of	the	ultimate	market.	Markets	from	trading	floors	to	malls	are
fundamental	to	human	society,	and	I	believe	this	new	one	will	eventually	be
the	world's	central	department	store.	It	will	be	where	we	social	animals	will
sell,	trade,	invest,	haggle,	pick	stuff	up,	argue,	meet	new	people,	and	hang
out.	When	you	hear	the	phrase	"information	highway,"	rather	than	seeing	a
road,	imagine	a	marketplace	or	an	exchange.	Think	of	the	hustle	and	bustle	of
the	New	York	Stock	Exchange	or	a	farmers'	market	or	of	a	bookstore	full	of
people	looking	for	fascinating	stories	and	information.	All	manner	of	human
activity	takes	place,	from	billion-dollar	deals	to	flirtations.	Many	transactions
will	involve	money,	tendered	in	digital	form	rather	than	currency.	Digital
information	of	all	kinds,	not	just	as	money,	will	be	the	new	medium	of
exchange	in	this	market.
The	global	information	market	will	be	huge	and	will	combine	all	the	various
ways	human	goods,	services,	and	ideas	are	exchanged.	On	a	practical	level,
this	will	give	you	broader	choices	about	most	things,	including	how	you	earn
and	invest,	what	you	buy	and	how	much	you	pay	for	it,	who	your	friends	are
and	how	you	spend	your	time	with	them,	and	where	and	how	securely	you
and	your	family	live.	Your	workplace	and	your	idea	of	what	it======================================================== he	telegraph	and,	later,	ticker	services	was	to	deliver	racetrack
results.	Satellite	television	broadcasts	contributed	to	off-track	betting.	Slot
machine	designs	have	always	tracked	the	progress	in	mechanical	calculators
and,	more	recently,	computers.	The	information	highway	will	have	an	even
more	significant	effect	on	both	legal	and	illegal	gambling.	We	are	sure	to	see
current	odds	posted	on	servers,	and	e-mail	as	a	way	to	make	bets.	Electronic
currency	will	be	used	to	place	bets	and	make	payoffs.
Gambling	is	a	highly	regulated	business,	so	it's	difficult	to	predict	what	forms
will	be	allowed	on	the	highway.	Maybe	air	travelers	who	are	stuck	on	a	plane
with	nothing	else	to	do	will	be	able	to	gamble	with	each	other.	Perhaps
gambling	games	will	have	to	provide	full	disclosure	of	the	odds	against	you.
The	technology	will	allow	people	to	bet	on	anything	they	choose	to,	and	if	it's
legal	someone	is	sure	to	set	up	a	service.	It	will	be	possible	to	bring	horse
races,	dog	races,	or	any	other	kind	of	live	sports	event	into	your	home	in	real-
time,	so	some	of	the	excitement	of	the	track	or	stadium	will	be	made
available.	Many	governments	raise	revenue	with	lotteries	and	in	the	future
could	provide	plug-into	electronic	lotteries.	The	highway	will	make	gambling
far	more	difficult	to	control	than	it	is	today.
We	can	be	sure	we'll	use	the	highway's	unique	capabilities	to	help	us	find
communities	of	others	with	common	interests.	Today	you	may	belong	to	the
local	ski	club	so	you	can	meet	other	people	who	like	to	ski.	You	may	also

subscribe	to	Recreational	Skier	so	you	can	get	information	about	new	ski
products.	Tomorrow	you	will	be	able	to	join	such	a	community	on	the
information	highway.	It	will	not	only	provide	you	with	up-to-date	information
about	weather	conditions	instantly,	but	will	also	be	a	way	for	you	to	stay	in
touch	with	other	enthusiasts.
The	greater	the	number	of	people	who	join	an	electronic	community,	the	more
valuable	it	will	be	to	everyone	who	uses	it.	Most	of	the	world's	skiing
enthusiasts	will	participate,	at	least	occasionally.	In	time,	the	world's	best
information	about	skis	and	skiing	will	be	available	electronically.	If	you	join,
you	will	find	the	best	slopes	near	Munich,	the	lowest	price	anywhere	for	a
particular	set	of	poles,	and	the	latest	news	and	advertising	about	all	ski-related
products.	If	people	have	taken	photos	or	made	videos	of	a	race	or	a	trip,	they
can	share	them.	Books	about	skiing	will	be	reviewed	by	anyone	who	has	an
opinion.	Laws	and	safety	practices	will	be	debated.	Instructional	videos	will
be	available	on	a	moment's	notice.	These	multi-media	documents	will	be
available	free	or	for	a	charge,	to	one	person	or	to	hundreds	of	thousands.	This
community	on	the	information	highway	will	become	the	place	to	go	if	you	are
interested	in	skiing.
If	you	want	to	get	yourself	in	better	physical	condition	before	trying	a	hard
slope,	you	might	find	training	more	fun	if	you	are	in	close	electronic	touch
with	a	dozen	other	people	who	are	your	size,	weight,	and	age,	and	who	share
your	specific	goals	for	exercise	and	weight	reduction.	You	would	have	less	to
be	self-conscious	about	in	an	exercise	program	in	which	everyone	else	is	like
you.	And	if	you	still	were	uncomfortable,	you	could	turn	your	video	camera
off.	Members	of	this	community	could	get	together	to	encourage	each	other
and	even	work	out	at	the	same	time.
The	community	of	skiers	is	quite	large	and	easy	to	define.	On	the	information
highway	there	will	be	applications	to	help	you	find	people	and	information
that	intersect	with	your	interests,	no	matter	how	specific.	If	you're	thinking	of
visiting	Berlin,	the	highway	will	make	vast	amounts	of	historical,	touristic,
and	sociological	information	available.	But	there	will	also	be	applications	to
let	you	find	fellow	enthusiasts	there.	You'll	be	invited	to	register	your	interests
in	databases	that	can	be	analyzed	by	the	applications.	These	applications	will
even	suggest	people	you	might	like	to	meet.	If	you	have	a	collection	of
Venetian	glass	paperweights,	you'll	probably	choose	to	be	a	member	of	one	or
more	world	communities	of	people	who	share	this	interest.	Some	of	those
people	may	live	in	Berlin	and	have	collections	they'd	be	delighted	to	show
you.	If	you	have	a	ten-year-old	daughter	you'll	be	taking	with	you	to	Berlin,
you	might	query	whether	there	is	anyone	in	Berlin	who	has	a	ten-year-old,

shares	your	language,	and	is	willing	to	spend	time	with	you	during	your	visit.
If	you	find	two	or	three	suitable	people,	you	have	created	a	small—and
probably	temporary—community	of	interest.
I	recently	visited	Africa	and	took	a	lot	of	pictures	of	chimpanzees.	If	the
information	highway	were	available	now,	I	would	put	out	a	message	saying
that	if	anyone	else	from	the	safari	wanted	to	exchange	photographs,	he	or	she
should	put	them	on	the	same	bulletin	board	where	I	had	posted	my
chimpanzee	photos.	I	would	be	able	to	set	it	up	so	only	fellow	safari	members
could	have	access	to	that	bulletin	board.
Already,	thousands	of	newsgroups	on	the	Internet	and	countless	forums	on
commercial	on-line	services	have	been	set	up	as	locations	for	small
communities	to	share	information.	For	example,	on	the	Internet	there	are
lively	text-based	discussion	groups	with	such	names	as	alt.agriculture.fruit,
alt.animals.raccoons,	alt.asian-movies,	alt.coffee,	bionet.-
biology.cardiovascular,	soc.religion.islam,	and	talk.philosophy,	misc.	But
these	topics	aren't	nearly	so	specialized	as	some	of	the	subjects	I	expect
electronic	communities	will	address	in	the	future.	Some	communities	will	be
very	local,	and	some	will	be	global.	You	won't	be	overwhelmed	by	the
number	of	choices	of	communities	any	more	than	you	are	now	by	the
telephone	system.	You'll	look	for	a	group	that	interests	you	in	general,	and
then	you'll	search	through	it	for	the	small	segment	you	want	to	join.	I	can
imagine	the	administration	of	every	municipality,	for	example,	becoming	the
focus	of	an	electronic	community.
Sometimes	I	get	annoyed	by	a	traffic	light	near	my	office	that	always	stays
red	longer	than	I	think	it	should.	I	could	write	a	letter	to	the	city,	telling	the
folks	who	program	the	lights	that	the	timing	isn't	optimal,	but	that	would	just
be	one	cranky	letter.	On	the	other	hand,	if	I	could	find	the	"community"	of
people	who	drive	the	route	I	do,	we	could	send	a	strong	complaint	to	the	city.
I	could	find	these	others	by	sending	a	message	to	people	who	live	near	me	or
by	posting	a	message	on	a	community	affairs	bulletin	board	that	showed	a
map	of	the	intersection	accompanied	by	the	message:	"During	the	morning
rush	hours	hardly	anyone	goes	left	at	this	intersection.	Does	anyone	else	think
the	cycle	should	be	shortened?"	Anyone	who	agreed	with	me	could	add	to	my
message.	It	would	make	it	easier	to	fight	City	Hall.
As	on-line	communities	grow	in	importance,	they	will	increasingly	be	where
people	will	turn	to	find	out	what	the	public	is	really	thinking.	People	like	to
know	what's	popular,	which	movies	friends	are	watching,	and	what	news
others	think	is	interesting.	I	want	to	read	the	same	"newspaper	front	page"	as

those	I'm	going	to	meet	with	later	today,	so	we	can	have	something	in
common	to	talk	about.	You	will	be	able	to	see	what	places	on	the	network	are
being	looked	at	often.	There	will	be	all	sorts	of	"hot	lists"	of	the	coolest
places.
Electronic	communities,	with	all	the	information	they	reveal,	will	also	create
problems.	Some	institutions	will	have	to	make	big	changes	as	on-line
communities	gain	power.	Doctors	and	medical	researchers	are	already	having
to	contend	with	patients	who	explore	medical	literature	electronically	and
compare	notes	with	other	patients	who	have	the	same	serious	disease.	Word
of	unorthodox	or	unapproved	treatments	spreads	fast	in	these	communities.
Some	patients	in	drug	trials	have	been	able	to	figure	out,	by	communicating
with	other	patients	in	the	trial,	that	they	are	receiving	a	placebo	rather	than	the
real	medication.	The	discovery	has	prompted	some	of	them	to	drop	out	of	the
trials	or	to	seek	alternate,	simultaneous	remedies.	This	undermines	the
research,	but	it	is	hard	to	fault	patients	who	are	trying	to	save	their	lives.
It's	not	just	medical	researchers	who	will	be	affected	by	so	much	access	to
information.	One	of	the	biggest	concerns	is	parents	having	to	contend	with
children	who	can	find	out	about	almost	anything	they	want	to,	right	from	a
home	information	appliance.	Already,	rating	systems	are	being	designed	to
allow	parental	control	over	what	kids	have	access	to.	This	could	become	a
major	political	issue	if	the	information	publishers	don't	handle	it	properly.
On	balance,	the	advantages	will	greatly	outweigh	the	problems.	The	more
information	there	is	available,	the	more	choices	we	will	have.	Today,	devoted
fans	plan	their	evenings	around	the	broadcast	times	of	their	favorite	television
shows,	but	once	video-on-demand	gives	us	the	opportunity	to	watch	whatever
we	like	whenever	we	like,	family	or	social	activities,	rather	than	a
broadcaster's	time	slots,	will	control	our	entertainment	schedules.	Before	the
telephone,	people	thought	of	their	neighbors	as	their	only	community.	Almost
everything	was	done	with	others	who	lived	nearby.	The	telephone	and	the
automobile	allowed	us	to	stretch	out.	We	may	visit	face-to-face	less	often	than
we	did	a	century	ago	because	we	can	pick	up	the	telephone,	but	this	doesn't
mean	we	have	become	isolated.	It	has	made	it	easier	for	us	to	talk	to	each
other	and	stay	in	touch.	Sometimes	it	may	seem	too	easy	for	people	to	reach
you.
A	decade	from	now,	you	may	shake	your	head	that	there	was	ever	a	time
when	any	stranger	or	a	wrong	number	could	interrupt	you	at	home	with	a
phone	call.	Cellular	phones,	pagers,	and	fax	machines	have	already	made	it
necessary	for	businesspeople	to	make	explicit	decisions	that	used	to	be

implicit.	A	decade	ago	we	didn't	have	to	decide	whether	we	wanted	to	receive
documents	at	home	or	take	calls	on	the	road.	It	was	easy	to	withdraw	to	your
house,	or	certainly	to	you======================================================== up	when	we	could	or	making	the	games	more
difficult.	A	friend	at	Lakeside	developed	a	program	in	BASIC	that	simulated
the	play	of	Monopoly.	BASIC	(Beginner's	All-purpose	Symbolic	Instruction

Code)	is,	as	its	name	suggests,	a	relatively	easy-to-learn	programming
language	we	used	to	develop	increasingly	complex	programs.	He	figured	out
how	to	make	the	computer	play	hundreds	of	games	really	fast.	We	fed	it
instructions	to	test	out	various	methods	of	play.	We	wanted	to	discover	what
strategies	won	most.	And—chug-a-chug,	chug-a-chug—the	computer	told	us.
Like	all	kids,	we	not	only	fooled	around	with	our	toys,	we	changed	them.	If
you've	ever	watched	a	child	with	a	cardboard	carton	and	a	box	of	crayons
create	a	spaceship	with	cool	control	panels,	or	listened	to	their	improvised
rules,	such	as	"Red	cars	can	jump	all	others,"	then	you	know	that	this	impulse
to	make	a	toy	do	more	is	at	the	heart	of	innovative	childhood	play.	It	is	also
the	essence	of	creativity.
Of	course,	in	those	days	we	were	just	goofing	around,	or	so	we	thought.	But
the	toy	we	had—well,	it	turned	out	to	be	some	toy.	A	few	of	us	at	Lakeside
refused	to	quit	playing	with	it.	In	the	minds	of	a	lot	of	people	at	school	we
became	linked	with	the	computer,	and	it	with	us.	I	was	asked	by	a	teacher	to
help	teach	computer	programming,	and	that	seemed	to	be	OK	With	everyone.
But	when	I	got	the	lead	in	the	school	play,	Black	Comedy,	some	students	were
heard	muttering,	"Why	did	they	pick	the	computer	guy?"	That's	still	the	way	I
sometimes	get	identified.
1968:	Bill	Gates	(Standing)	and	Paul	Allen	working	at	the	computer	terminal
at	Lakeside	School.
It	seems	there	was	a	whole	generation	of	us,	all	over	the	world,	who	dragged
that	favorite	toy	with	us	into	adulthood.	In	doing	so,	we	caused	a	kind	of
revolution—peaceful,	mainly—and	now	the	computer	has	taken	up	residence
in	our	offices	and	homes.	Computers	shrank	in	size	and	grew	in	power,	as
they	dropped	dramatically	in	price.	And	it	all	happened	fairly	quickly.	Not	as
quickly	as	I	once	thought,	but	still	pretty	fast.	Inexpensive	computer	chips
now	show	up	in	engines,	watches,	antilock	brakes,	facsimile	machines,
elevators,	gasoline	pumps,	cameras,	thermostats,	treadmills,	vending

machines,	burglar	alarms,	and	even	talking	greeting	cards.	School	kids	today
are	doing	amazing	things	with	personal	computers	that	are	no	larger	than
textbooks	but	outperform	the	largest	computers	of	a	generation	ago.
Now	that	computing	is	astoundingly	inexpensive	and	computers	inhabit	every
part	of	our	lives,	we	stand	at	the	brink	of	another	revolution.	This	one	will
involve	unprecedentedly	inexpensive	communication;	all	the	computers	will
join	together	to	communicate	with	us	and	for	us.	Interconnected	globally,	they
will	form	a	network,	which	is	being	called	the	information	highway.	A	direct
precursor	is	the	present	Internet,	which	is	a	group	of	computers	joined	and
exchanging	information	using	current	technology.
The	reach	and	use	of	the	new	network,	its	promise	and	perils,	is	the	subject	of
this	book.
Every	aspect	of	what's	about	to	happen	seems	exciting.	When	I	was	nineteen	I
caught	a	look	at	the	future,	based	my	career	on	what	I	saw,	and	I	turned	out	to
have	been	right.	But	the	Bill	Gates	of	nineteen	was	in	a	very	different	position
from	the	one	I'm	in	now.	In	those	days,	not	only	did	I	have	all	the	self-
assurance	of	a	smart	teenager,	but	also	nobody	was	watching	me,	and	if	I
failed—so	what?	Today	I'm	much	more	in	the	position	of	the	computer	giants
of	the	seventies,	but	I	hope	I've	learned	some	lessons	from	them.
At	one	time	I	thought	I	might	want	to	major	in	economics	in	college.	I
eventually	changed	my	mind,	but	in	a	way	my	whole	experience	with	the
computer	industry	has	been	a	series	of	economics	lessons.	I	saw	firsthand	the
effects	of	positive	spirals	and	inflexible	business	models.	I	watched	the	way
industry	standards	evolved.	I	witnessed	the	importance	of	compatibility	in
technology,	of	feedback,	and	of	constant	innovation.	And	I	think	we	may	be
about	to	witness	the	realization	of	Adam	Smith's	ideal	market,	at	last.
But	I'm	not	using	those	lessons	just	for	theorizing	about	this	future—I'm
betting	on	it.	Back	when	I	was	a	teenager,	I	envisioned	the	impact	that	low-
cost	computers	could	have.	"A	computer	on	every	desk	and	in	every	home"
became	Microsoft's	corporate	mission,	and	we	have	worked	to	help	make	that
possible.	Now	those	computers	are	being	connected	to	one	another,	and	we're
building	software—the	instructions	that	tell	the	computer	hardware	what	to
do—that	will	help	individuals	get	the	benefits	of	this	connected
communication	power.	It	is	impossible	to	predict	exactly	what	it	will	be	like
to	use	the	network.	We'll	communicate	with	it	through	a	variety	of	devices,
including	some	that	look	like	television	sets,	some	like	today's	PCs;	some	will
look	like	telephones,	and	some	will	be	the	size	and	something	like	the	shape

of	a	wallet.	And	at	the	heart	of	each	will	be	a	powerful	computer,	invisibly
connected	to	millions	of	others.
There	will	be	a	day,	not	far	distant,	when	you	will	be	able	to	conduct
business,	study,	explore	the	world	and	its	cultures,	call	up	any	great
entertainment,	make	friends,	attend	neighborhood	markets,	and	show	pictures
to	distant	relatives—without	leaving	your	desk	or	armchair.	You	won't	leave
your	network	connection	behind	at	the	office	or	in	the	classroom.	It	will	be
more	than	an	object	you	carry	or	an	appliance	you	purchase.	It	will	be	your
passport	into	a	new,	mediated	way	of	life.
Firsthand	experiences	and	pleasures	are	personal	and	unmediated.	No	one,	in
the	name	of	progress,	will	take	away	from	you	the	experience	of	lying	on	a
beach,	walking	in	the	woods,	sitting	in	a	comedy	club,	or	shopping	at	a	flea
market.	But	firsthand	experiences	aren't	always	rewarding.	For	example,
waiting	in	line	is	a	firsthand	experience,	but	we	have	been	trying	to	invent
ways	to	avoid	it	ever	since	we	first	queued	up.
Much	of	human	progress	has	come	about	because	someone	invented	a	better
and	more	powerful	tool.	Physical	tools	speed	up	work	and	rescue	people	from
hard	labor.	The	plow	and	the	wheel,	the	crane	and	the	bulldozer,	amplify	the
physical	abilities	of	those	using	them.
Informational	tools	are	symbolic	mediators	that	amplify	the	intellect	rather
than	the	muscle	of	their	users.	You're	having	a	mediated	experience	as	you
read	this	book:	We're	not	actually	in	the	same	room,	but	you	are	still	able	to
find	out	what's	on	my	mind.	A	great	deal	of	work	now	involves	decision
making	and	knowledge,	so	information	tools	have	become,	and	will	continue
increasingly	to	be,	the	focus	of	inventors.	Just	as	any	text	could	be
represented	with	an	arrangement	of	letters,	these	tools	allow	information	of
all	types	to	be	represented	in	digital	form,	in	a	pattern	of	electrical	pulses	that
is	easy	for	computers	to	deal	with.	The	world	today	has	more	than	100	million
computers	whose	purpose	is	to	manipulate	information.	They	are	helping	us
now	by	making	it	much	easier	to	store	and	transmit	information	that	is	already
in	digital	form,	but	in	the	near	future	they	will	allow	us	access	to	almost	any
information	in	the	world.
In	the	United	States,	the	connecting	of	all	these	computers	has	been	compared
to	another	massive	project:	the	gridding	of	the	country	with	interstate
highways,	which	began	during	the	Eisenhower	era.	This	is	why	the	new
network	was	dubbed	the	"information	superhighway."	The	term	was
popularized	by	then-senator	Al	Gore,	whose	father	sponsored	the	1956

Federal	Aid	Highway	Act.
The	highway	metaphor	isn't	quite	right	though.	The	phrase	suggests	landscape
and	geography,	a	distance	between	points,	and	embodies	the	implication	that
you	have	to	travel	to	get	from	one	place	to	another.	In	fact,	one	of	the	most
remarkable	aspects	of	this	new	communications	technology	is	that	it	will
eliminate	distance.	It	won't	matter	if	someone	you're	contacting	is	in	the	next
room	or	on	another	continent,	because	this	highly	mediated	network	will	be
unconstrained	by	miles	and	kilometers.
The	term	"highway"	also	suggests	that	everyone	is	driving	and	following	the
same	route.	This	network	is	more	like	a	lot	of	country	lanes	where	everyone
can	look	at	or	do	whatever	his	individual	interests	suggest.	Another
implication	is	that	perhaps	it	should	be	built	by	the	government,	which	I	think
would	be	a	major	mistake	in	most	countries.	But	the	real	problem	is	that	the
metaphor	emphasizes	the	infrastructure	of	the	endeavor	rather	than	its
applications.	At	Microsoft	we	talk	about	"Information	At	Your	Fingertips,"
which	spotlights	a	benefit	rather	than	the	network	itself.	A	different	metaphor
that	I	think	comes	closer	to	describing	a	lot	of	the	activities	that	will	take
place	is	that	of	the	ultimate	market.	Markets	from	trading	floors	to	malls	are
fundamental	to	human	society,	and	I	believe	this	new	one	will	eventually	be
the	world's	central	department	store.	It	will	be	where	we	social	animals	will
sell,	trade,	invest,	haggle,	pick	stuff	up,	argue,	meet	new	people,	and	hang
out.	When	you	hear	the	phrase	"information	highway,"	rather	than	seeing	a
road,	imagine	a	marketplace	or	an	exchange.	Think	of	the	hustle	and	bustle	of
the	New	York	Stock	Exchange	or	a	farmers'	market	or	of	a	bookstore	full	of
people	looking	for	fascinating	stories	and	information.	All	manner	of	human
activity	takes	place,	from	billion-dollar	deals	to	flirtations.	Many	transactions
will	involve	money,	tendered	in	digital	form	rather	than	currency.	Digital
information	of	all	kinds,	not	just	as	money,	will	be	the	new	medium	of
exchange	in	this	market.
The	global	information	market	will	be	huge	and	will	combine	all	the	various
ways	human	goods,	services,	and	ideas	are	exchanged.	On	a	practical	level,
this	will	give	you	broader	choices	about	most	things,	including	how	you	earn
and	invest,	what	you	buy	and	how	much	you	pay	for	it,	who	your	friends	are
and	how	you	spend	your	time	with	them,	and	where	and	how	securely	you
and	your	family	live.	Your	workplace	and	your	idea	of	what	it======================================================== ighway.	We	are	providing	software	tools	to	a	number	of	hardware	companies
building	new	applications.	Many	media	and	communications	companies	from
around	the	world	will	be	working	with	us	and	observing	the	ways	customers
respond	to	the	applications.	It	will	be	critical	to	listen	to	customer	feedback.
You	too	will	be	able	to	read	about	the	results	of	the	highway	trials.	Are	people
gravitating	toward	new	types	of	multiplayer	games?	Are	they	socializing	in
new	ways?	Are	they	working	together	across	the	network?	Are	they	shopping
in	the	new	marketplace?	Are	exciting	applications	you	never	would	have
imagined	coming	along?	Are	people	willing	to	pay	for	these	new	capabilities?
The	answers	to	these	questions	are	the	key	to	how	the	Information	Age
develops.	Mergers	and	mania	are	fun	to	watch.	But	if	you	want	to	know	how
the	race	to	build	the	information	highway	is	really	going,	keep	your	eye	on
PCs	connected	to	the	Internet,	and	on	the	software	applications	that	are
popular	in	highway	trials.	At	least	that's	what	I'm	going	to	do.

12
CRITICAL	ISSUES
This	is	an	exciting	time	in	the	Information	Age.	It	is	the	very	beginning.
Almost	everywhere	I	go,	whether	to	speak	to	a	group	or	to	have	dinner	with
friends,	questions	come	up	about	how	information	technology	will	change	our
lives.	People	want	to	understand	how	it	will	make	the	future	different.	Will	it
make	our	lives	better	or	worse?
I've	already	said	I'm	an	optimist,	and	I'm	optimistic	about	the	impact	of	the
new	technology.	It	will	enhance	leisure	time	and	enrich	culture	by	expanding
the	distribution	of	information.	It	will	help	relieve	pressures	on	urban	areas	by
enabling	individuals	to	work	from	home	or	remote-site	offices.	It	will	relieve
pressure	on	natural	resources	because	increasing	numbers	of	products	will	be
able	to	take	the	form	of	bits	rather	than	of	manufactured	goods.	It	will	give	us
more	control	over	our	lives	and	allow	experiences	and	products	to	be	custom
tailored	to	our	interests.	Citizens	of	the	information	society	will	enjoy	new
opportunities	for	productivity,	learning,	and	entertainment.	Countries	that
move	boldly	and	in	concert	with	each	other	will	enjoy	economic	rewards.
Whole	new	markets	will	emerge,	and	a	myriad	new	opportunities	for
employment	will	be	created.
When	measured	by	decades,	the	economy	is	always	in	upheaval.	For	the	past
few	hundred	years,	every	generation	has	found	more	efficient	ways	of	getting
work	done,	and	the	cumulative	benefits	have	been	enormous.	The	average
person	today	enjoys	a	much	better	life	than	the	nobility	did	a	few	centuries
ago.	It	would	be	great	to	have	a	king's	land,	but	what	about	his	lice?	Medical
advances	alone	have	greatly	increased	life	spans	and	improved	standards	of
living.
Henry	Ford,	in	the	first	part	of	the	twentieth	century,	was	the	automotive
industry,	but	your	car	is	superior	to	anything	he	ever	drove.	It's	safer,	more
reliable,	and	surely	has	a	better	sound	system.	This	pattern	of	improvement
isn't	going	to	change.	Advancing	productivity	propels	societies	forward,	and	it
is	only	a	matter	of	time	before	the	average	person	in	a	developed	country	will
be	"richer"	in	many	ways	than	anyone	is	today.
Just	because	I'm	optimistic	doesn't	mean	I	don't	have	concerns	about	what	is
going	to	happen	to	all	of	us.	As	with	all	major	changes,	the	benefits	of	the

information	society	will	carry	costs.	There	will	be	dislocations	in	some
business	sectors	that	will	create	a	need	for	worker	retraining.	The	availability
of	virtually	free	communications	and	computing	will	alter	the	relationships	of
nations,	and	of	socioeconomic	groups	within	nations.	The	power	and
versatility	of	digital	technology	will	raise	new	concerns	about	individual
privacy,	commercial	confidentiality,	and	national	security.	There	are,
moreover,	equity	issues	that	will	have	to	be	addressed.	The	information
society	should	serve	all	of	its	citizens,	not	only	the	technically	sophisticated
and	economically	privileged.	In	short,	a	range	of	important	issues	confronts
us.	I	don't	necessarily	have	the	solutions,	but,	as	I	started	off	the	book	saying,
now	is	a	good	time	for	a	broad	discussion.	Technological	progress	will	force
all	of	society	to	confront	tough	new	problems,	only	some	of	which	we	can
foresee.	The	pace	of	technological	change	is	so	fast	that	sometimes	it	seems
the	world	will	be	completely	different	from	one	day	to	the	next.	It	won't.	But
we	should	be	prepared	for	change.	Societies	are	going	to	be	asked	to	make
hard	choices	in	such	areas	as	universal	availability,	investment	in	education,
regulation,	and	the	balance	between	individual	privacy	and	community
security.
While	it	is	important	that	we	start	thinking	about	the	future,	we	should	guard
against	the	impulse	to	take	hasty	action.	We	can	ask	only	the	most	general
kinds	of	questions	today,	so	it	doesn't	make	sense	to	come	up	with	detailed,
specific	regulations.	We've	got	a	good	number	of	years	to	observe	the	course
of	the	coming	revolution,	and	we	should	use	that	time	to	make	intelligent
rather	than	reflexive	decisions.
Perhaps	the	most	widespread	and	personal	anxiety	is,	"How	will	I	fit	into	the
evolving	economy?"	Men	and	women	are	worried	that	their	own	jobs	will
become	obsolete,	that	they	won't	be	able	to	adapt	to	new	ways	of	working,
that	their	children	will	get	into	industries	that	will	cease	to	exist,	or	that
economic	upheaval	will	create	wholesale	unemployment,	especially	among
older	workers.	These	are	legitimate	concerns.	Entire	professions	and
industries	will	fade.	But	new	ones	will	flourish.	This	will	be	happening	over
the	next	two	or	three	decades,	which	is	fast	by	historical	standards,	but	may
turn	out	to	be	no	more	disruptive	than	the	pace	at	which	the	microprocessor
revolution	brought	about	its	changes	in	the	workplace,	or	the	upheavals	in	the
airline,	trucking,	and	banking	industries	over	the	last	decade.
Although	the	microprocessor	and	the	personal	computer	that	it	enabled	have
altered	and	even	eliminated	some	jobs	and	companies,	it	is	hard	to	find	any
large	sector	of	the	economy	that	has	been	negatively	affected.	Mainframe,
mini-computer,	and	typewriter	companies	have	downsized,	but	the	computer

industry	as	a	whole	has	grown,	with	a	substantial	net	increase	in	employment.
As	big	computer	companies	such	as	IBM	or	DEC	have	laid	people	off,	many
of	those	workers	have	found	employment	within	the	industry—usually	at
companies	doing	something	related	to	PCs.
Outside	the	computer	industry	it	is	also	hard	to	find	a	complete	business
sector	hurt	by	the	PC.	There	are	some	typesetters	who	were	displaced	by
desktop-publishing	programs—but	for	every	worker	in	that	situation	there	are
several	whose	jobs	desktop	publishing	created.	All	the	change	hasn't	always
been	good	for	all	the	people,	but	as	revolutions	go,	the	one	set	in	motion	by
the	personal	computer	has	been	remarkably	benign.
Some	people	worry	that	there	are	only	a	finite	number	of	jobs	in	the	world,
and	that	each	time	a	job	goes	away	someone	is	left	stranded	with	no	further
purpose.	Fortunately,	this	is	not	how	the	economy	works.	The	economy	is	a
vast	interconnected	system	in	which	any	resource	that	is	freed	up	becomes
available	to	another	area	of	the	economy	that	finds	it	most	valuable.	Each
time	a	job	is	made	unnecessary,	the	person	who	was	filling	that	job	is	freed	to
do	something	else.	The	net	result	is	that	more	gets	done,	raising	the	overall
standard	of	living	in	the	long	run.	If	there	is	a	general	downturn	across	the
economy—a	recession	or	a	depression—there	is	a	cyclical	loss	of	jobs,	but
the	shifts	that	have	come	about	as	a	result	of	technology	have	tended,	if
anything,	to	create	jobs.
Job	categories	change	constantly	in	an	evolving	economy.	Once	all	telephone
calls	were	made	through	an	operator.	When	I	was	a	child,	long-distance	calls
from	our	home	were	made	by	dialing	"0"	and	giving	an	operator	the	number,
and	when	I	was	a	teenager,	many	companies	still	employed	in-house
telephone	operators	who	routed	calls	by	plugging	cables	into	receptacles.
Today	there	are	comparatively	few	telephone	operators,	even	though	the
volume	of	calls	is	greater	than	ever.	Automation	has	taken	over.
Before	the	Industrial	Revolution,	most	people	lived	or	worked	on	farms.
Growing	food	was	mankind's	main	preoccupation.	If	someone	had	predicted
back	then	that	within	a	couple	of	centuries	only	a	tiny	percentage	of	the
population	would	be	needed	to	produce	food,	all	those	farmers	would	have
worried	about	what	everyone	would	do	for	a	living.	The	great	majority	of	the
501	job	categories	recognized	in	1990	by	the	U.S.	Census	Bureau	didn't	even
exist	fifty	years	earlier.	Although	we	can't	predict	new	job	categories,	most
will	relate	to	unmet	needs	in	education,	social	services,	and	leisure
opportunities.

We	know	that	when	the	highway	connects	buyers	and	sellers	directly,	it	will
put	pressure	on	people	who	are	currently	acting	as	middlemen.	This	is	the
same	sort	of	pressure	that	mass	merchants	such	as	WalMart,	Price-Costco,
and	other	companies	with	particularly	efficient	consumer-merchandising
approaches	have	already	put	on	more	traditional	stores.	When	Wal-Mart
moves	into	a	rural	area,	the	merchants	in	the	local	towns	feel	the	pinch.	Some
survive,	some	do	not,	but	the	net	economic	effect	on	the	region	is	modest.	We
may	regret	the	cultural	ramifications,	but	warehouse	stores	and	fast-food
chains	are	thriving	because	consumers,	who	vote	with	their	dollars,	tend	to
support	outlets	that	pass	their	productivity	savings	along	in	the	form	of	lower
prices.
Reducing	the	number	of	middlemen	is	another	way	of	lowering	costs.	It	will
also	cause	economic	shifts,	but	no	faster	than	the	changes	happened	in
retailing	in	the	last	decade.	It	will	take	many	years	for	the	highway	to	be
utilized	so	widely	for	shopping	that	there	will	be	significantly	fewer
middlemen.	There	is	plenty	of	time	to	prepare.	The	jobs	those	displaced
middlemen	change	to	might	not	even	have	been	thought	of	yet.	We'll	have	to
wait	and	see	what	kinds	of	creative	work	the	new	economy	devises.	But	as======================================================== of	money	and	help	the	environment	by
reducing	peak	loads.

Not	all	our	experiments	in	the	guest	cottage	have	been	successful.	For
example,	I	had	installed	speakers	that	descended	from	the	ceiling	when
needed.	The	speaker	enclosures	were	to	be	suspended	away	from	walls,	in	an
optimal	acoustical	position.	But	after	trying	this	out	in	the	cottage,	it
reminded	me	too	much	of	James	Bond	gadgets,	so	in	the	main	house	we've
settled	for	concealed	speakers.
A	house	that	tries	to	guess	what	you	want	has	to	be	right	often	enough	that
you	don't	get	annoyed	by	miscalculations.	I	went	to	a	party	at	a	house	that	had
a	computerized	home-control	system.	The	lights	were	set	to	go	out	at	ten-
thirty,	which	is	when	the	owner	usually	went	to	bed.	At	ten-thirty	the	party
was	still	going	on,	but	sure	enough,	the	lights	went	out.	The	host	was	away
for	what	seemed	like	a	long	time	trying	to	get	them	back	on.	Some	office
buildings	use	motion	detectors	to	control	the	lighting	in	each	room.	If	there
hasn't	been	any	major	activity	for	a	few	minutes,	the	lights	go	off.	People	who
sit	nearly	motionless	at	their	desks	learn	to	wave	their	arms	periodically.
It	isn't	that	hard	to	turn	lights	on	and	off	yourself.	Light	switches	are
extremely	reliable	and	very	easy	to	use,	so	you	run	a	risk	whenever	you	start
replacing	them	with	computer-controlled	devices.	You	have	to	install	systems
that	work	an	incredibly	high	percentage	of	the	time,	because	your	payoff	in
convenience	can	be	eliminated	by	any	lack	of	reliability	or	sensitivity.	I'm
hoping	the	house	systems	will	be	able	to	set	the	lights	automatically	at	the
right	levels.	But,	just	in	case,	every	room	also	has	wall	switches	that	can	be
used	to	override	the	computer's	lighting	decisions.
If	you	regularly	ask	for	light	to	be	unusually	bright	or	dim,	the	house	will
assume	that's	how	you	want	it	most	of	the	time.	In	fact,	the	house	will
remember	everything	it	learns	about	your	preferences.	If	in	the	past	you've
asked	to	see	paintings	by	Henri	Matisse	or	photographs	by	Chris	Johns	of
National	Geographic,	you	may	find	other	works	of	theirs	displayed	on	the
walls	of	rooms	you	enter.	If	you	listened	to	Mozart	horn	concertos	the	last
time	you	visited,	you	might	find	them	on	again	when	you	come	back.	If	you
don't	take	telephone	calls	during	dinner,	the	phone	won't	ring	if	the	call	is	for
you.	We'll	also	be	able	to	"tell"	the	house	what	a	guest	likes.	Paul	Allen	is	a
Jimi	Hendrix	fan	and	a	head-banging	guitar	lick	will	greet	him	whenever	he
visits.
The	house	will	be	instrumented	so	it	records	statistics	on	the	operations	of	all
systems,	and	we'll	be	able	to	analyze	that	information	to	tune	the	systems.
When	we	are	all	on	the	information	highway,	the	same	sort	of	instrumentation

will	be	used	to	count	and	keep	track	of	all	sorts	of	things,	and	the	tallies	will
be	published	for	anyone	who	cares	to	pay	attention.	We	see	precursors	of	this
tabulation	today.	The	Internet	already	carries	information	about	local	traffic
patterns,	which	is	great	for	deciding	on	alternate	commuting	routes.
Television	news	programs	often	show	traffic	as	seen	by	cameras	in
helicopters	and	use	the	same	helicopters	to	estimate	freeway	speeds	during
rush	hours.
A	trivial	but	amusing	example	is	taking	place	today	thanks	to	student
programmers	on	several	college	campuses.	They	have	instrumented	a	soft-
drink	vending	machine	by	connecting	the	hardware	to	the	machine's	empty-
indicator	light,	and	the	machine	publishes	information	constantly	on	the
Internet.	It's	a	bit	of	frivolous	engineering,	but	each	week	hundreds	of	people
from	all	over	the	world	check	whether	there's	any	7UP	or	Diet	Coke	left	in	a
vending	machine	at	Carnegie	Mellon	University.
The	information	highway	may	still	report	on	vending	machines,	as	well	as
showing	us	live	video	from	many	public	places,	up-to-the-second	lottery
numbers	and	sports	betting	odds,	current	mortgage	rates,	or	inventory
numbers	for	certain	kinds	of	products.	I	expect	that	we	will	be	able	to	call	up
live	pictures	from	various	places	around	the	city	and	ask	for	overlays	to	show
spaces	for	rent	with	a	list	of	the	prices	and	the	dates	they	are	available.	Counts
of	crime	reports,	campaign	contributions	by	area,	and	almost	any	other	kind
of	public	or	potentially	public	information	will	be	ours	for	the	asking.
I	will	be	the	first	home	user	for	one	of	the	most	unusual	electronic	features	in
my	house.	The	product	is	a	database	of	more	than	a	million	still	images,
including	photographs	and	reproductions	of	paintings.	If	you're	a	guest,	you'll
be	able	to	call	up	portraits	of	presidents,	pictures	of	sunsets,	airplanes,	skiing
in	the	Andes,	a	rare	French	stamp,	the	Beatles	in	1965,	or	reproductions	of
High	Renaissance	paintings,	on	screens	throughout	the	house.
A	few	years	ago	I	started	a	small	company,	now	called	Corbis,	in	order	to
build	a	unique	and	comprehensive	digital	archive	of	images	of	all	types.
Corbis	is	a	digital	stock	agency	for	a	large	variety	of	visual	material—ranging
from	history,	science,	and	technology	to	natural	history,	world	cultures,	and
fine	arts.	It	converts	these	images	into	digital	form	using	high-quality
scanners.	The	images	are	stored	at	high	resolution	in	a	database	that	has	been
indexed	in	inventive	ways	that	will	make	it	easy	for	someone	to	find	exactly
the	right	image.	These	digital	images	will	be	available	to	commercial	users
such	as	magazine	and	book	publishers	as	well	as	to	individual	browsers.
Royalties	are	paid	to	the	image	owners.	Corbis	is	working	with	museums	and

libraries,	as	well	as	a	large	number	of	individual	photographers,	agencies,	and
other	archives.
I	believe	quality	images	will	be	in	great	demand	on	the	highway.	This	vision
that	the	public	will	find	image-browsing	worthwhile	is	obviously	totally
unproven.	I	think	the	right	interface	will	make	it	appealing	to	a	lot	of	people.
If	you	can't	decide	what	you	feel	like	seeing,	you	will	be	able	to	scan
randomly	and	the	database	will	show	you	various	images	until	something
interests	you.	Then	you'll	be	able	to	explore	related	pictures	in	depth.	I'm
looking	forward	to	being	able	to	scan	and	to	asking	for	"sailboats"	or
"volcanoes"	or	"famous	scientists"
Although	some	of	the	images	will	be	of	artworks,	that	doesn't	mean	I	believe
that	reproductions	are	as	good	as	the	originals.	There's	nothing	like	seeing	the
real	work.	I	believe	that	easy-to-browse	image	databases	will	get	more	people
interested	in	both	graphic	and	photographic	art.
In	the	course	of	my	business	travels,	I've	been	able	to	spend	some	time	in
museums	seeing	the	originals	of	some	great	art.	The	most	interesting	piece	of
"art"	I	own	is	a	scientific	notebook,	kept	by	Leonardo	da	Vinci	in	the	early
1500s.	I've	admired	Leonardo	since	I	was	young	because	he	was	a	genius	in
so	many	fields	and	so	far	ahead	of	his	time.	Even	though	what	I	own	is	a
notebook	of	writings	and	drawings,	rather	than	a	painting,	no	reproduction
could	do	it	full	justice.
Art,	like	most	things,	is	more	enjoyable	when	you	know	something	about	it.
You	can	walk	for	hours	through	the	Louvre,	admiring	paintings	that	are	at
best	vaguely	familiar,	but	the	experience	becomes	much	more	interesting
when	there	is	someone	knowledgeable	walking	with	you.	The	multi-media
document	can	play	the	role	of	guide,	at	home	or	in	a	museum.	It	can	let	you
hear	part	of	a	lecture	on	a	work	given	by	the	preeminent	scholar	on	the
subject.	It	can	refer	you	to	other	works	by	the	same	artist	or	from	the	same
period.	You	can	even	zoom	in	for	a	closer	look.	If	multi-media	reproductions
make	art	more	approachable,	those	who	see	the	reproduction	will	want	to	see
originals.	Exposure	to	the	reproductions	is	likely	to	increase	rather	than
diminish	reverence	for	real	art	and	encourage	more	people	to	get	out	to
museums	and	galleries.
A	decade	from	now,	access	to	the	millions	of	images	and	all	the	other
entertainment	opportunities	I've	described	will	be	available	in	many	homes
and	will	certainly	be	more	impressive	than	those	I'll	have	when	I	move	into
my	house	in	late	1996.	My	house	will	just	be	getting	some	of	the	services	a

little	sooner.
I	enjoy	experimenting,	and	I	know	some	of	my	concepts	for	the	house	will
work	out	better	than	others.	Maybe	I'll	decide	to	conceal	the	monitors	behind
conventional	wall	art	or	throw	the	electronic	pins	into	the	trash.	Or	maybe	I'll
grow	accustomed	to	the	systems	in	the	house,	or	even	fond	of	them,	and
wonder	how	I	got	along	without	them.	That's	my	hope.

11
RACE	FOR
THE	GOLD
It	seems	as	though	every	week	some	company	or	consortium	announces	it	has
won	the	race	to	build	the	information	highway.	Incessant	hoopla	about
megamergers	and	bold	investments	has	created	a	gold	rush	atmosphere—
people	and	companies	pressing	headlong	toward	an	opportunity,	hoping	to
cross	a	finish	line	or	stake	a	claim	they	believe	will	assure	them	of	success.
Investors	seem	enchanted	with	highway-related	stock	offerings.	Media
coverage	of	the	race	is	unprecedented,	especially	considering	that	both	the
technology	and	the	demand	are	unproven.	This	is	quite	different	from	the
early,	unchronicled	days	of	the	personal-computer	industry.	Today's	frenzy
can	be	intoxicating,	especially	for	those	who	hope	to	be	contenders,	but	the
truth	is	that	in	this	race	everyone	is	barely	at	the	starting	line.
When	it	finally	is	run,	there	will	be	many	winners,	some	unexpected.	One
result	of	the	California	gold	rush	was	the	rapid	economic	development	of	the
West.	In	1848,	only	400	settlers	were	drawn	to	California.	Most	were	engaged
in	agriculture.	Within	one	year	the	gold	rush	had	attracted	25,000	settlers.	A
decade	later,	manufacturing	was	a	much	bigger	part	of	California's	economy
than	gold	production,	and	the	state's	per	capita	wealth	was	the	nation's
highest.
Over	time,	big	money	will	be	made	with	the	right	investment	strategies.	There
are	large	numbers	of	very	different	sorts	of	companies	jockeying	for	what
they	perceive	will	be	the	post	position.	And	much	of	their	jockeying	is	being
covered	as	important	news.	In	this	chapter	I'd	like	t======================================================== of	money	and	help	the	environment	by
reducing	peak	loads.

Not	all	our	experiments	in	the	guest	cottage	have	been	successful.	For
example,	I	had	installed	speakers	that	descended	from	the	ceiling	when
needed.	The	speaker	enclosures	were	to	be	suspended	away	from	walls,	in	an
optimal	acoustical	position.	But	after	trying	this	out	in	the	cottage,	it
reminded	me	too	much	of	James	Bond	gadgets,	so	in	the	main	house	we've
settled	for	concealed	speakers.
A	house	that	tries	to	guess	what	you	want	has	to	be	right	often	enough	that
you	don't	get	annoyed	by	miscalculations.	I	went	to	a	party	at	a	house	that	had
a	computerized	home-control	system.	The	lights	were	set	to	go	out	at	ten-
thirty,	which	is	when	the	owner	usually	went	to	bed.	At	ten-thirty	the	party
was	still	going	on,	but	sure	enough,	the	lights	went	out.	The	host	was	away
for	what	seemed	like	a	long	time	trying	to	get	them	back	on.	Some	office
buildings	use	motion	detectors	to	control	the	lighting	in	each	room.	If	there
hasn't	been	any	major	activity	for	a	few	minutes,	the	lights	go	off.	People	who
sit	nearly	motionless	at	their	desks	learn	to	wave	their	arms	periodically.
It	isn't	that	hard	to	turn	lights	on	and	off	yourself.	Light	switches	are
extremely	reliable	and	very	easy	to	use,	so	you	run	a	risk	whenever	you	start
replacing	them	with	computer-controlled	devices.	You	have	to	install	systems
that	work	an	incredibly	high	percentage	of	the	time,	because	your	payoff	in
convenience	can	be	eliminated	by	any	lack	of	reliability	or	sensitivity.	I'm
hoping	the	house	systems	will	be	able	to	set	the	lights	automatically	at	the
right	levels.	But,	just	in	case,	every	room	also	has	wall	switches	that	can	be
used	to	override	the	computer's	lighting	decisions.
If	you	regularly	ask	for	light	to	be	unusually	bright	or	dim,	the	house	will
assume	that's	how	you	want	it	most	of	the	time.	In	fact,	the	house	will
remember	everything	it	learns	about	your	preferences.	If	in	the	past	you've
asked	to	see	paintings	by	Henri	Matisse	or	photographs	by	Chris	Johns	of
National	Geographic,	you	may	find	other	works	of	theirs	displayed	on	the
walls	of	rooms	you	enter.	If	you	listened	to	Mozart	horn	concertos	the	last
time	you	visited,	you	might	find	them	on	again	when	you	come	back.	If	you
don't	take	telephone	calls	during	dinner,	the	phone	won't	ring	if	the	call	is	for
you.	We'll	also	be	able	to	"tell"	the	house	what	a	guest	likes.	Paul	Allen	is	a
Jimi	Hendrix	fan	and	a	head-banging	guitar	lick	will	greet	him	whenever	he
visits.
The	house	will	be	instrumented	so	it	records	statistics	on	the	operations	of	all
systems,	and	we'll	be	able	to	analyze	that	information	to	tune	the	systems.
When	we	are	all	on	the	information	highway,	the	same	sort	of	instrumentation

will	be	used	to	count	and	keep	track	of	all	sorts	of	things,	and	the	tallies	will
be	published	for	anyone	who	cares	to	pay	attention.	We	see	precursors	of	this
tabulation	today.	The	Internet	already	carries	information	about	local	traffic
patterns,	which	is	great	for	deciding	on	alternate	commuting	routes.
Television	news	programs	often	show	traffic	as	seen	by	cameras	in
helicopters	and	use	the	same	helicopters	to	estimate	freeway	speeds	during
rush	hours.
A	trivial	but	amusing	example	is	taking	place	today	thanks	to	student
programmers	on	several	college	campuses.	They	have	instrumented	a	soft-
drink	vending	machine	by	connecting	the	hardware	to	the	machine's	empty-
indicator	light,	and	the	machine	publishes	information	constantly	on	the
Internet.	It's	a	bit	of	frivolous	engineering,	but	each	week	hundreds	of	people
from	all	over	the	world	check	whether	there's	any	7UP	or	Diet	Coke	left	in	a
vending	machine	at	Carnegie	Mellon	University.
The	information	highway	may	still	report	on	vending	machines,	as	well	as
showing	us	live	video	from	many	public	places,	up-to-the-second	lottery
numbers	and	sports	betting	odds,	current	mortgage	rates,	or	inventory
numbers	for	certain	kinds	of	products.	I	expect	that	we	will	be	able	to	call	up
live	pictures	from	various	places	around	the	city	and	ask	for	overlays	to	show
spaces	for	rent	with	a	list	of	the	prices	and	the	dates	they	are	available.	Counts
of	crime	reports,	campaign	contributions	by	area,	and	almost	any	other	kind
of	public	or	potentially	public	information	will	be	ours	for	the	asking.
I	will	be	the	first	home	user	for	one	of	the	most	unusual	electronic	features	in
my	house.	The	product	is	a	database	of	more	than	a	million	still	images,
including	photographs	and	reproductions	of	paintings.	If	you're	a	guest,	you'll
be	able	to	call	up	portraits	of	presidents,	pictures	of	sunsets,	airplanes,	skiing
in	the	Andes,	a	rare	French	stamp,	the	Beatles	in	1965,	or	reproductions	of
High	Renaissance	paintings,	on	screens	throughout	the	house.
A	few	years	ago	I	started	a	small	company,	now	called	Corbis,	in	order	to
build	a	unique	and	comprehensive	digital	archive	of	images	of	all	types.
Corbis	is	a	digital	stock	agency	for	a	large	variety	of	visual	material—ranging
from	history,	science,	and	technology	to	natural	history,	world	cultures,	and
fine	arts.	It	converts	these	images	into	digital	form	using	high-quality
scanners.	The	images	are	stored	at	high	resolution	in	a	database	that	has	been
indexed	in	inventive	ways	that	will	make	it	easy	for	someone	to	find	exactly
the	right	image.	These	digital	images	will	be	available	to	commercial	users
such	as	magazine	and	book	publishers	as	well	as	to	individual	browsers.
Royalties	are	paid	to	the	image	owners.	Corbis	is	working	with	museums	and

libraries,	as	well	as	a	large	number	of	individual	photographers,	agencies,	and
other	archives.
I	believe	quality	images	will	be	in	great	demand	on	the	highway.	This	vision
that	the	public	will	find	image-browsing	worthwhile	is	obviously	totally
unproven.	I	think	the	right	interface	will	make	it	appealing	to	a	lot	of	people.
If	you	can't	decide	what	you	feel	like	seeing,	you	will	be	able	to	scan
randomly	and	the	database	will	show	you	various	images	until	something
interests	you.	Then	you'll	be	able	to	explore	related	pictures	in	depth.	I'm
looking	forward	to	being	able	to	scan	and	to	asking	for	"sailboats"	or
"volcanoes"	or	"famous	scientists"
Although	some	of	the	images	will	be	of	artworks,	that	doesn't	mean	I	believe
that	reproductions	are	as	good	as	the	originals.	There's	nothing	like	seeing	the
real	work.	I	believe	that	easy-to-browse	image	databases	will	get	more	people
interested	in	both	graphic	and	photographic	art.
In	the	course	of	my	business	travels,	I've	been	able	to	spend	some	time	in
museums	seeing	the	originals	of	some	great	art.	The	most	interesting	piece	of
"art"	I	own	is	a	scientific	notebook,	kept	by	Leonardo	da	Vinci	in	the	early
1500s.	I've	admired	Leonardo	since	I	was	young	because	he	was	a	genius	in
so	many	fields	and	so	far	ahead	of	his	time.	Even	though	what	I	own	is	a
notebook	of	writings	and	drawings,	rather	than	a	painting,	no	reproduction
could	do	it	full	justice.
Art,	like	most	things,	is	more	enjoyable	when	you	know	something	about	it.
You	can	walk	for	hours	through	the	Louvre,	admiring	paintings	that	are	at
best	vaguely	familiar,	but	the	experience	becomes	much	more	interesting
when	there	is	someone	knowledgeable	walking	with	you.	The	multi-media
document	can	play	the	role	of	guide,	at	home	or	in	a	museum.	It	can	let	you
hear	part	of	a	lecture	on	a	work	given	by	the	preeminent	scholar	on	the
subject.	It	can	refer	you	to	other	works	by	the	same	artist	or	from	the	same
period.	You	can	even	zoom	in	for	a	closer	look.	If	multi-media	reproductions
make	art	more	approachable,	those	who	see	the	reproduction	will	want	to	see
originals.	Exposure	to	the	reproductions	is	likely	to	increase	rather	than
diminish	reverence	for	real	art	and	encourage	more	people	to	get	out	to
museums	and	galleries.
A	decade	from	now,	access	to	the	millions	of	images	and	all	the	other
entertainment	opportunities	I've	described	will	be	available	in	many	homes
and	will	certainly	be	more	impressive	than	those	I'll	have	when	I	move	into
my	house	in	late	1996.	My	house	will	just	be	getting	some	of	the	services	a

little	sooner.
I	enjoy	experimenting,	and	I	know	some	of	my	concepts	for	the	house	will
work	out	better	than	others.	Maybe	I'll	decide	to	conceal	the	monitors	behind
conventional	wall	art	or	throw	the	electronic	pins	into	the	trash.	Or	maybe	I'll
grow	accustomed	to	the	systems	in	the	house,	or	even	fond	of	them,	and
wonder	how	I	got	along	without	them.	That's	my	hope.

11
RACE	FOR
THE	GOLD
It	seems	as	though	every	week	some	company	or	consortium	announces	it	has
won	the	race	to	build	the	information	highway.	Incessant	hoopla	about
megamergers	and	bold	investments	has	created	a	gold	rush	atmosphere—
people	and	companies	pressing	headlong	toward	an	opportunity,	hoping	to
cross	a	finish	line	or	stake	a	claim	they	believe	will	assure	them	of	success.
Investors	seem	enchanted	with	highway-related	stock	offerings.	Media
coverage	of	the	race	is	unprecedented,	especially	considering	that	both	the
technology	and	the	demand	are	unproven.	This	is	quite	different	from	the
early,	unchronicled	days	of	the	personal-computer	industry.	Today's	frenzy
can	be	intoxicating,	especially	for	those	who	hope	to	be	contenders,	but	the
truth	is	that	in	this	race	everyone	is	barely	at	the	starting	line.
When	it	finally	is	run,	there	will	be	many	winners,	some	unexpected.	One
result	of	the	California	gold	rush	was	the	rapid	economic	development	of	the
West.	In	1848,	only	400	settlers	were	drawn	to	California.	Most	were	engaged
in	agriculture.	Within	one	year	the	gold	rush	had	attracted	25,000	settlers.	A
decade	later,	manufacturing	was	a	much	bigger	part	of	California's	economy
than	gold	production,	and	the	state's	per	capita	wealth	was	the	nation's
highest.
Over	time,	big	money	will	be	made	with	the	right	investment	strategies.	There
are	large	numbers	of	very	different	sorts	of	companies	jockeying	for	what
they	perceive	will	be	the	post	position.	And	much	of	their	jockeying	is	being
covered	as	important	news.	In	this	chapter	I'd	like	t======================================================== re	limited,
Minitel's	success	has	fostered	innovations	and	provided	lessons.	France
Telecom	is	investing	in	a	packet	switch	data	network.
In	Germany,	Deutsche	Telekom	lowered	the	price	of	ISDN	service
dramatically	in	1995.	This	has	led	to	a	significant	increase	in	the	number	of
users	connecting	personal	computers.	Bringing	down	ISDN	prices	was	clever,
because	lower	prices	will	foster	the	development	of	applications	that	will	help
hasten	the	arrival	of	a	broadband	system.
The	level	of	PC	penetration	in	business	is	even	higher	in	the	Nordic	countries
than	in	the	United	States.	These	countries	understand	that	their	highly
educated	workforces	will	benefit	from	having	high-speed	connections	to	the
rest	of	the	world.
Although	the	interest	in	high-tech	communications	systems	is	probably
greater	in	Japan	than	in	any	other	country,	it	is	very	difficult	to	predict	the	fate
of	the	information	highway	there.	The	use	of	personal	computers	in
businesses,	schools,	and	homes	is	significantly	less	widespread	in	Japan	than
in	other	developed	countries.	This	is	partly	because	of	the	difficulty	of
entering	kanji	characters	on	a	keyboard,	but	also	because	of	Japan's	large	and
entrenched	market	for	dedicated	word-processing	machines.
Japan	is	second	only	to	the	United	States	in	the	number	of	companies
investing	in	developing	both	highway	building	blocks	and	the	highway's
content.	Many	large	Japanese	companies	have	excellent	technology	and	a
record	of	taking	long-term	approaches	to	their	investments.	Sony	owns	Sony
Music	and	Sony	Pictures,	which	includes	Columbia	Records	and	Columbia
Studios.	Toshiba	has	a	large	investment	in	Time	Warner.	NEC's	corporate
slogan,	"Computers	&	Communication,"	coined	in	1984,	anticipating	the
highway,	is	an	indication	of	its	commitment.
The	cable	industry	in	Japan	was	overregulated	until	quite	recently,	but	the	rate
of	change	is	impressive.	The	Japanese	phone	company,	NTT,	has	the	largest
valuation	of	any	public	company	in	the	world	and	will	play	a	leadership	role
in	every	aspect	of	the	highway	system.
In	South	Korea,	although	significantly	fewer	PCs	per	capita	are	being	sold
there	than	in	the	United	States,	more	than	25	percent	of	the	machines	are
going	into	homes.	This	statistic	demonstrates	how	countries	with	a	strong
family	structure	that	put	great	emphasis	on	getting	ahead	by	educating

children	will	be	fertile	ground	for	products	that	provide	educational
advantages.	One	appropriate	use	of	governmental	authority	will	be	the
creation	of	incentives	to	encourage	low-cost	connections	for	schools	and	to
ensure	that	the	highway	reaches	rural	areas	and	low-income	areas	too.
Australia	and	New	Zealand	are	also	interested	in	the	highway,	partly	because
of	the	great	geographic	distance	between	them	and	other	developed	countries.
The	phone	companies	in	Australia	are	being	privatized	and	the	market	opened
to	competitors,	encouraging	forward-looking	plans.	New	Zealand	has	the
most	open	telecommunications	market	in	the	world,	and	its	newly	privatized
phone	company	has	set	an	example	of	how	effective	privatization	can	be.
I	doubt	that	any	of	the	developed	countries,	including	all	of	Western	Europe,
North	America,	Australia,	New	Zealand,	and	Japan,	will	end	up	more	than	a
year	or	two	ahead	of	or	behind	the	others	unless	poor	political	decisions	are
made.	Within	each	country	some	communities	will	get	service	earlier	than
others	because	of	their	economic	demographics.	Networks	will	go	into	richer
neighborhoods	first	because	that's	where	residents	are	likely	to	spend	more.
Local	regulators	may	even	find	themselves	competing	to	create	favorable
environments	for	the	early	deployment	of	the	highway.	No	taxpayer	money
will	be	needed	to	build	the	highway	in	industrialized	countries	with	pro-
competition	regulations.	The	speed	with	which	the	highway	is	brought
directly	into	homes	will	correlate	in	large	part	with	the	per	capita	gross
domestic	product	(GDP)	of	a	country.	Despite	this,	even	in	developing
countries	the	connections	into	businesses	and	schools	will	have	a	huge	impact
and	reduce	the	income	gap	between	these	countries	and	developed	ones.
Areas	such	as	Bangalore	in	India,	or	Shanghai	and	Guangzhou	in	China,	will
install	highway	connections	to	businesses	that	they	will	use	to	offer	the
services	of	their	highly	educated	workers	to	the	global	market.
In	many	countries	nowadays,	the	top	political	leaders	are	making	plans	to
encourage	highway	investment.	The	competition	among	nations	trying	either
to	take	the	lead	in	development	or	to	make	sure	they	don't	fall	behind	is
creating	a	very	positive	dynamic.	As	different	countries	try	different
approaches,	everyone	will	watch	to	see	what	works	best.	Some	national
governments	may	rationalize	that	if	they	decide	they	must	have	a	network
right	away	and	private	enterprise	is	not	willing	to	build	it,	they	will	have	to
help	build	or	fund	pieces	of	their	information	highway.	A	government
bootstrap	could,	in	principle,	cause	an	information	highway	to	be	built	sooner
than	might	happen	otherwise,	but	the	very	real	possibility	of	an	unattractive
outcome	has	to	be	considered	carefully.	Such	a	country	might	end	up	with	a
boondoggle,	white-elephant	information	highway	built	by	engineers	out	of

touch	with	the	rapid	pace	of	technological	development.
Something	like	this	happened	in	Japan	with	the	Hi-Vision	high-definition
television	project.	MITI,	the	powerful	Ministry	of	International	Trade	and
Industry,	and	broadcasting	company,	and	NHK,	the	government-run	TV
broadcasting	company,	coordinated	an	effort	among	Japanese	consumer-
electronics	companies	to	build	a	new	analog	HDTV	system.	NHK	committed
to	broadcasting	shows	a	few	hours	a	day	in	the	new	format.	Unfortunately,	the
system	was	rendered	obsolete	before	it	was	ever	deployed,	when	it	became
clear	that	digital	technology	was	superior.	Many	Japanese	companies	found
themselves	in	a	difficult	position.	Privately,	they	knew	the	system	was	not	a
good	investment,	but	they	had	to	maintain	their	public	commitments	to	the
government-sponsored	format.	As	I	write	this,	the	"plan	of	record"	in	Japan
remains	to	move	to	this	analog	system,	although	nobody	actually	expects	it	to
happen.	Japan	will,	however,	benefit	from	the	investment	in	developing	high-
definition	cameras	and	displays	that	the	Hi-Vision	project	encouraged.
Building	the	information	highway	will	not	be	as	simple	as	saying	"Run	fiber
everywhere."	Any	government	or	company	getting	involved	will	need	to	track
new	developments	and	be	prepared	to	shift	directions.	Such	flexibility
requires	technological	expertise	that,	with	the	attendant	risks,	is	better
covered	by	industry.
Competition	in	the	private	sector	will	be	fierce	on	many	fronts.	Cable,	phone,
and	other	companies	will	compete	to	provide	the	fiber,	wireless,	and	satellite
infrastructure.	Hardware	companies	will	fight	to	sell	servers,	ATM	switches,
and	set-top	boxes	to	network	companies,	and	PCs,	digital	TVs,	telephones,
and	other	information	appliances	to	consumers.	At	the	same	time	companies
in	the	software	business,	including	Apple,	AT&T,	IBM,	Microsoft,	Oracle,
and	Sun	Microsystems,	will	be	offering	software	components	to	network
providers.	Eventually,	millions	of	companies	and	individuals	will	be	selling
software	applications	and	information,	including	entertainment,	across	the
network	that	springs	up.
I've	discussed	at	some	length	how	critical	it	is	that	the	physical	infrastructure
be	built	out	to	provide	broadband	connections	to	homes.	I	described	the
competition	in	the	United	States,	and	the	strategies	of	the	telephone	and	cable
industries,	the	major	players.	The	cable	companies	are	younger	and	smaller
than	the	big	telephone	companies	and	tend	to	be	more	entrepreneurial.	Cable
television	networks	provide	customers	with	one-way	broadband	video
through	a	web	of	coaxial,	and	sometimes	fiber-optic,	cable.	Although	the
penetration	rate	worldwide	is	quite	low—189	million	subscribers—cable

systems	run	past	nearly	70	percent	of	all	American	homes,	and	into	63	million
of	them.	Already,	cable	systems	are	gradually	being	converted	to	carry	a
digital	signal,	and	a	number	of	cable	companies	are	working	to	provide	PC
users	with	connections	to	the	Internet	and	on-line	services.	They're	gambling
that	many	PC	users	accustomed	to	downloading	information	on	a	telephone
line	at	28,800	bits	per	second	will	be	willing	to	pay	more	to	download
information	through	their	television	cable	at	3	million	bits	per	second.
As	for	the	phone	companies,	they	are	much	stronger	financially.	The
American	telephone	system	is	the	world's	largest	switched-distributed
network	providing	point-to-point	connections.	The	combined	local	telephone
exchange	market,	with	annual	revenues	of	about	$100	billion,	is	far	more
profitable	than	the	$20	billion	U.S.	cable	business.	The	seven	regional	Bell
operating	companies	(RBOCs)	will	compete	with	their	former	parent,	AT&T,
to	provide	long-distance,	cellular,	and	new	services.	But,	like	phone
companies	around	the	world,	the	RBOCs	are	new	to	the	competitive	world,
just	emerging	from	their	heritage	as	heavily	regulated	utilities.
The	local	phone	companies	will	be	motivated	by	increased	competition.	They
are	in	a	defensive	position.	Other	phone	companies	and	cable	companies	are
going	to	want	to	offer	telephone	as	well	as	other	communications	services	in
their	areas.	New	regulations	will	unleash	this	competition	and,	as	I've	already
noted,	the	cost	of	long-distance	voice-telephone	service	will	drop
dramatically.	If	that	happens,	phone	companies	will	be	deprived	of	much	of
their	current	profitable	revenue.
The	companies	providing	local	service	have	slowly	been	introducing
advanced	digital	transmission	capabilities	into	their	networks.	They	haven't
felt	pressure	to	hurry,	because	until	now	it	seemed	they	were	protected	from
competition	by	the	large	financial	barriers	to	market	entry.	They	knew	a
potential	rival	would	have	to	make	a	duplicate	investment	of,	say,	$100
million	in	equipment	in	order	to	compete	in	a	given	community.	But======================================================== o	ballet
slippers.	Of	course	you	will	still	ask	people	you	know	for	recommendations,
but	efficiently,	by	electronic	mail.
If	you're	thinking	of	doing	business	with	a	company	or	buying	a	product,
you'll	be	able	to	check	what	others	say	about	it.	If	you	want	to	buy	a
refrigerator,	you	will	look	for	the	electronic	bulletin	boards	containing	formal
and	informal	reviews	of	refrigerators	and	their	manufacturers	and	retailers.
You'll	get	into	the	habit	of	checking	these	bulletin	boards	before	you	make
any	significant	purchase.	When	you	have	a	compliment	or	complaint	about	a
record	club,	a	doctor,	or	even	a	computer	chip,	it	will	be	easy	to	find	the	place
on	the	network	where	that	company	or	product	is	discussed	and	add	your
opinion.	Ultimately,	companies	that	don't	serve	their	customers	well	will	see
their	reputations	and	their	sales	decline,	while	those	that	do	a	great	job	will

attract	sizable	followings	through	this	new	form	of	word	of	"mouth."
But	the	various	endorsements	and	especially	the	negative	comments	will	have
to	be	examined	carefully.	They	may	be	motivated	more	by	fanaticism	than	a
genuine	desire	to	share	pertinent	information.
Let's	say	a	company	is	selling	an	air	conditioner	that	99.9	percent	of	its
customers	are	very	happy	with.	One	angry	consumer	in	the	remaining	0.1
percent	can	post	horrible	insults	about	a	brand	of	air	conditioner,	the	company
that	manufactures	it,	and	individuals	in	the	company,	and	keep	sending	the
messages	over	and	over	and	over.	The	effect	could	be	compared	to	sitting	in	a
meeting	where	everyone	has	a	volume	control	that	could	be	set	from	0	to
1,000,	and	the	normal	level	of	conversation	is,	say,	3.	Then	a	few	people
decide	to	crank	their	volume	up	to	1,000	and	start	shouting.	This	means	that	if
I	happen	to	look	in	on	the	bulletin	board	because	I'm	buying	an	air
conditioner,	my	visit	may	be	a	waste	of	time	because	all	I	find	there	is	the
shouting.	It	is	unfair	to	me	and	to	the	company	selling	the	air	conditioners.
Already,	a	network	etiquette,	or	"netiquette,"	is	evolving.	As	the	information
highway	becomes	society's	town	square,	we	will	come	to	expect	it	to	conform
to	our	culture's	mores.	There	are	vast	cultural	differences	around	the	world,	so
the	highway	will	be	divided	into	different	parts,	some	dedicated	to	various
cultures,	and	some	specified	for	global	usage.	So	far,	a	frontier	mentality	has
prevailed,	and	participants	in	electronic	forums	have	been	known	to	lapse	into
behavior	that	is	antisocial	and	even	illegal.	Illegal	copies	of	copyrighted
intellectual	property,	including	articles,	books,	and	software	applications,	are
distributed	freely.	Get-rich-quick	scams	pop	up	here	and	there.	Pornography
flourishes	within	the	easy	reach	of	children.	Single-minded	voices	rant,
sometimes	almost	incessantly,	about	products,	companies,	and	people	they
have	come	to	dislike.	Forum	participants	get	horrible	insults	hurled	at	them
because	of	some	comment	they	have	made.	The	ease	with	which	an
individual,	any	individual,	can	share	his	opinions	with	the	members	of	a	huge
electronic	community	is	unprecedented.	And	the	ones	who	are	yelling	are
able,	because	the	electronic	community	is	so	efficient,	to	take	a	piece	of	hate
mail	and	post	it	on	twenty	bulletin	boards.	I've	seen	bulletin	boards	collapse
into	foolishness	after	people	start	getting	shrill.	Other	participants	in	the
discussion	don't	know	what	to	do.	Some	people	yell	back;	a	few	try	to	say
rational	things.	But	the	shrill	comments	continue,	and	that	destroys	the	sense
of	community.
The	Internet,	true	to	its	roots	as	an	academic	cooperative,	has	relied	on	peer
pressure	for	regulation.	For	example,	if	someone	in	a	discussion	group	posts

an	extraneous	comment	or,	worse,	tries	to	sell	something	in	an	electronic
forum	that	is	seen	by	others	as	a	noncommercial	setting,	the	would-be
diverger	or	merchant	may	get	a	withering	barrage	of	insults.	The	enforcement
so	far	has	been	mostly	by	self-appointed	censors
who	"flame"	those	they	believe	have	crossed	the	line	into	antisocial	behavior.
The	commercial	on-line	services	employ	volunteers	and	professional
moderators	to	monitor	conduct	on	their	bulletin	boards.	Forums	that	have
moderators	can	filter	out	some	antisocial	behavior	by	refusing	to	allow	insults
or	copyrighted	information	to	remain	on	a	system's	servers.	Most	Internet
forums	remain	unmoderated,	however.	Anything	goes,	and	because	people
can	post	messages	and	information	anonymously,	little	accountability	exists.
We	need	a	more	sophisticated	process	to	gather	consensus	opinions	without
depending	on	the	Attorney	General's	Consumer	Complaints	Division	to	act	as
a	filter.	We	will	have	to	find	some	way	to	force	people	to	turn	their	volume
down	so	the	highway	doesn't	become	an	amplifier	for	libel	or	slander	or	an
outlet	for	venting	irritation.
Many	providers	of	Internet	access	are	beginning	to	restrict	entry	to	forums
containing	sexually	explicit	material,	and	there	has	been	a	crackdown	on	the
illegal	traffic	of	copyrighted	materials.	Some	universities	are	getting	students
and	staff	to	remove	objectionable	postings.	This	rubs	some	the	wrong	way,
because	they	see	cyberspace	as	a	place	where	anything	goes.	The	commercial
services	have	had	similar	problems.	There	have	been	complaints	about
restriction	of	free	speech.	And	parents	were	outraged	when	their	family
account	was	closed	after	their	eleven-year-old	made	an	objectionable
comment	to	a	moderator.	Companies	will	create	special	communities	on	the
Internet	and	will	"compete"	by	having	rules	about	how	they	are	going	to	deal
with	these	issues.
Politicians	are	already	wrestling	with	the	question	of	when	an	on-line	service
should	be	treated	as	a	common	carrier	and	when	it	should	be	treated	as	a
publisher.	Telephone	companies	are	legally	considered	common	carriers.
They	transport	messages	without	assuming	any	responsibility	for	them.	If	an
obscene	caller	bothers	you,	the	telephone	company	will	cooperate	with	the
police,	but	nobody	thinks	it	is	the	phone	company's	fault	that	some	creep	is
calling	you	and	talking	dirty.	Magazines	and	newspapers,	on	the	other	hand,
are	publishers.	They	are	legally	responsible	for	their	content	and	can	be	sued
for	libel.	They	also	have	a	strong	interest	in	maintaining	their	reputation	and
editorial	integrity	because	that	is	an	important	part	of	their	business.	Any
responsible	newspaper	checks	very	carefully	before	making	a	previously

unpublished	allegation	about	someone—in	part	because	it	doesn't	want	a	libel
suit,	but	also	because	inaccuracy	would	hurt	its	reputation.
On-line	services	function	simultaneously	as	common	carriers	and	publishers,
which	is	where	the	problem	lies.	When	they	act	as	publishers,	and	offer
content	they	have	acquired,	authored,	or	edited,	it	makes	sense	that	the	rules
of	libel	and	the	self-governing	incentive	of	editorial	reputation	would	apply.
But	we	also	expect	them	to	deliver	our	e-mail	like	a	common	carrier	without
examining	or	taking	responsibility	for	its	contents.	Likewise,	chat	lines,
bulletin	boards,	and	forums	that	encourage	users	to	interact	without	editorial
supervision	are	a	new	means	of	communication,	and	shouldn't	be	treated	the
same	way	as	material	published	on	the	service.	A	New	York	judge,	however,
recently	cleared	the	way	for	a	libel	lawsuit	by	ruling	that	the	on-line	service
involved	was	a	publisher	of	information,	not	just	a	distributor.	Perhaps	by	the
time	you	read	this	things	will	have	been	clarified.	The	stakes	in	the	resolution
of	this	issue	are	high.	If	network	providers	are	treated	entirely	as	publishers,
they	will	have	to	monitor	and	preapprove	the	content	of	all	information	they
transmit.	This	could	create	an	unwelcome	atmosphere	of	censorship	and
curtail	spontaneous	exchange,	so	important	in	the	electronic	world.
Ideally,	the	industry	will	develop	some	standards	so	that	when	you	go	into	a
bulletin	board	or	article,	you	get	an	indication	of	whether	or	not	some
"publisher"	has	looked	it	over,	edited	it,	and	stands	behind	its	content.	The
question	will	be	what	standards	and	who	will	oversee	them?	A	bulletin	board
for	lesbians	should	not	be	forced	to	accept	antilesbian	comments,	nor	should	a
bulletin	board	about	some	product	be	overwhelmed	by	messages	from	a
competitor.	It	would	be	a	shame	to	have	to	keep	children	away	from	all
bulletin	boards,	but	it	would	also	be	unrealistic,	and	possibly	an	abridgment
of	free	expression,	to	force	all	bulletin	boards	to	undergo	review	by	someone
willing	to	accept	liability	for	everything	they	contain.	What	we	will	most
likely	end	up	with	is	a	series	of	categories,	like	the	ratings	given	movies,	that
will	indicate	whether	shrill	voices	have	been	controlled	and	whether	an
"editor"	has	deleted	messages	he	thought	were	out	of	line	with	the	policies	of
the	group	involved.
The	bulletin	boards	I've	been	discussing	are	the	free,	public	ones,	but	there
will	also	be	places	where	professional	information	and	advice	will	be	offered
for	a	fee.	You	might	wonder	why	you	would	need	an	expert	when	so	much
information	will	be	available.	For	the	same	reasons	you	might	need	one	now.
All	sorts	of	consumer	data	can	be	had	now.	Consumer	Reports	offers
objective	evaluations	of	a	lot	of	products,	but	the	reviews	are	aimed	at	a	broad
audience—they	don't	necessarily	discuss	your	particular	requirements.	If	you

can't	find	exactly	the	advice	you	need	on	the	highway,	you	will	be	able	to	hire
a	knowledgeable	sales	consultant,	for	five	minutes	or	an	afternoon,	via
videoconference.	She	will	help	you	choose	products,	which	your	computer
will	then	buy	for	you	from	the	cheapest	reliable	source.
I	expect	the	traditional	binding	together	of	advice	and	sales	to	be	much	less
prevalent,	because	although	the	advice	appears	free	to	the	customer,	it	is	paid
for	by	the	stores	and	services	that	offer	it.	This	cost	then	gets	added	on	to	the
price	of	the	goods.	Stores	that	are	charging	more	because	they	offer	advice
will	have	increasing	difficulty	competing	with	the	discounters	who	will
operate	on	the	information	highway.	The======================================================== itches	to	handle	ISDN
with	very	little	idea	of	how	it	would	be	used.	The	good	news	is	that	the	PC
will	drive	explosive	demand.	An	add-in	card	for	a	PC	to	support	ISDN	costs
$500	in	1995,	but	the	price	should	drop	to	less	than	$200	over	the	next	few
years.	The	line	costs	vary	by	location	but	are	generally	about	$50	per	month
in	the	United	States.	I	expect	this	will	drop	to	less	than	$20,	not	much	more
than	a	regular	phone	connection.	We	are	among	companies	working	to
convince	phone	companies	all	over	the	world	to	lower	these	charges	in	order
to	encourage	PC	owners	to	connect,	using	ISDN.
Cable	companies	have	interim	technologies	and	strategies	of	their	own.	They
want	to	use	their	existing	coaxial	cable	networks	to	compete	with	the	phone
companies	to	provide	local	telephone	service.	They	have	also	already
demonstrated	that	special	cable	modems	can	connect	personal	computers	to
cable	networks.	This	allows	cable	companies	to	offer	bandwidth	somewhat
greater	than	ISDN's.
For	cable	companies	another	interim	step	will	be	to	increase	the	number	of
broadcast	channels	they	carry	five-	to	tenfold.	They'll	do	it	by	using	digital-
compression	technology	to	squeeze	more	channels	onto	existing	cables.

This	so-called	500-channel	approach—which	often	will	really	only	have	150
channels—makes	possible	near-video-on-demand,	although	only	for	a	limited
number	of	television	shows	and	movies.	You	would	choose	from	a	list	on-
screen	rather	than	selecting	a	numbered	channel.	A	popular	movie	might	run
on	twenty	of	the	channels,	with	the	starting	time	staggered	at	five-minute
intervals	so	that	you	could	begin	watching	it	within	five	minutes	of	whenever
you	wanted.	You	would	choose	from	among	the	available	starting	times	for
movies	and	television	programs,	and	the	set-top	box	would	switch	to	the
appropriate	channel.	The	half-hour-long	CNN	Headline	News	might	be
offered	on	six	channels	instead	of	one,	with	the	6:00	P.M.	broadcast	shown
again	at	6:05,	6:10,	6:15,	6:20,	and	6:25.	There	would	be	a	new,	live
broadcast	every	half	hour,	just	as	there	is	now.	Five	hundred	channels	will	get
used	up	pretty	fast	this	way.
The	cable	companies	are	under	pressure	to	add	channels	partly	as	a	reaction	to
competition.	Direct-broadcast	satellites	such	as	Hughes	Electronics'
DIRECTV	are	already	beaming	hundreds	of	channels	directly	into	homes.
Cable	companies	want	to	increase	their	channel	lineup	rapidly	to	avoid	losing
customers.	If	the	only	reason	for	the	information	highway	were	to	deliver	a
limited	number	of	movies,	then	a	500-channel	system	would	be	adequate.
A	500-channel	system	will	still	be	mostly	synchronous,	will	limit	your
choices,	and	will	provide	only	a	low-bandwidth	back	channel,	at	best.	A
"back	channel"	is	an	information	path	dedicated	to	carrying	instructions	and
other	information	from	a	consumer's	information	appliance	back	up	the	cable
to	the	network.	A	back	channel	on	a	500-channel	system	might	let	you	use
your	television	set-top	box	to	order	products	or	programs,	respond	to	polls	or
game-show	questions,	and	participate	in	certain	kinds	of	multiplayer	games.
But	a	low-bandwidth	back	channel	can't	offer	the	full	flexibility	and
interactivity	the	most	interesting	applications	will	require.	It	won't	let	you
send	a	video	of	your	children	to	their	grandparents,	or	play	truly	interactive
games.
Cable	and	phone	companies	around	the	world	will	progress	along	four
parallel	paths.	First,	each	will	be	going	after	the	others'	business.	Cable
companies	will	offer	telephone	service,	and	phone	companies	will	offer	video
services,	including	television.	Second,	both	systems	will	be	providing	better
ways	to	connect	PCs	with	either	ISDN	or	cable	modems.	Third,	both	will	be
converting	to	digital	technology	in	order	to	provide	more	television	channels
and	higher-quality	signals.	Fourth,	both	will	be	conducting	trials	of	broadband
systems	connected	to	television	sets	and	PCs.	Each	of	the	four	strategies	will
motivate	investment	in	digital	network	capacity.	There	will	be	intense

competition	between	the	telephone	companies	and	cable	television	networks
to	be	the	first	network	provider	in	a	neighborhood.
Eventually,	the	Internet	and	the	other	transitional	technologies	will	be
subsumed	within	the	real	information	highway.	The	highway	will	combine	the
best	qualities	of	both	the	telephone	and	the	cable	network	systems:	Like	the
telephone	network,	it	will	offer	private	connections	so	that	everyone	using	the
network	can	pursue	his	or	her	own	interests,	on	his	or	her	own	schedule.	It
will	also	be	fully	two-way	like	the	telephone	network,	so	that	rich	forms	of
interaction	are	possible.	Like	the	cable	television	network,	it	will	be	high
capacity,	so	there	will	be	sufficient	bandwidth	to	allow	multiple	televisions	or
personal	computers	in	a	single	household	to	connect	simultaneously	to
different	video	programs	or	sources	of	information.
Most	of	the	wires	connecting	servers	with	one	another,	and	with	the
neighborhoods	of	the	world,	will	be	made	of	incredibly	clear	fiber-optic
cable,	the	"asphalt"	of	the	information	highway.	All	of	the	major	long-
distance	trunk	lines	that	carry	telephone	calls	within	the	United	States	today
use	fiber,	but	the	lines	that	connect	our	homes	to	these	data	thoroughfares	are
still	copper	wire.	Telephone	companies	will	replace	the	copper-wire,
microwave,	and	satellite	links	in	their	networks	with	fiber-optic	cable	so	they
will	have	the	bandwidth	to	carry	enough	bits	to	deliver	high-quality	video.
Cable	television	companies	will	increase	the	amount	of	fiber	they	use.	At	the
same	time	fiber	is	being	deployed,	telephone	and	cable	companies	will	be
incorporating	new	switches	into	their	networks	so	that	digital	video	signals
and	other	information	can	be	routed	from	any	point	to	any	other	point.	The
costs	of	upgrading	the	existing	networks	to	prepare	for	the	highway	will	be
less	than	a	quarter	of	what	they	would	be	to	run	new	wires	into	every	home.
You	can	think	of	a	fiber	trunk	as	being	like	the	foot-wide	water	main	that
carries	water	up	your	street.	It	doesn't	come	directly	to	your	house;	instead,	a
smaller	pipe	at	the	curb	connects	the	main	to	your	home.	At	first,	the	fiber
will	probably	run	only	to	neighborhood	distribution	points	and	the	signals	will
be	carried	from	the	neighborhood	fiber	on	either	the	coaxial	cable	that	brings
you	cable	television	or	on	the	"twisted-pair"	copper-wire	connections	that
provide	telephone	service.	Eventually,	though,	fiber	connections	may	run
directly	into	your	home	if	you	use	lots	of	data.
Switches	are	the	sophisticated	computers	that	shunt	streams	of	data	from	one
track	to	another,	like	boxcars	in	a	train	yard.	Millions	of	simultaneous	streams
of	communications	will	flow	on	large	networks,	and	no	matter	how	many
intermediate	waypoints	are	required,	all	the	different	bits	of	information	will

have	to	be	guided	to	their	destinations,	with	an	assurance	they	will	arrive	in
the	right	places	and	on	time.	To	grasp	how	big	the	task	will	be	in	the	era	of
the	information	highway,	imagine	billions	of	boxcars	that	have	to	be	routed
along	railroad	tracks	through	vast	systems	of	switches	and	arrive	at	their
destinations	on	schedule.	Because	the	cars	are	attached	to	one	another,
switchyards	get	clogged	waiting	for	long,	multicar	trains	to	pass	through.
There	would	be	fewer	tie-ups	if	each	boxcar	could	travel	independently	and
find	its	own	way	through	the	switches,	then	reassemble	as	a	train	at	the
destination.
Information	traversing	the	information	highway	will	be	broken	up	into	tiny
packets,	and	each	packet	will	be	routed	independently	through	the	network,
the	way	individual	automobiles	navigate	roads.	When	you	order	a	movie,	it
will	be	broken	into	millions	of	tiny	pieces,	each	one	of	which	will	find	its	way
through	the	network	to	your	television.
This	routing	of	packets	will	be	accomplished	through	the	use	of	a
communications	protocol	known	as	asynchronous	transfer	mode,	or	ATM
(not	to	be	confused	with	"automatic	teller	machine").	It	will	be	one	of	the
building	blocks	of	the	information	highway.	Phone	companies	around	the
world	are	already	beginning	to	rely	on	ATM,	because	it	takes	great	advantage
of	fiber's	amazing	bandwidth.	One	strength	of	ATM	is	its	ability	to	guarantee
timely	delivery	of	information.	ATM	breaks	each	digital	stream	into	uniform
packets,	each	of	which	contains	48	bytes	of	the	information	to	be	transported
and	5	bytes	of	control	information	that	allow	the	highway's	switches	to	route
the	packets	very	quickly	to	their	destinations.	At	their	destinations	the	packets
are	recombined	into	a	stream.
ATM	delivers	streams	of	information	at	very	high	speeds—up	to	155	million
bits	per	second	at	first,	later	jumping	to	622	million	bits	per	second	and
eventually	to	2	billion	bits	per	second.	This	technology	will	make	it	possible
to	send	video	as	easily	as	voice	calls,	and	at	very	low	cost.	Just	as	advances	in
chip	technology	have	driven	down	the	cost	of	computing,	ATM,	because	it
will	also	be	able	to	carry	enormous	numbers	of	old-fashioned	voice	calls,	will
drive	down	the	cost	of	long-distance	phone	calls.
High-bandwidth	cable	connections	will	link	most	information	appliances	to
the	highway,	but	some	devices	will	connect	wirelessly.	We	already	use	a
number	of	wireless	communication	devices—cellular	telephones,	pagers,	and
consumer-electronics	remote	controls.	They	send	radio	signals	and	allow	us
mobility,	but	the	bandwidth	is	limited.	The	wireless	networks	of	the	future
will	be	faster,	but	unless	there	is	a	major	breakthrough,	wired	networks	will

have	far	greater	bandwidth.	Mobile	devices	will	be	able	to	send	and	receive
messages,	but	it	will	be	expensive	and	unusual	to	use	them	to	receive	an
individual	video	stream.
The	wireless	networks	that	will	allow	us	to	communicate	when	we	are	mobile
will	grow	out	of	today's	cellular-telephone	systems	and	the	new	alternative
wireless	phone	service,	called	PCS.	When	you	are	on	the	road	and	want
information	from	your	home	or	office	computer,	your	portable	information
appliance======================================================== udience	is	with	a	classified
ad.	Each	classification	represents	a	small	community	of	interest:	people	who
want	to	buy	or	sell	a	rug,	for	example.	Tomorrow,	the	classified	ad	won't	be
tied	to	paper	or	limited	to	text.	If	you're	looking	for	a	used	car,	you	will	send
out	a	query	specifying	the	price	range,	model,	and	features	that	interest	you
and	will	be	shown	a	list	of	the	available	cars	that	match	your	preferences.	Or
you	will	ask	a	software	agent	to	notify	you	when	a	suitable	car	comes	on	the
market.	Car	sellers'	ads	might	include	links	to	a	picture	or	a	video	of	the	car
or	even	the	car's	maintenance	records,	so	you	can	get	a	sense	of	what	shape	it
is	in.	You'll	be	able	to	learn	the	mileage	the	same	way,	and	whether	the	engine
has	ever	been	replaced,	and	if	the	car	has	air	bags.	Perhaps	you	will	want	to
cross-link	to	police	records,	which	are	public,	to	see	whether	it	has	been	in	a
wreck.

If	you	put	your	house	on	the	market,	you	will	be	able	to	describe	it	fully	and
include	photographs,	video,	floor	plans,	tax	records,	utility	and	repair	bills,
even	a	little	mood	music.	The	chances	that	a	potential	buyer	for	your	house
will	see	your	ad	are	improved	because	the	information	highway	will	make	it
easy	for	anyone	to	look	it	up.	The	whole	system	of	real	estate	agencies	and
commissions	may	be	changed	by	the	principals'	having	direct	access	to	so
much	information.
At	first,	on-line	classified	ads	won't	be	very	attractive,	because	not	many
people	will	be	using	them.	But	then	word-of-mouth	from	a	few	satisfied
customers	will	entice	more	and	more	users	to	the	service.	There	will	be	a
positive-feedback	loop	created	as	more	sellers	attract	more	buyers	and	vice
versa.	When	a	critical	mass	is	achieved,	which	might	be	only	a	year	or	two
after	the	service	is	first	offered,	the	information	highway's	classified
advertising	service	will	be	transformed	from	a	curiosity	to	the	primary	way
private	sellers	and	buyers	get	together.
Direct-response	advertising—the	junk-mail	business	is	in	for	even	bigger
changes.	Today,	a	lot	of	it	really	is	junk,	because	we	cut	down	a	lot	of	trees	in
order	to	mail	out	material,	much	of	which	is	discarded	unopened.	Direct-
response	advertising	on	the	information	highway	will	come	in	the	form	of	an
interactive	multi-media	document	rather	than	a	piece	of	paper.	Although	it
won't	waste	natural	resources,	there	will	have	to	be	some	way	to	make	sure
you	don't	get	thousands	of	these	almost-free	communications	a	day.
You	won't	be	drowned	by	the	deluge	of	unimportant	information	because
you'll	use	software	to	filter	incoming	advertising	and	other	extraneous
messages	and	spend	your	valuable	time	looking	at	those	messages	that
interest	you.	Most	people	will	block	e-mail	ads	except	for	those	about	product
areas	of	particular	concern.	One	way	for	the	advertiser	to	capture	your
attention	will	be	to	offer	a	small	amount	of	money—a	nickel	or	a	dollar,
perhaps—if	you	will	look	at	an	ad.	When	you	have	watched	it,	or	as	you're
interacting	with	it,	your	electronic	account	gets	credited	and	the	advertiser's
electronic	account	is	debited.	In	effect,	some	of	the	billions	of	dollars	now
spent	annually	on	media	advertising,	and	on	the	printing	and	postage	of
direct-mail	advertising,	will	instead	be	divvied	up	among	consumers	who
agree	to	watch	or	read	ads	sent	directly	to	them	as	messages.
Mailings	offering	this	sort	of	paying	advertisement	could	be	extremely
effective	because	they	can	be	carefully	targeted.	Advertisers	will	be	smart
about	sending	messages	worth	money	only	to	people	who	meet	appropriate
demographics.	A	company	such	as	Ferrari	or	Porsche	might	send	$1	messages

to	car	enthusiasts,	on	the	chance	that	seeing	a	cool	new	car	and	hearing	the
sound	of	its	engine	will	generate	interest.	If	the	ad	led	to	even	one	in	1,000
people's	buying	a	new	car	as	a	result,	it	would	be	worthwhile	to	the	company.
They	could	adjust	the	amount	they	offer	according	to	the	customer's	profile.
Such	ads	will	be	available	to	those	not	on	the	advertiser's	A-list.	For	instance,
if	a	sixteen-year-old	car-crazy	kid	wants	to	experience	a	Ferrari,	and	is	willing
to	do	it	for	nothing,	he'll	get	the	message	too.
This	may	sound	a	little	strange,	but	it	is	just	another	use	of	the	market
mechanism	for	friction-free	capitalism.	The	advertiser	decides	how	much
money	it	is	willing	to	bid	for	your	time,	and	you	decide	what	your	time	is
worth.
Advertising	messages,	like	the	rest	of	your	incoming	mail,	will	be	stored	in
various	folders.	You	will	instruct	your	computer	how	to	do	the	sorting	for
you.	Unread	mail	from	friends	and	family	members	might	be	in	one	folder.
Messages	and	documents	that	relate	to	a	personal	or	business	interest	would
be	in	other	folders.	And	advertisements	and	messages	from	unknown	people
could	be	sorted	by	how	much	money	was	attached	to	them.	There	would	be	a
group	of	1-cent	messages,	a	group	of	10-cent	messages,	and	so	forth.	If	there
was	no	fee	attached,	they	could	be	refused.	You	will	be	able	to	scan	each
message	and	dispose	of	it	if	it	isn't	of	interest.	Some	days	you	might	not	look
into	any	of	the	advertising	message	folders.	But	if	someone	sent	you	a	$10
message,	you	would	probably	take	a	look—if	not	for	the	money,	then	just	to
see	who	thought	reaching	you	was	worth	$10.
You	won't	have	to	take	the	money	someone	bids,	of	course.	When	you	accept
the	message,	you'll	be	able	to	cancel	the	payment,	so	it's	really	just	the
amount	the	person	puts	at	risk	to	get	your	attention.	The	sender's	credit	will
be	checked	in	advance.	If	a	man	sends	you	a	$100	message	suggesting	that	he
is	your	long-lost	brother,	you	might	forgive	him	the	money	if,	in	fact,	he
turned	out	to	be	your	brother.	On	the	other	hand,	if	he	was	just	someone
trying	to	get	your	attention	to	sell	you	something,	you	would	probably	keep
the	money,	thank	you	very	much.
In	the	United	States,	advertisers	currently	spend	more	than	$20	a	month	per
American	family	to	subsidize	free	broadcast	and	cable	television.	Ads	in
general	are	so	familiar	they	don't	really	bother	us	when	we	watch	television	or
listen	to	the	radio.	We	understand	that	programs	are	"free"	because	of	the
commercials.	Customers	pay	for	them	indirectly	because	advertising	costs	are
built	into	the	prices	of	cornflakes,	shampoo,	and	diamonds.	We	also	pay	for
entertainment	and	information	directly	when	we	buy	a	book	or	a	movie	ticket,

or	order	a	pay-per-view	movie.	The	average	American	household	pays	a	total
of	$100	a	month	for	movie	tickets,	subscriptions	to	newspapers	and
magazines,	books,	cable	television	fees,	compact	discs	and	tapes,	video
rentals,	and	the	like.
When	you	pay	for	entertainment	by	buying	a	tape	or	a	disc,	your	rights	to
reuse	or	resell	it	are	restricted.	If	you	buy	a	copy	of	Abbey	Road	by	the
Beatles,	you're	actually	purchasing	the	physical	disc	or	tape	and	a	license	to
replay,	any	number	of	times,	for	noncommercial	purposes,	the	music	stored
on	it.	If	you	buy	a	paperback	book,	what	you're	really	buying	is	the	paper	and
ink	and	the	right	to	read,	and	allow	others	to	read,	the	words	printed	on	that
particular	paper	with	that	particular	ink.	You	don't	own	the	words	and	you
can't	reprint	them,	except	in	narrowly	defined	circumstances.	When	you
watch	a	television	show,	you	don't	own	it,	either.	In	fact,	it	took	a	United
States	Supreme	Court	decision	to	confirm	that	people	in	this	country	can
legally	videotape	a	television	show	for	their	personal	use.
The	information	highway	will	enable	innovations	in	the	way	that	intellectual
property,	such	as	music	and	software,	is	licensed.	Record	companies,	or	even
individual	recording	artists,	might	choose	to	sell	music	a	new	way.	You,	the
consumer,	won't	need	compact	discs,	tapes,	or	any	other	kinds	of	physical
apparatus.	The	music	will	be	stored	as	bits	of	information	on	a	server	on	the
highway.	"Buying"	a	song	or	album	will	really	mean	buying	the	right	to
access	the	appropriate	bits.	You	will	be	able	to	listen	at	home,	at	work,	or	on
vacation,	without	carrying	around	a	collection	of	titles.	Anyplace	you	go
where	there	are	audio	speakers	connected	to	the	highway,	you'll	be	able	to
identify	yourself	and	take	advantage	of	your	rights.	You	won't	be	allowed	to
rent	a	concert	hall	and	play	that	recording	of	the	music	or	create	an
advertisement	that	incorporated	it.	But	in	any	noncommercial	setting,
anywhere	you	go,	you'll	have	the	right	to	play	the	song	without	additional
payment	to	the	copyright	holder.	In	the	same	way,	the	information	highway
could	keep	track	of	whether	you	had	bought	the	right	to	read	a	particular	book
or	see	a	movie.	If	you	had,	you'd	be	able	to	call	it	up	at	any	time,	from	any
information	appliance	anywhere.
This	personal,	lifetime	buyout	of	rights	is	similar	to	what	we	do	today	when
we	buy	a	music	disc	or	tape,	or	book,	except	that	there	is	no	physical	medium
involved.	It	sounds	comfortingly	familiar.	However,	there	are	lots	of	other
ways	to	sell	the	enjoyment	of	music	or	other	information.
For	example,	a	song	could	be	made	available	on	a	pay-per-hearing	basis.	Each
time	you	listened	to	it,	your	account	would	be	charged	some	small	amount,

such	as	5	cents.	At	that	rate,	it	would	cost	60	cents	to	listen	to	a	twelve-song
"album."	You	would	have	to	play	the	whole	album	twenty-five	times	to	spend
$15,	which	is	roughly	what	a	compact	disc	sells	for	today.	If	you	found	that
you	liked	only	one	song	on	the	album,	you	could	play	it	three	hundred	times,
at	a	nickel	each	time,	for	your	$15.	Because	digital	information	is	so	flexible,
as	the	audio	quality	improves	you	won't	have	to	pay	for	the	same	music	again
the	way	people	did	when	they	bought	CDs	to	replace	the	LPs	in	their	personal
libraries.
All	kinds	of	pricing	schemes	will	be	tried.	We	may	see	digital	entertainment
that	has	an	expiration	date	or	that	allows	only	a	certain	number	of	plays
before	it	has	to	be	purchased	again.	A	record	company	might	offer	a	very	low
price	for	a	song	but	let	you	play	it	only	ten	or	twenty	times.	Or	they	might	let
you	play	a	song—or	an	addictive	game—ten	times	free	be======================================================== unications
companies.	Federal	regulations	currently	prevent	cable	and	phone	companies
from	offering	a	general-purpose	network	that	would	put	them	in	competition
with	each	other.	The	first	thing	most	governments	have	to	do	to	help	the
highway	start	is	to	deregulate	communications.
The	old	approach	in	most	countries	was	to	create	monopolies	in	the	various
forms	of	telecommunication.	The	theory	behind	this	approach	was	that
companies	wouldn't	make	the	huge	investments	necessary	to	run	telephone
wires	out	to	everyone	unless	they	had	the	incentive	of	being	the	exclusive
supplier.	A	set	of	rules	drawn	up	by	the	government	binds	the	monopoly
holders	to	act	in	the	public	interest	with	restricted	but	essentially	guaranteed
profit.	The	outcome	has	been	a	very	reliable	network	with	broad	services	but
limited	innovation.	Later	regulations	extended	the	concept	to	cable	television
as	well	as	to	local	telephone	systems.	Both	federal	and	local	governments
granted	monopolies	and	curtailed	competition	in	exchange	for	regulatory
control.
A	highway	that	delivers	both	telephone	and	video	services	is	not	allowed
under	current	U.S.	laws.	Economists	and	historians	can	argue	the	pros	and
cons	of	whether	granting	regulated	monopolies	was	a	good	idea	back	in	1934,
but	today	there	is	a	general	agreement	that	the	rules	should	be	changed.	As	of
mid-1995,	however,	policy	makers	haven't	been	able	to	agree	on	exactly	when
or	in	what	ways.	Billions	of	dollars	are	at	stake	and	lawmakers	have	found	it

easy	to	get	lost	in	the	complicated	details	of	how	competition	should	start.
The	problem	is	to	figure	out	how	to	move	from	the	old	system	to	a	new	one
while	keeping	most	of	the	participants	happy.	This	dilemma	is	the	reason
telecommunications	reform	has	been	in	limbo	for	years.	Congress	was
embroiled	much	of	the	summer	of	1995	in	a	debate,	not	about	whether	the
telecommunications	industry	should	be	deregulated,	but	rather	about	how	it
should	be	deregulated.	I	hope	that	by	the	time	you	read	this,	the	information
highway	will	be	legal	in	the	United	States!
Outside	the	United	States,	matters	are	complicated	by	the	fact	that	in	many
countries	the	regulated	monopolies	have	been	agencies	owned	by	the
government	itself.	They	were	called	PTTs	because	they	managed	postal,
telephone,	and	telegraph	services.	In	some	countries	the	PTT	is	being	allowed
to	go	ahead	and	develop	the	highway,	but	when	government	organizations	are
involved,	things	often	move	slowly.	I	think	the	pace	of	investment	and
deregulation	worldwide	will	increase	in	the	next	ten	years	because	politicians
are	recognizing	that	this	issue	is	critical	if	their	countries	are	to	remain
competitive	in	the	long	term.	In	many	election	campaigns	candidates'
platform	planks	will	include	policies	that	will	allow	their	country	to	lead	in
the	creation	of	the	highway.	The	political	use	of	these	issues	will	make	them
more	visible,	which	will	help	clear	various	international	roadblocks.
Countries	like	the	United	States	and	Canada,	where	a	high	percentage	of
homes	have	cable	television,	are	at	an	advantage	because	the	competition
between	cable	companies	and	phone	companies	will	accelerate	the	pace	of
investment	in	the	highway	infrastructure.	Great	Britain,	however,	is	the
farthest	along	in	actually	using	a	single	network	to	provide	both	television
and	cable	services.	The	cable	companies	there	were	allowed	to	offer	phone
service	in	1990.	Foreign	companies,	primarily	U.S.	phone	and	cable
companies,	made	major	investments	in	fiber	infrastructure	in	the	United
Kingdom.	British	consumers	now	can	choose	to	get	telephone	service	from
their	cable	TV	company.	This	competition	has	forced	British	Telecom	to
improve	its	rates	and	services.
If	we	look	back	in	ten	years,	I	think	we'll	see	a	clear	correlation	between	the
amount	of	telecommunications	reform	in	each	country	and	the	state	of	its
information	economy.	Few	investors	will	want	to	put	money	into	places	that
don't	have	great	communications	infrastructures.	There	are	so	many
politicians	and	lobbyists	involved	in	creating	new	regulations	in	so	many
countries,	I'm	sure	the	entire	spectrum	of	different	regulatory	schemes	will	be
tried.	The	"right"	solution	will	vary	somewhat	in	different	countries.

One	area	it's	clear	government	should	stay	out	of	is	compatibility.	Some	have
suggested	that	governments	set	standards	for	networks,	to	guarantee	that	they
interoperate.	In	1994,	legislation	was	put	before	a	subcommittee	in	the	U.S.
House	of	Representatives	calling	for	all	set-top	boxes	to	be	made	so	they
would	be	compatible.	This	sounded	like	a	great	idea	to	those	who	drafted	the
legislation.	It	would	ensure	that	if	Aunt	Bessie	invested	in	a	set-top	box,	she
could	be	confident	it	would	work	if	she	moved	to	another	part	of	the	country.
Compatibility	is	important.	It	makes	the	consumer-electronics	and	personal-
computer	businesses	thrive.	When	the	PC	industry	was	new,	many	machines
came	and	went.	The	Altair	8800	was	superseded	by	the	Apple	I.	Then	came
the	Apple	II,	the	original	IBM	PC,	the	Apple	Macintosh,	IBM	PC	AT,	386
and	486	PCs,	Power	Macintoshes,	and	Pentium	PCs.	Each	of	these	machines
was	somewhat	compatible	with	the	others.	For	instance,	all	were	able	to	share
plain-text	files.	But	there	was	also	a	lot	of	incompatibility	because	each
successive	computer	generation	showcased	fundamental	breakthroughs	the
older	systems	didn't	support.
Compatibility	with	prior	machines	is	a	great	virtue	in	some	cases.	Both	PC-
compatibles	and	the	Apple	Macintosh	provide	some	backwards	compatibility.
However,	they	are	incompatible	with	each	other.	And	at	the	time	the	PC	was
introduced,	it	was	not	compatible	with	IBM's	prior	machines.	Likewise,	the
Mac	was	incompatible	with	Apple's	earlier	machines.	In	the	world	of
computing,	technology	is	so	dynamic	that	any	company	should	be	able	to
come	out	with	whatever	new	product	it	wants	and	let	the	market	decide	if	it
has	made	the	right	set	of	trade-offs.	Because	the	set-top	box	is	in	every	sense
a	computer,	it	stands	to	reason	it	will	follow	the	same	pattern	of	rapid
innovation	that	has	driven	the	PC	industry.	In	fact,	the	set-top	box	will	be	sold
to	a	far	more	uncertain	market	than	the	PC	was,	so	the	case	for	letting	it	be
market	driven	is	even	stronger.	It	would	be	foolish	to	impose	the	constraint	of
government-dictated	design	on	an	unfinished	invention.
The	original	set-top	box	compatibility	legislation	in	the	United	States
ultimately	died	in	Congress	in	1994,	but	related	issues	arose	in	1995,	and	I
expect	that	similar	efforts	will	be	made	in	other	countries.	It	seems	easy	to
legislate	reasonable-sounding	constraints,	but	if	we	don't	watch	out,	those
constraints	could	strangle	the	market.
The	highway	will	develop	at	a	different	pace	in	different	communities	and	in
different	countries.	When	I	travel	abroad,	the	foreign	press	often	asks	how
many	years	behind	the	developments	in	the	United	States	their	country	is.	It's
a	difficult	question.	The	advantages	that	the	United	States	has	are	the	size	of

the	market,	the	popularity	of	the	personal	computer	in	American	homes,	and
the	way	the	phone	and	cable	companies	will	compete	with	each	other	for
current	and	future	revenues.	Of	the	various	technologies	that	will	be	part	of
building	the	highway,	U.S.-based	companies	are	leaders	in	almost	every	one:
microprocessors,	software,	entertainment,	personal	computers,	set-top	boxes,
and	network-switching	equipment.	The	only	significant	exceptions	are	display
technology	and	memory	chips.
Other	countries	have	advantages	of	their	own.	In	Singapore,	the	population
density	and	political	focus	on	infrastructure	makes	it	certain	that	this	nation
will	be	a	leader.	A	decision	by	the	Singaporean	government	to	make
something	happen	means	quite	a	bit	in	this	unique	country.	The	highway
infrastructure	is	already	under	construction.	Every	developer	will	soon	be
required	to	provide	every	new	house	or	apartment	with	a	broadband	cable	in
the	same	way	he	is	required	by	law	to	provide	lines	for	water,	gas,	electricity,
and	telephone.	When	I	visited	with	Lee	Kuan	Yew,	the	seventy-two-year-old
senior	minister	who	was	the	political	head	of	Singapore	from	1959	to	1990,	I
was	extremely	impressed	with	his	understanding	of	the	opportunity	and	his
belief	that	it	is	a	top	priority	to	move	ahead	at	full	speed.	He	views	it	as
imperative	that	his	small	country	continue	to	be	a	premier	location	in	Asia	for
high-value	jobs.	I	was	quite	blunt	in	asking	Mr.	Lee	if	he	understood	that	the
Singaporean	government	would	be	giving	up	the	tight	control	over
information	it	exercises	today	as	a	way	of	ensuring	shared	values	that	tend	to
keep	societal	problems	in	check.	He	said	Singapore	recognizes	that	in	the
future	it	will	have	to	rely	on	methods	other	than	censorship	to	maintain	a
culture	that	sacrifices	some	Western-style	freedom	in	exchange	for	a	strong
sense	of	community.
In	China,	however,	the	government	seems	to	believe	it	can	have	it	both	ways.
Post	and	Telecommunications	Minster	Wu	Jichuan	told	reporters	at	a	news
briefing,	"By	linking	with	the	Internet	we	don't	mean	absolute	freedom	of
information.	I	think	there	is	general	understanding	about	this.	If	you	go
through	customs,	you	have	to	show	your	passport.	It's	the	same	with
management	of	information."	Wu	said	Beijing	will	adopt	unspecified
"management	measures"	to	control	inflows	of	data	on	all	telecommunications
services	as	they	evolve	in	China.	"There	is	no	contradiction	at	all	between	the
development	of	telecoms	infrastructure	and	the	exercise	of	state	sovereignty.
The	International	Telecommunications	Union	states	that	any	country	has
sovereignty	over	its	own	telecoms."	He	may	not	understand	that	to	implement
full	Internet	access	and	maintain	censorship,	you	would	almost	have	to	have
someone	looking	over	the	shoulder	of	every	user.

In	France,	the	pioneering	on-line	service,	Minitel,	has	fostered	a	community
of	information	publishers	and	stimulated	broad	familiarity	with	on-line
systems	generally.	Even	though	both	terminals	and	bandwidth	a======================================================== eramental	monsters	that	resided	in	climate-controlled
cocoons.	After	we	had	used	up	the	money	the	Mothers'	Club	had	provided,
my	school	friend	Paul	Allen,	with	whom	I	later	started	Microsoft,	and	I	spent
a	lot	of	time	trying	to	get	access	to	computers.	They	performed	modestly	by
today's	standards,	but	seemed	awesome	to	us	because	they	were	big	and
complicated	and	cost	as	much	as	millions	of	dollars	each.	They	were
connected	by	phone	lines	to	clackety	Teletype	terminals	so	they	could	be
shared	by	people	at	different	locations.	We	rarely	got	close	to	the	actual
mainframes.	Computer	time	was	very	expensive.	When	I	was	in	high	school,
it	cost	about	$40	an	hour	to	access	a	time-shared	computer	using	a	Teletype—
for	that	$40	an	hour	you	got	a	slice	of	the	computer's	precious	attention.	This
seems	odd	today,	when	some	people	have	more	than	one	PC	and	think
nothing	of	leaving	them	idle	for	most	of	the	day.	Actually,	it	was	possible
even	then	to	own	your	own	computer.	If	you	could	afford	$18,000,	Digital
Equipment	Corporation	(DEC)	made	the	PDP-8.	Although	it	was	called	a
"mini-computer,"	it	was	large	by	today's	standards.	It	occupied	a	rack	about
two	feet	square	and	six	feet	high	and	weighed	250	pounds.	We	had	one	at	our
high	school	for	a	while,	and	I	fooled	around	with	it	a	lot.	The	PDP-8	was	very
limited	compared	to	the	mainframes	we	could	reach	by	phone;	in	fact,	it	had
less	raw	computing	power	than	some	wristwatches	do	today.	But	it	was
programmable	the	same	way	the	big,	expensive	ones	were:	by	giving	it
software	instructions.	Despite	its	limitations,	the	PDP-8	inspired	us	to	indulge
in	the	dream	that	one	day	millions	of	individuals	could	possess	their	own
computers.	With	each	passing	year,	I	became	more	certain	that	computers	and
computing	were	destined	to	be	cheap	and	ubiquitous.	I'm	sure	that	one	of	the
reasons	I	was	so	determined	to	help	develop	the	personal	computer	is	that	I
wanted	one	for	myself.
At	that	time	software,	like	computer	hardware,	was	expensive.	It	had	to	be
written	specifically	for	each	kind	of	computer.	And	each	time	computer
hardware	changed,	which	it	did	regularly,	the	software	for	it	pretty	much	had
to	be	rewritten.	Computer	manufacturers	provided	some	standard	software
program	building	blocks	(for	example,	libraries	of	mathematical	functions)
with	their	machines,	but	most	software	was	written	specifically	to	solve	some
business's	individual	problems.	Some	software	was	shared,	and	a	few
companies	were	selling	general-purpose	software,	but	there	was	very	little
packaged	software	that	you	could	buy	off	the	shelf.
My	parents	paid	my	tuition	at	Lakeside	and	gave	me	money	for	books,	but	I

had	to	take	care	of	my	own	computer-time	bills.	This	is	what	drove	me	to	the
commercial	side	of	the	software	business.	A	bunch	of	us,	including	Paul
Allen,	got	entry-level	software	programming	jobs.	For	high	school	students
the	pay	was	extraordinary—about	$5,000	each	summer,	part	in	cash	and	the
rest	in	computer	time.	We	also	worked	out	deals	with	a	few	companies
whereby	we	could	use	computers	for	free	if	we'd	locate	problems	in	their
software.	One	of	the	programs	I	wrote	was	the	one	that	scheduled	students	in
classes.	I	surreptitiously	added	a	few	instructions	and	found	myself	nearly	the
only	guy	in	a	class	full	of	girls.	As	I	said	before,	it	was	hard	to	tear	myself
away	from	a	machine	at	which	I	could	so	unambiguously	demonstrate
success.	I	was	hooked.
Paul	knew	a	lot	more	than	I	did	about	computer	hardware,	the	machines
themselves.	One	summer	day	in	1972,	when	I	was	sixteen	and	Paul	was
nineteen,	he	showed	me	a	ten-paragraph	article	buried	on	page	143	of
Electronics	magazine.	It	was	announcing	that	a	young	firm	named	Intel	had
released	a	microprocessor	chip	called	the	8008.
A	microprocessor	is	a	simple	chip	that	contains	the	entire	brain	of	a	whole
computer.	Paul	and	I	realized	this	first	microprocessor	was	very	limited,	but
he	was	sure	that	the	chips	would	get	more	powerful	and	computers	on	a	chip
would	improve	very	rapidly.
At	the	time,	the	computer	industry	had	no	idea	of	building	a	real	computer
around	a	microprocessor.	The	Electronics	article,	for	example,	described	the
8008	as	suitable	for	"any	arithmetic,	control,	or	decision-making	system,	such
as	a	smart	terminal"	The	writers	didn't	see	that	a	microprocessor	could	grow
up	to	be	a	general-purpose	computer.	Microprocessors	were	slow	and	limited
in	the	amount	of	information	they	could	handle.	None	of	the	languages
programmers	were	familiar	with	was	available	for	the	8008,	which	made	it
nearly	impossible	to	write	complex	programs	for	it.	Every	application	had	to
be	programmed	with	the	few	dozen	simple	instructions	the	chip	could
understand.	The	8008	was	condemned	to	life	as	a	beast	of	burden,	carrying
out	uncomplicated	and	unchanging	tasks	over	and	over.	It	was	quite	popular
in	elevators	and	calculators.

1972:	Intel's	8088	microprocessor
To	put	it	another	way,	a	simple	microprocessor	in	an	embedded	application,
such	as	an	elevator's	controls,	is	a	single	instrument,	a	drum	or	a	horn,	in	the
hands	of	an	amateur:	good	for	basic	rhythm	or	uncomplicated	tunes.	A
powerful	microprocessor	with	programming	languages,	however,	is	like	an
accomplished	orchestra.	With	the	right	software,	or	sheet	music,	it	can	play
anything.
Paul	and	I	wondered	what	we	could	program	the	8008	to	do.	He	called	up
Intel	to	request	a	manual.	We	were	a	little	surprised	when	they	actually	sent
him	one.	We	both	dug	into	it.	I	had	worked	out	a	version	of	BASIC,	which
ran	on	the	limited	DEC	PDP-8,	and	was	excited	at	the	thought	of	doing	the
same	for	the	little	Intel	chip.	But	as	I	studied	the	8008's	manual,	I	realized	it
was	futile	to	try.	The	8008	just	wasn't	sophisticated	enough,	didn't	have
enough	transistors.
We	did,	however,	figure	out	a	way	to	use	the	little	chip	to	power	a	machine
that	could	analyze	the	information	counted	by	traffic	monitors	on	city	streets.
Many	municipalities	that	measured	traffic	flow	did	so	by	stringing	a	rubber
hose	over	a	selected	street.	When	a	car	crossed	the	hose,	it	punched	a	paper
tape	inside	a	metal	box	at	the	end	of	the	hose.	We	saw	that	we	could	use	the
8008	to	process	these	tapes,	to	print	out	graphs	and	other	statistics.	We
baptized	our	first	company	"Traf-O-Data."	At	the	time	it	sounded	like	poetry.
I	wrote	much	of	the	software	for	the	Traf-O-Data	machine	on	cross-state	bus
trips	from	Seattle	to	Pullman,	Washington,	where	Paul	was	attending	college.
Our	prototype	worked	well,	and	we	envisioned	selling	lots	of	our	new
machines	across	the	country.	We	used	it	to	process	traffic-volume	tapes	for	a
few	customers,	but	no	one	actually	wanted	to	buy	the	machine,	at	least	not
from	a	couple	of	teenagers.
Despite	our	disappointment,	we	still	believed	our	future,	even	if	it	was	not	to

be	in	hardware,	might	have	something	to	do	with	microprocessors.	After	I
started	at	Harvard	College	in	1973,	Paul	somehow	managed	to	coax	his
clunky	old	Chrysler	New	Yorker	cross-country	from	Washington	State	and
took	a	job	in	Boston,	programming	mini-computers	at	Honeywell.	He	drove
over	to	Cambridge	a	lot	so	we	could	continue	our	long	talks	about	future
schemes.
In	the	spring	of	1974,	Electronics	magazine	announced	Intel's	new	8080	chip
—ten	times	the	power	of	the	8008	inside	the	Traf-O-Data	machine.	The	8080
was	not	much	larger	than	the	8008,	but	it	contained	2,700	more	transistors.
All	at	once	we	were	looking	at	the	heart	of	a	real	computer,	and	the	price	was
under	$200.	We	attacked	the	manual.	"DEC	can't	sell	any	more	PDP-8s	now,"
I	told	Paul.	It	seemed	obvious	to	us	that	if	a	tiny	chip	could	get	so	much	more
powerful,	the	end	of	big	unwieldy	machines	was	coming.
Computer	manufacturers,	however,	didn't	see	the	microprocessor	as	a	threat.
They	just	couldn't	imagine	a	puny	chip	taking	on	a	"real"	computer.	Not	even
the	scientists	at	Intel	saw	its	full	potential.	To	them,	the	8080	represented
nothing	more	than	an	improvement	in	chip	technology.	In	the	short	term,	the
computer	establishment	was	right.	The	8080	was	just	another	slight	advance.
But	Paul	and	I	looked	past	the	limits	of	that	new	chip	and	saw	a	different	kind
of	computer	that	would	be	perfect	for	us,	and	for	everyone—personal,
affordable,	and	adaptable.	It	was	absolutely	clear	to	us	that	because	the	new
chips	were	so	cheap,	they	soon	would	be	everywhere.
Computer	hardware,	which	had	once	been	scarce,	would	soon	be	readily
available,	and	access	to	computers	would	no	longer	be	charged	for	at	a	high
hourly	rate.	It	seemed	to	us	people	would	find	all	kinds	of	new	uses	for
computing	if	it	was	cheap.	Then,	software	would	be	the	key	to	delivering	the
full	potential	of	these	machines.	Paul	and	I	speculated	that	Japanese
companies	and	IBM	would	likely	produce	most	of	the	hardware.	We	believed
we	could	come	up	with	new	and	innovative	software.	And	why	not?	The
microprocessor	would	change	the	structure	of	the	industry.	Maybe	there	was	a
place	for	the	two	of	us.
This	kind	of	talk	is	what	college	is	all	about.	You	have	all	kinds	of	new
experiences,	and	dream	crazy	dreams.	We	were	young	and	assumed	we	had
all	the	time	in	the	world.	I	enrolled	for	another	year	at	Harvard	and	kept
thinking	about	how	we	could	get	a	software	company	going.	One	plan	was
pretty	simple.	We	sent	letters	from	my	dorm	room	to	all	the	big	computer
companies,	offering	to	write	them	a	version	of	BASIC	for	the	new	Intel	chip.
We	got	no	takers.	By	December,	we	were	pretty	discouraged.	I	was	planning

to	fly	home	to	Seattle	for	the	holidays,	and	Paul	was	staying	in	Boston.	On	an
achingly	cold	Massachusetts	morning	a	few	days	before	I	left,	Paul	and	I	were
hanging	out	at	the	Harvard	Square	newsstand,	and	Paul	picked	up	the	January
issue	of	Popular	Electronics.	This	is	the	moment	I	described	at	the	beginning
of	the	Foreword.	This	gave	reality	to	our	dreams	about	the	future.
January	1975	issue	of	Popular	Electronics
On	the	magazine's	cover	was	a	photograph	of	a	very	small	computer,	not
much	larger	than	a	toaster	oven.	It	had	a	name	only	slightly	more	dignified
t======================================================== t	appears	that	Windows	has
the	lead	for	the	moment.	However,	in	high	tech	this	is	no	guarantee	we'll	have
it	even	in	the	near	future.
We	have	had	to	improve	our	software	to	keep	up	with	hardware	advances.
Each	subsequent	version	will	only	be	successful	with	new	users	if	current
users	adopt	it.	Microsoft	has	to	do	its	best	to	make	new	versions	so	attractive

in	terms	of	price	and	features	that	people	will	want	to	change.	This	is	hard
because	a	change	involves	a	big	overhead	for	both	developers	and	customers.
Only	a	major	advance	is	able	to	convince	enough	users	it	is	worth	their	while
to	change.	With	enough	innovation	it	can	be	done.	I	expect	major	new
generations	of	Windows	to	come	along	every	two	to	three	years.
The	seeds	of	new	competition	are	being	sown	constantly	in	research
environments	and	garages	around	the	world.	For	instance,	the	Internet	is
becoming	so	important	that	Windows	will	only	thrive	if	it	is	clearly	the	best
way	to	gain	access	to	the	Internet.	All	operating-system	companies	are
rushing	to	find	ways	to	have	a	competitive	edge	in	providing	Internet	support.
When	speech	recognition	becomes	genuinely	reliable,	this	will	cause	another
big	change	in	operating	systems.
In	our	business	things	move	too	fast	to	spend	much	time	looking	back.	I	pay
close	attention	to	our	mistakes,	however,	and	try	to	focus	on	future
opportunity.	It's	important	to	acknowledge	mistakes	and	make	sure	you	draw
some	lesson	from	them.	It's	also	important	to	make	sure	no	one	avoids	trying
something	because	he	thinks	he'll	be	penalized	for	what	happened	or	that
management	is	not	working	to	fix	the	problems.	Almost	no	single	mistake	is
fatal.
Lately,	under	Lou	Gerstner's	leadership,	IBM	has	become	far	more	efficient
and	regained	both	its	profitability	and	its	positive	focus	on	the	future.
Although	the	continuing	decline	in	mainframe	revenues	remains	a	problem
for	IBM,	it	will	clearly	be	one	of	the	major	companies	providing	products	for
businesses	and	the	information	highway.
In	recent	years,	Microsoft	has	deliberately	hired	a	few	managers	with
experience	in	failing	companies.	When	you're	failing	you're	forced	to	be
creative,	to	dig	deep	and	think,	night	and	day.	I	want	some	people	around	who
have	been	through	that.	Microsoft	is	bound	to	have	failures	in	the	future,	and	I
want	people	here	who	have	proved	they	can	do	well	in	tough	situations.
Death	can	come	swiftly	to	a	market	leader.	By	the	time	you	have	lost	the
positive-feedback	cycle	it's	often	too	late	to	change	what	you've	been	doing,
and	all	the	elements	of	a	negative	spiral	come	into	play.	It	is	difficult	to
recognize	that	you're	in	a	crisis	and	react	to	it	when	your	business	appears
extremely	healthy.	That	is	going	to	be	one	of	the	paradoxes	for	companies
building	the	information	highway.	It	keeps	me	alert.	I	never	anticipated
Microsoft's	growing	so	large,	and	now,	at	the	beginning	of	this	new	era,	I
unexpectedly	find	myself	a	part	of	the	establishment.	My	goal	is	to	prove	that

a	successful	corporation	can	renew	itself	and	stay	in	the	forefront.

4
APPLICATIONS
AND	APPLIANCES
When	I	was	a	kid,	The	Ed	Sullivan	Show	aired	at	eight	o'clock	on	Sunday
nights.	Most	Americans	with	television	sets	tried	to	be	home	to	watch	it
because	it	might	be	the	only	time	and	place	to	see	the	Beatles,	Elvis	Presley,
the	Temptations,	or	that	guy	who	could	spin	ten	plates	simultaneously	on	the
noses	of	ten	dogs.	But	if	you	were	driving	back	from	your	grandparents'
house	or	were	on	a	Cub	Scout	camping	trip,	too	bad.	Not	being	home	on
Sundays	at	eight	meant	you	also	missed	out	on	the	Monday-morning
conversations	about	the	previous	night's	broadcast.
Conventional	television	allows	us	to	decide	what	we	watch,	but	not	when	we
watch	it.	The	technical	term	for	this	sort	of	broadcasting	is	"synchronous."
Viewers	must	synchronize	their	schedules	with	the	time	of	a	broadcast	sent	to
everyone.	That's	how	I	watched	The	Ed	Sullivan	Show	three	decades	ago,	and
it's	still	how	most	of	us	will	watch	the	news	tonight.
In	the	early	1980s	the	videocassette	recorder	gave	us	more	flexibility.	If	you
cared	enough	about	a	program	to	fuss	with	timers	and	tapes	in	advance,	you
could	watch	it	whenever	you	liked.	You	could	claim	from	the	broadcasters	the
freedom	and	luxury	to	serve	as	your	own	program	scheduler—and	millions	of
people	do.	A	telephone	conversation	is	also	synchronous,	because	both	parties
must	be	on	the	line	at	the	same	time.	When	you	tape	a	television	show	or	let
an	answering	machine	record	an	incoming	call,	you	are	converting
synchronous	communications	into	a	more	convenient	form:	"asynchronous"
communications.
It	is	human	nature	to	find	ways	to	convert	synchronous	communications	into
asynchronous	forms.	Before	the	invention	of	writing,	5,000	years	ago,	the
only	form	of	communication	was	the	spoken	word	and	audiences	had	to	be	in
the	presence	of	the	speaker	or	they	missed	his	message.	Once	the	message
could	be	written,	it	could	be	stored	and	read	later	by	anyone,	at	his	or	her
convenience.	I	am	writing	these	words	at	home	early	in	1995,	but	I	have	no
idea	when	or	where	you'll	read	them.
One	of	the	benefits	bestowed	by	the	information	highway	will	be	more

control	over	our	schedules.	There	will	be	many	others.	Once	you	make	a	form
of	communication	asynchronous,	you	can	also	increase	the	variety	and
selection	possibilities.	Even	viewers	who	rarely	record	television	programs
routinely	rent	movies.	There	are	thousands	of	choices	available	at	local	video-
rental	stores	for	just	a	few	dollars	each,	so	the	home	viewer	can	spend	any
evening	with	Elvis,	the	Beatles—or	Greta	Garbo.
Television	has	been	around	for	fewer	than	sixty	years,	but	in	that	time	it	has
become	a	major	influence	in	the	life	of	almost	everyone	in	developed	nations.
But	television,	in	some	ways,	was	just	a	replacement	for	commercial	radio,
which	had	been	bringing	electronic	entertainment	into	homes	for	twenty
years.	No	broadcast	medium	is	comparable	to	what	the	highway	will	be	like.
The	highway	will	enable	capabilities	that	seem	magical	when	they	are
described,	but	represent	technology	at	work	to	make	our	lives	easier	and
better.	Because	consumers	already	understand	the	value	of	movies	and	are
used	to	paying	to	watch	them,	video-on-demand	will	be	an	important
application	on	the	information	highway.	It	won't	be	the	first,	however.	We
already	know	that	PCs	will	be	connected	long	before	television	sets	and	that
the	quality	of	movies	shown	on	early	systems	will	not	be	very	high.	The
systems	will	be	able	to	offer	other	applications	such	as	games,	electronic	mail,
and	home	banking.	When	high-quality	video	can	be	transmitted,	there	won't
be	any	intermediary	VCR;	you'll	simply	request	what	you	want	from	a	long
list	of	available	programs.	Limited	video-on-demand	systems	are	already
installed	in	some	higher-priced	hotel	rooms,	replacing	or	complementing
premium	movie	channels.	Hotel	rooms,	airports,	and	even	airplanes	are	great
laboratories	for	all	the	new	highway	services	that	will	come	later	into	homes.
They	offer	a	controlled	environment	and	an	upscale	audience	for
experimentation.
Television	shows	will	continue	to	be	broadcast	as	they	are	today	for
synchronous	consumption.	After	they	air,	these	shows—as	well	as	thousands
of	movies	and	virtually	all	other	kinds	of	video—will	be	available	whenever
you	want	to	view	them.	You'll	be	able	to	watch	the	new	episode	of	Seinfeld	at
9:00	P.M.	on	Thursday	night,	or	at	9:13	P.M.,	or	at	9:45	P.M.,	or	at	11:00
A.M.	on	Saturday.	If	you	don't	care	for	his	brand	of	humor,	there	will	be
thousands	of	other	choices.	Your	request	for	a	specific	movie	or	television
program	episode	will	register	and	the	bits	will	be	routed	to	you	across	the
network.	The	information	highway	will	make	it	feel	as	though	all	the
intermediary	machinery	between	you	and	the	object	of	your	interest	has	been
removed.	You	indicate	what	you	want,	and	presto!	you	get	it.

Movies,	television	programs,	and	all	sorts	of	other	digital	information	will	be
stored	on	"servers,"	which	are	computers	with	capacious	disks.	Servers	will
provide	information	for	use	anywhere	on	the	network.	If	you	ask	to	see	a
particular	movie,	check	a	fact,	or	retrieve	your	electronic	mail,	your	request
will	be	routed	by	switches	to	the	server	or	servers	storing	that	information.
You	won't	know	whether	the	material	that	arrives	at	your	house	is	stored	on	a
server	down	the	road	or	on	the	other	side	of	the	country,	nor	will	it	matter.
The	requested	digital	data	will	be	retrieved	from	the	server	and	routed	by
switches	back	to	your	television,	personal	computer,	or	telephone—your
information	appliances.	These	digital	devices	will	succeed	for	the	same
reason	their	analog	precursors	did—they	will	make	some	aspect	of	life	easier.
Unlike	the	dedicated	word	processors	that	brought	the	first	microprocessors	to
many	offices,	these	information	appliances	will	be	general-purpose,
programmable	computers	connected	to	the	information	highway.
Even	if	a	show	is	being	broadcast	live,	you'll	be	able	to	use	your	infrared
remote	control	to	start,	stop,	or	go	to	any	previous	part	of	the	program,	at	any
time.	If	someone	comes	to	your	door,	you'll	be	able	to	pause	the	program	for
as	long	as	you	like.	You'll	be	in	absolute	control.	Except,	of	course,	you	won't
be	able	to	forward	past	part	of	a	live	show	as	it's	taking	place.
Delivering	movies	and	television	programs	is	technically	one	of	the	simpler
things	to	do.	Most	viewers	can	understand	video-on-demand	and	will
welcome	the	freedom	it	provides.	It	has	the	potential	to	be	what	in	computer
parlance	is	called	the	"killer	application"	for	the	highway.	A	killer	application
(or	just	"killer	app")	is	a	use	of	technology	so	attractive	to	consumers	that	it
fuels	market	forces	and	makes	an	invention	all	but	indispensable,	even	if	it
wasn't	anticipated	by	the	inventor.	Skin-So-Soft	was	just	another	lotion
competing	in	a	crowded	market	until	someone	discovered	its	insect-repelling
qualities.	Now	it	may	still	be	sold	for
its	original	application—to	soften	skin—but======================================================== long	as	society	needs	help,	there	will	definitely	be	plenty	for	everyone	to	do.
The	broad	benefits	of	advancing	productivity	are	no	solace	for	someone
whose	job	is	on	the	line.	When	a	person	has	been	trained	for	a	job	that	is	no
longer	needed,	you	can't	just	suggest	he	go	out	and	learn	something	else.
Adjustments	aren't	that	simple	or	fast,	but	ultimately	they	are	necessary.	It
isn't	easy	to	prepare	for	the	next	century,	because	it's	almost	impossible	to
guess	the	secondary	effects	of	even	the	changes	we	can	foresee,	much	less
those	we	can't.	A	hundred	years	ago,	people	saw	the	automobile	coming.	It
was	sure	to	make	fortunes,	and	also	to	run	over	some	jobs	and	industries.	But
specifics	would	have	been	hard	to	predict.	You	might	have	warned	your
friends	at	the	Acme	Buggy	Whip	Company	to	polish	up	their	résumés,	and
perhaps	learn	about	engines,	but	would	you	have	known	to	invest	in	real
estate	for	strip	malls?
More	than	ever,	an	education	that	emphasizes	general	problem-solving	skills
will	be	important.	In	a	changing	world,	education	is	the	best	preparation	for
being	able	to	adapt.	As	the	economy	shifts,	people	and	societies	who	are
appropriately	educated	will	tend	to	do	best.	The	premium	that	society	pays	for
skills	is	going	to	climb,	so	my	advice	is	to	get	a	good	formal	education	and
then	keep	on	learning.	Acquire	new	interests	and	skills	throughout	your	life.
A	lot	of	people	will	be	pushed	out	of	their	comfort	zones,	but	that	doesn't

mean	that	what	they	already	know	won't	still	be	valuable.	It	does	mean	that
people	and	companies	will	have	to	be	open	to	reinventing	themselves—
possibly	more	than	once.	Companies	and	governments	can	help	train	and
retrain	workers,	but	the	individual	must	ultimately	bear	principal
responsibility	for	his	education.
A	first	step	will	be	to	come	to	terms	with	computers.	Computers	make	almost
everyone	nervous	before	they	understand	them.	Children	are	the	primary
exception.	First-time	users	worry	that	a	single	misstep	will	cause	them	to	ruin
the	computer	or	lose	everything	stored	in	it.	People	do	lose	data,	of	course,
but	very	rarely	is	the	damage	irreversible.	We	have	worked	to	make	it	harder
to	lose	data	and	easier	to	recover	from	mistakes.	Most	programs	have	"Undo"
commands	that	make	it	simple	to	try	something,	then	quickly	reverse	it.	Users
become	more	confident	as	they	see	that	making	mistakes	won't	be
catastrophic.	And	then	they	begin	to	experiment.	PCs	provide	all	kinds	of
opportunities	for	experimentation.	The	more	experience	people	have	with
PCs,	the	better	they	understand	what	they	can	and	can't	do.	Then	PCs	become
tools	instead	of	threats.	Like	a	tractor	or	a	sewing	machine,	a	computer	is	a
machine	we	can	use	to	help	us	get	certain	tasks	done	more	efficiently.
Another	fear	people	express	is	that	computers	will	be	so	"smart"	they	will
take	over	and	do	away	with	any	need	for	the	human	mind.	Although	I	believe
that	eventually	there	will	be	programs	that	will	recreate	some	elements	of
human	intelligence,	it	is	very	unlikely	to	happen	in	my	lifetime.	For	decades
computer	scientists	studying	artificial	intelligence	have	been	trying	to	develop
a	computer	with	human	understanding	and	common	sense.	Alan	Turing	in
1950	suggested	what	has	come	to	be	called	the	Turing	Test:	If	you	were	able
to	carry	on	a	conversation	with	a	computer	and	another	human,	both	hidden
from	your	view,	and	were	uncertain	about	which	was	which,	you	would	have
a	truly	intelligent	machine.
Every	prediction	about	major	advances	in	artificial	intelligence	has	proved	to
be	overly	optimistic.	Today	even	simple	learning	tasks	still	go	well	beyond
the	world's	most	capable	computer.	When	computers	appear	to	be	intelligent
it	is	because	they	have	been	specially	programmed	to	handle	some	task	in	a
straightforward	fashion—like	trying	out	billions	of	chess	moves	in	order	to
play	master-level	chess.
The	computer	has	the	potential	to	be	a	tool	to	leverage	human	intelligence	for
the	foreseeable	future.	However,	information	appliances	won't	become
mainstream	for	publishing	information	until	almost	everyone	is	a	user.	It
would	be	wonderful	if	everyone—rich	or	poor,	urban	or	rural,	old	or	young—

could	have	access	to	one.	However,	personal	computers	are	still	too	expensive
for	most	people.	Before	the	information	highway	can	become	fully	integrated
into	society,	it	must	be	available	to	virtually	every	citizen,	not	just	the	elite,
but	this	does	not	mean	that	every	citizen	has	to	have	an	information	appliance
in	his	house.	Once	the	majority	of	people	have	systems	installed	in	their
homes,	those	who	do	not	can	be	accommodated	with	a	shared	appliance	at	a
library,	school,	post	office,	or	public	kiosk.	It's	important	to	remember	that	the
question	of	universal	access	arises	only	if	the	highway	is	immensely
successful—more	successful	than	many	commentators	expect.	Amazingly,
some	of	the	same	critics	who	complain	the	highway	will	be	so	popular	it	will
cause	problems	also	complain	it	won't	be	popular	at	all.
The	fully	developed	information	highway	will	be	affordable—almost	by
definition.	An	expensive	system	that	connected	a	few	big	corporations	and
wealthy	people	simply	would	not	be	the	information	highway—it	would	be
the	information	private	road.	The	network	will	not	attract	enough	great
content	to	thrive	if	only	the	most	affluent	10	percent	of	society	choose	to	avail
themselves	of	it.	There	are	fixed	costs	to	authoring	material;	so	to	make	them
affordable,	a	large	audience	is	required.	Advertising	revenue	won't	support	the
highway	if	a	majority	of	eligible	people	don't	embrace	it.	If	that	is	the	case,
the	price	for	connecting	will	have	to	be	cut	or	deployment	delayed	while	the
system	is	redesigned	to	be	more	attractive.	The	information	highway	is	a	mass
phenomenon,	or	it	is	nothing.
Eventually	the	costs	of	computing	and	communications	will	be	so	low,	and
the	competitive	environment	so	open,	that	much	of	the	entertainment	and
information	offered	on	the	highway	will	cost	very	little.	Advertising	income
will	allow	a	lot	of	content	to	be	free.	However,	most	service	providers,
whether	they	are	rock	bands	or	consulting	engineers	or	book	publishers,	will
still	ask	that	users	make	a	payment.	So	the	information	highway	will	be
affordable,	if	used	judiciously,	but	it	won't	be	free.
A	large	portion	of	the	money	you	will	spend	on	highway	services	you	spend
today	for	the	same	services	in	other	forms.	In	the	past	you	may	have	shifted
money	you	spent	on	records	to	buying	compact	discs,	or	from	movie	tickets
to	videotape	rentals.	Soon	your	spending	for	videotape	rentals	will	go	to
video-on-demand	movies.	You	will	redirect	part	of	what	you	now	spend	on
printed-periodical	subscriptions	to	interactive	information	services	and
communities.	Most	of	the	money	that	now	goes	to	local	telephone	service,
long-distance	service,	and	cable	television	will	be	available	to	spend	on	the
highway.

Access	to	government	information,	medical	advice,	bulletin	boards,	and	some
educational	material	will	be	free.	Once	people	are	on	the	highway,	they	will
enjoy	full	egalitarian	access	to	vital	on-line	resources.	Within	twenty	years,	as
commerce,	education,	and	broad-scale	communications	services	move	onto
the	highway,	an	individual's	ability	to	be	part	of	mainstream	society	will
depend,	at	least	in	part,	on	his	or	her	using	it.	Society	will	then	have	to	decide
how	to	subsidize	broad	access	so	that	all	users	will	be	equal,	both
geographically	and	socioeconomically.
Education	is	not	the	entire	answer	to	the	challenges	presented	by	the
Information	Age,	but	it	is	part	of	the	answer,	just	as	education	is	part	of	the
answer	to	a	range	of	society's	problems.	H.	G.	Wells,	who	was	as	imaginative
and	forward-looking	as	any	futurist,	summed	it	up	back	in	1920.	"Human
history,"	he	said,	"becomes	more	and	more	a	race	between	education	and
catastrophe"	Education	is	society's	great	leveler,	and	any	improvement	in
education	goes	a	long	way	toward	equalizing	opportunity.	Part	of	the	beauty
of	the	electronic	world	is	that	the	extra	cost	of	letting	additional	people	use
educational	material	is	basically	zero.
Your	education	in	personal	computers	can	be	informal.	As	I've	said,	my
fascination	began	with	game	playing,	as	years	later	Warren	Buffett's	did.	My
dad	got	hooked	when	he	used	a	computer	to	help	him	prepare	his	taxes.	If
computers	seem	intimidating	to	you,	why	not	try	doing	the	same	sort	of
thing?	Find	something	a	personal	computer	does	that	will	make	your	life
easier	or	more	fun	and	latch	on	to	that	as	a	way	of	getting	more	involved.
Write	a	screenplay;	do	your	banking	from	home;	help	your	child	with	her
homework.	It	is	worth	making	the	effort	to	establish	a	level	of	comfort	with
computers.	If	you	give	them	a	chance,	you	will	most	likely	be	won	over.	If
personal	computing	still	seems	too	hard	or	confusing,	it	doesn't	mean	you
aren't	smart	enough.	It	means	we	still	have	work	to	do	to	make	them	easier.
The	younger	you	are,	the	more	important	this	is.	If	you	are	fifty	or	older
today,	you	may	be	out	of	the	workforce	before	you'll	need	to	learn	to	use	a
computer—although	I	think	if	you	don't	learn,	you'll	be	missing	out	on	the
chance	for	an	amazing	experience.	But	if	you	are	twenty-five	today	and	not
comfortable	with	computers,	you	risk	being	ineffective	in	almost	any	kind	of
work	you	pursue.	To	begin	with,	finding	a	job	will	be	easier	if	you	have
embraced	the	computer	as	a	tool.
Ultimately,	the	information	highway	is	not	for	my	generation	or	those	before
me.	It	is	for	future	generations.	The	kids	who	have	grown	up	with	PCs	in	the
last	decade,	and	those	who	will	grow	up	with	the	highway	in	the	next,	will

push	the	technology	to	its	limits.
We	have	to	pay	particular	attention	to	correcting	the	gender	imbalance.	When
I	was	young,	it	seemed	that	only	boys	were	encouraged	to	mess	around	with
computers.	Girls	are	far	more	active	with	computers	today	than	twenty	years
ago,	but	there	are	still	many	fewer	women	in	technical	careers.	By	making
sure	that	girls	as	well	as	boys	become	comfortable	with	c======================================================== verhead	projectors	represent	the	state	of	the	art.
Reed	Hundt,	chairman	of	the	U.S.	Federal	Communications	Commission,
commented	on	this.	"There	are	thousands	of	buildings	in	this	country	with
millions	of	people	in	them	who	have	no	telephones,	no	cable	television	and
no	reasonable	prospect	of	broadband	services,"	he	said.	"They	are	called
schools"
Despite	these	constraints,	genuine	change	is	going	to	come.	It	won't	happen
abruptly.	On	the	face	of	it,	the	basic	patterns	of	education	will	remain	the
same.	Students	will	continue	to	attend	classes,	listen	to	teachers,	ask
questions,	participate	in	individual	and	group	work	(including	hands-on
experiments),	and	do	homework.
There	seems	to	be	a	universal	commitment	to	having	more	computers	in
schools,	but	the	rate	at	which	they	are	being	supplied	varies	from	country	to
country.	Only	a	few	countries,	such	as	the	Netherlands,	already	have
computers	in	nearly	every	school.	In	France	and	many	other	places,	although
few	installations	have	taken	place,	governments	have
pledged	to	equip	all	their	classrooms	with	computers.	Britain,	Japan,	and	the
People's	Republic	of	China	have	begun	the	process	of	incorporating
information	technology	into	their	national	curricula,	with	a	focus	on
vocational	training.	I	believe	most	countries	will	decide	to	make	increased
investments	in	education,	and	computer	use	in	schools	will	catch	up	to	its	use
in	homes	and	businesses.	Over	time—longer	in	less	developed	countries—we
are	likely	to	see	computers	installed	in	every	classroom	in	the	world.
The	cost	of	computer	hardware	gets	cheaper	almost	by	the	month,	and
educational	software	will	become	quite	affordable	when	purchased	in
quantity.	Already	many	cable	and	telephone	companies	in	the	United	States
have	promised	free	or	reduced-price	network	connections	to	schools	and
libraries	in	their	areas.	For	example,	Pacific	Bell	has	announced	a	plan	to
provide	free	ISDN	service	to	every	school	in	California	for	one	year,	and	TCI
and	Viacom	offer	free	cable	to	schools	in	every	community	they	serve.
Although	a	classroom	will	still	be	a	classroom,	technology	will	transform	a
lot	of	the	details.	Classroom	learning	will	include	multi-media	presentations,
and	homework	will	involve	exploring	electronic	documents	as	much	as
textbooks,	perhaps	even	more.	Students	will	be	encouraged	to	pursue	areas	of
particular	interest,	and	it	will	be	easy	for	them	to	do	so.	Each	pupil	will	be
able	to	have	his	own	question	answered	simultaneously	with	the	other
students'	queries.	A	class	will	spend	part	of	a	day	at	a	personal	computer

exploring	information	individually	or	in	groups.	Then	the	students	will	bring
back	their	thoughts	and	questions	about	the	information	they	have	discovered
to	the	teacher,	who	will	be	able	to	decide	which	questions	should	be	brought
to	the	attention	of	the	full	class.	While	students	are	at	their	computers,	the
teacher	will	be	free	to	work	with	individuals	or	small	groups	and	focus	less	on
lecturing	and	more	on	problem	solving.
Educators,	like	so	many	in	today's	economy,	are,	among	other	things,
facilitators.	Like	many	other,	similar	workers,	they	will	have	to	adapt	and
readapt	to	changing	conditions.	Unlike	some	professions,	however,	the	future
of	teaching	looks	extremely	bright.	As	innovation	has	improved	the	standard
of	living,	there	has	always	been	an	increase	in	the	portion	of	the	workforce
dedicated	to	education.	Educators	who	bring	energy	and	creativity	to	a
classroom	will	thrive.	So	will	teachers	who	build	strong	relationships	with
children,	because	kids	love	classes	taught	by	adults	they	know	genuinely	care
about	them.
We've	all	had	teachers	who	made	a	difference.	I	had	a	great	chemistry	teacher
in	high	school	who	made	his	subject	immensely	interesting.	Chemistry
seemed	enthralling	compared	to	biology.	In	biology,	we	were	dissecting	frogs
—just	hacking	them	to	pieces,	actually—and	our	teacher	didn't	explain	why.
My	chemistry	teacher	sensationalized	his	subject	a	bit	and	promised	that	it
would	help	us	understand	the	world.	When	I	was	in	my	twenties,	I	read	James
D.	Watson's	Molecular	Biology	of	the	Gene	and	decided	my	high	school
experience	had	misled	me.	The	understanding	of	life	is	a	great	subject.
Biological	information	is	the	most	important	information	we	can	discover,
because	over	the	next	several	decades	it	will	revolutionize	medicine.	Human
DNA	is	like	a	computer	program	but	far,	far	more	advanced	than	any	software
ever	created.	It	seems	amazing	to	me	now	that	one	great	teacher	made
chemistry	endlessly	fascinating	while	I	found	biology	totally	boring.
When	teachers	do	excellent	work	and	prepare	wonderful	materials,	only	their
few	dozen	students	benefit	each	year.	It's	difficult	for	teachers	in	different
locations	to	build	on	one	another's	work.	The	network	will	enable	teachers	to
share	lessons	and	materials,	so	that	the	best	educational	practices	can	spread.
In	most	cases	watching	a	lecture	on	video	is	much	less	interesting	than
actually	being	in	the	room	with	the	teacher.	But	sometimes	the	value	of	being
able	to	hear	a	particular	teacher	outweighs	the	loss	of	interactivity.	A	few
years	ago,	a	friend	and	I	discovered	in	the	University	of	Washington's	catalog
videotapes	of	a	series	of	lectures	by	the	distinguished	physicist	Richard
Feynman.	We	were	able	to	watch	the	lectures	on	vacation	ten	years	after
Feynman	gave	the	talks	at	Cornell.	We	might	have	gotten	more	from	the

lectures	if	we	had	been	in	the	lecture	hall	or	been	able	to	ask	him	questions
via	a	videoconference.	But	the	clarity	of	his	thinking	explained	many	of	the
concepts	of	physics	better	than	any	book	or	any	instructor	I've	ever	had.	He
brought	the	subject	to	life.	I	think	anyone	studying	physics	should	have	these
lectures	easily	accessible.	With	the	information	highway	there	will	be	lots	of
such	uniquely	valuable	resources	available	to	teachers	and	students.
If	a	teacher	in	Providence,	Rhode	Island,	happened	to	have	a	particularly
good	way	of	explaining	photosynthesis,	her	lecture	notes	and	multi-media
demonstrations	could	be	obtained	by	educators	around	the	world.	Some
teachers	will	use	material	exactly	as	it	comes	off	the	highway,	but	others	will
take	advantage	of	easy-to-use	authoring	software	to	adapt	and	combine	bits
and	pieces	of	what	they	find.	Feedback	from	other	interested	instructors	will
be	easy	to	get	and	will	help	refine	the	lesson.	In	a	short	time	the	improved
material	could	be	in	thousands	of	classrooms	all	over	the	world.	It	will	be
easy	to	tell	what	materials	are	popular,	because	the	network	will	be	able	to
count	the	number	of	times	they	are	accessed,	or	to	poll	teachers	electronically.
Corporations	wanting	to	help	with	education	could	provide	recognition	and
cash	awards	to	teachers	whose	materials	are	making	a	difference.
It	is	hard	for	a	teacher	to	prepare	in-depth,	interesting	material	for	twenty-five
students,	six	hours	a	day,	180	days	a	year.	This	is	particularly	true	if	students'
extensive	television	watching	has	raised	their	entertainment	expectations.	I
can	imagine	a	middle-school	science	teacher	a	decade	or	so	from	now,
working	on	a	lecture	about	the	sun,	explaining	not	only	the	science	but	also
the	history	of	discoveries	that	made	it	possible.	When	a	teacher	wants	to
select	a	picture,	still	or	video,	whether	it's	a	piece	of	art	or	a	portrait	of	a	great
solar	scientist,	the	highway	will	allow	her	to	select	from	a	comprehensive
catalog	of	images.	Snippets	of	video	and	narrated	animations	from	countless
sources	will	be	available.	It	will	only	take	minutes	to	pull	together	a	visual
show	that	would	now	require	days	of	work	to	organize.	As	she	lectures	about
the	sun,	she	will	have	images	and	diagrams	appear	at	appropriate	times.	If	a
student	asks	her	about	the	source	of	the	sun's	power,	she	can	answer	using
animated	graphics	of	hydrogen	and	helium	atoms,	she'll	be	able	to	show	solar
flares	or	sunspots	or	other	phenomena,	or	she	might	call	up	a	brief	video	on
fusion	energy	to	the	white	board.	The	teacher	will	have	organized	the	links	to
servers	on	the	information	highway	in	advance.	She	will	make	the	list	of	links
available	to	her	students,	so	that	during	study	times	in	the	library	or	at	home,
they	will	be	able	to	review	the	material	from	as	many	perspectives	as	they
find	helpful.
Think	of	a	high	school	art	teacher	using	a	digital	white	board	to	display	a

high-quality	digital	reproduction	of	Seurat's	Bathers	at	Asnières,	which	shows
young	men	relaxing	on	the	bank	of	the	Seine	River	in	the	1880s	against	a
background	of	sailboats	and	smokestacks.	The	white	board	will	pronounce	the
name	of	the	painting	in	the	original	French—Une	Baignade	à	Asnières	and
show	a	map	of	the	outskirts	of	Paris,	with	the	town	of	Asnières	highlighted.
The	teacher	might	use	the	painting,	which	presaged	Pointillism,	to	illustrate
the	end	of	Impressionism.	Or	she	will	use	it	to	get	into	broader	topics,	such	as
life	in	France	at	the	end	of	the	nineteenth	century,	the	Industrial	Revolution,
or	even	the	way	the	eye	sees	complementary	colors.
She	might	point	to	the	orangish-red	hat	of	a	figure	standing	on	the	far	right
side	of	the	composition	and	say:	"Look	at	the	vibrancy	of	the	hat.	Seurat	has
tricked	the	eye.	The	hat	is	red,	but	he	has	added	tiny	dots	of	orange	and	blue.
You	don't	really	notice	the	blue	unless	you	look	closely."	As	the	teacher	says
this,	the	picture	will	zoom	in	on	the	hat,	until	the	texture	of	the	canvas	is
apparent.	At	this	magnification,	specks	of	blue	will	be	obvious,	and	the
teacher	will	explain	that	blue	is	the	complement	of	orange.	A	color	wheel	will
appear	on	the	white	board,	and	either	the	teacher	or	the	multi-media	document
itself	will	explain:	"Every	color	on	this	wheel	is	arranged	opposite	its
complement.	Red	is	opposite	green,	yellow	is	opposite	purple,	and	blue	is
opposite	orange.	It	is	a	quirk	of	the	eye	that	staring	at	a	color	creates	an
afterimage	of	its	complementary	color.	Seurat	used	this	trick	to	make	the	red
and	orange	hues	of	the	hat	more	vivid	by	sneaking	in	dots	of	blue."
Computers	conn======================================================== eramental	monsters	that	resided	in	climate-controlled
cocoons.	After	we	had	used	up	the	money	the	Mothers'	Club	had	provided,
my	school	friend	Paul	Allen,	with	whom	I	later	started	Microsoft,	and	I	spent
a	lot	of	time	trying	to	get	access	to	computers.	They	performed	modestly	by
today's	standards,	but	seemed	awesome	to	us	because	they	were	big	and
complicated	and	cost	as	much	as	millions	of	dollars	each.	They	were
connected	by	phone	lines	to	clackety	Teletype	terminals	so	they	could	be
shared	by	people	at	different	locations.	We	rarely	got	close	to	the	actual
mainframes.	Computer	time	was	very	expensive.	When	I	was	in	high	school,
it	cost	about	$40	an	hour	to	access	a	time-shared	computer	using	a	Teletype—
for	that	$40	an	hour	you	got	a	slice	of	the	computer's	precious	attention.	This
seems	odd	today,	when	some	people	have	more	than	one	PC	and	think
nothing	of	leaving	them	idle	for	most	of	the	day.	Actually,	it	was	possible
even	then	to	own	your	own	computer.	If	you	could	afford	$18,000,	Digital
Equipment	Corporation	(DEC)	made	the	PDP-8.	Although	it	was	called	a
"mini-computer,"	it	was	large	by	today's	standards.	It	occupied	a	rack	about
two	feet	square	and	six	feet	high	and	weighed	250	pounds.	We	had	one	at	our
high	school	for	a	while,	and	I	fooled	around	with	it	a	lot.	The	PDP-8	was	very
limited	compared	to	the	mainframes	we	could	reach	by	phone;	in	fact,	it	had
less	raw	computing	power	than	some	wristwatches	do	today.	But	it	was
programmable	the	same	way	the	big,	expensive	ones	were:	by	giving	it
software	instructions.	Despite	its	limitations,	the	PDP-8	inspired	us	to	indulge
in	the	dream	that	one	day	millions	of	individuals	could	possess	their	own
computers.	With	each	passing	year,	I	became	more	certain	that	computers	and
computing	were	destined	to	be	cheap	and	ubiquitous.	I'm	sure	that	one	of	the
reasons	I	was	so	determined	to	help	develop	the	personal	computer	is	that	I
wanted	one	for	myself.
At	that	time	software,	like	computer	hardware,	was	expensive.	It	had	to	be
written	specifically	for	each	kind	of	computer.	And	each	time	computer
hardware	changed,	which	it	did	regularly,	the	software	for	it	pretty	much	had
to	be	rewritten.	Computer	manufacturers	provided	some	standard	software
program	building	blocks	(for	example,	libraries	of	mathematical	functions)
with	their	machines,	but	most	software	was	written	specifically	to	solve	some
business's	individual	problems.	Some	software	was	shared,	and	a	few
companies	were	selling	general-purpose	software,	but	there	was	very	little
packaged	software	that	you	could	buy	off	the	shelf.
My	parents	paid	my	tuition	at	Lakeside	and	gave	me	money	for	books,	but	I

had	to	take	care	of	my	own	computer-time	bills.	This	is	what	drove	me	to	the
commercial	side	of	the	software	business.	A	bunch	of	us,	including	Paul
Allen,	got	entry-level	software	programming	jobs.	For	high	school	students
the	pay	was	extraordinary—about	$5,000	each	summer,	part	in	cash	and	the
rest	in	computer	time.	We	also	worked	out	deals	with	a	few	companies
whereby	we	could	use	computers	for	free	if	we'd	locate	problems	in	their
software.	One	of	the	programs	I	wrote	was	the	one	that	scheduled	students	in
classes.	I	surreptitiously	added	a	few	instructions	and	found	myself	nearly	the
only	guy	in	a	class	full	of	girls.	As	I	said	before,	it	was	hard	to	tear	myself
away	from	a	machine	at	which	I	could	so	unambiguously	demonstrate
success.	I	was	hooked.
Paul	knew	a	lot	more	than	I	did	about	computer	hardware,	the	machines
themselves.	One	summer	day	in	1972,	when	I	was	sixteen	and	Paul	was
nineteen,	he	showed	me	a	ten-paragraph	article	buried	on	page	143	of
Electronics	magazine.	It	was	announcing	that	a	young	firm	named	Intel	had
released	a	microprocessor	chip	called	the	8008.
A	microprocessor	is	a	simple	chip	that	contains	the	entire	brain	of	a	whole
computer.	Paul	and	I	realized	this	first	microprocessor	was	very	limited,	but
he	was	sure	that	the	chips	would	get	more	powerful	and	computers	on	a	chip
would	improve	very	rapidly.
At	the	time,	the	computer	industry	had	no	idea	of	building	a	real	computer
around	a	microprocessor.	The	Electronics	article,	for	example,	described	the
8008	as	suitable	for	"any	arithmetic,	control,	or	decision-making	system,	such
as	a	smart	terminal"	The	writers	didn't	see	that	a	microprocessor	could	grow
up	to	be	a	general-purpose	computer.	Microprocessors	were	slow	and	limited
in	the	amount	of	information	they	could	handle.	None	of	the	languages
programmers	were	familiar	with	was	available	for	the	8008,	which	made	it
nearly	impossible	to	write	complex	programs	for	it.	Every	application	had	to
be	programmed	with	the	few	dozen	simple	instructions	the	chip	could
understand.	The	8008	was	condemned	to	life	as	a	beast	of	burden,	carrying
out	uncomplicated	and	unchanging	tasks	over	and	over.	It	was	quite	popular
in	elevators	and	calculators.

1972:	Intel's	8088	microprocessor
To	put	it	another	way,	a	simple	microprocessor	in	an	embedded	application,
such	as	an	elevator's	controls,	is	a	single	instrument,	a	drum	or	a	horn,	in	the
hands	of	an	amateur:	good	for	basic	rhythm	or	uncomplicated	tunes.	A
powerful	microprocessor	with	programming	languages,	however,	is	like	an
accomplished	orchestra.	With	the	right	software,	or	sheet	music,	it	can	play
anything.
Paul	and	I	wondered	what	we	could	program	the	8008	to	do.	He	called	up
Intel	to	request	a	manual.	We	were	a	little	surprised	when	they	actually	sent
him	one.	We	both	dug	into	it.	I	had	worked	out	a	version	of	BASIC,	which
ran	on	the	limited	DEC	PDP-8,	and	was	excited	at	the	thought	of	doing	the
same	for	the	little	Intel	chip.	But	as	I	studied	the	8008's	manual,	I	realized	it
was	futile	to	try.	The	8008	just	wasn't	sophisticated	enough,	didn't	have
enough	transistors.
We	did,	however,	figure	out	a	way	to	use	the	little	chip	to	power	a	machine
that	could	analyze	the	information	counted	by	traffic	monitors	on	city	streets.
Many	municipalities	that	measured	traffic	flow	did	so	by	stringing	a	rubber
hose	over	a	selected	street.	When	a	car	crossed	the	hose,	it	punched	a	paper
tape	inside	a	metal	box	at	the	end	of	the	hose.	We	saw	that	we	could	use	the
8008	to	process	these	tapes,	to	print	out	graphs	and	other	statistics.	We
baptized	our	first	company	"Traf-O-Data."	At	the	time	it	sounded	like	poetry.
I	wrote	much	of	the	software	for	the	Traf-O-Data	machine	on	cross-state	bus
trips	from	Seattle	to	Pullman,	Washington,	where	Paul	was	attending	college.
Our	prototype	worked	well,	and	we	envisioned	selling	lots	of	our	new
machines	across	the	country.	We	used	it	to	process	traffic-volume	tapes	for	a
few	customers,	but	no	one	actually	wanted	to	buy	the	machine,	at	least	not
from	a	couple	of	teenagers.
Despite	our	disappointment,	we	still	believed	our	future,	even	if	it	was	not	to

be	in	hardware,	might	have	something	to	do	with	microprocessors.	After	I
started	at	Harvard	College	in	1973,	Paul	somehow	managed	to	coax	his
clunky	old	Chrysler	New	Yorker	cross-country	from	Washington	State	and
took	a	job	in	Boston,	programming	mini-computers	at	Honeywell.	He	drove
over	to	Cambridge	a	lot	so	we	could	continue	our	long	talks	about	future
schemes.
In	the	spring	of	1974,	Electronics	magazine	announced	Intel's	new	8080	chip
—ten	times	the	power	of	the	8008	inside	the	Traf-O-Data	machine.	The	8080
was	not	much	larger	than	the	8008,	but	it	contained	2,700	more	transistors.
All	at	once	we	were	looking	at	the	heart	of	a	real	computer,	and	the	price	was
under	$200.	We	attacked	the	manual.	"DEC	can't	sell	any	more	PDP-8s	now,"
I	told	Paul.	It	seemed	obvious	to	us	that	if	a	tiny	chip	could	get	so	much	more
powerful,	the	end	of	big	unwieldy	machines	was	coming.
Computer	manufacturers,	however,	didn't	see	the	microprocessor	as	a	threat.
They	just	couldn't	imagine	a	puny	chip	taking	on	a	"real"	computer.	Not	even
the	scientists	at	Intel	saw	its	full	potential.	To	them,	the	8080	represented
nothing	more	than	an	improvement	in	chip	technology.	In	the	short	term,	the
computer	establishment	was	right.	The	8080	was	just	another	slight	advance.
But	Paul	and	I	looked	past	the	limits	of	that	new	chip	and	saw	a	different	kind
of	computer	that	would	be	perfect	for	us,	and	for	everyone—personal,
affordable,	and	adaptable.	It	was	absolutely	clear	to	us	that	because	the	new
chips	were	so	cheap,	they	soon	would	be	everywhere.
Computer	hardware,	which	had	once	been	scarce,	would	soon	be	readily
available,	and	access	to	computers	would	no	longer	be	charged	for	at	a	high
hourly	rate.	It	seemed	to	us	people	would	find	all	kinds	of	new	uses	for
computing	if	it	was	cheap.	Then,	software	would	be	the	key	to	delivering	the
full	potential	of	these	machines.	Paul	and	I	speculated	that	Japanese
companies	and	IBM	would	likely	produce	most	of	the	hardware.	We	believed
we	could	come	up	with	new	and	innovative	software.	And	why	not?	The
microprocessor	would	change	the	structure	of	the	industry.	Maybe	there	was	a
place	for	the	two	of	us.
This	kind	of	talk	is	what	college	is	all	about.	You	have	all	kinds	of	new
experiences,	and	dream	crazy	dreams.	We	were	young	and	assumed	we	had
all	the	time	in	the	world.	I	enrolled	for	another	year	at	Harvard	and	kept
thinking	about	how	we	could	get	a	software	company	going.	One	plan	was
pretty	simple.	We	sent	letters	from	my	dorm	room	to	all	the	big	computer
companies,	offering	to	write	them	a	version	of	BASIC	for	the	new	Intel	chip.
We	got	no	takers.	By	December,	we	were	pretty	discouraged.	I	was	planning

to	fly	home	to	Seattle	for	the	holidays,	and	Paul	was	staying	in	Boston.	On	an
achingly	cold	Massachusetts	morning	a	few	days	before	I	left,	Paul	and	I	were
hanging	out	at	the	Harvard	Square	newsstand,	and	Paul	picked	up	the	January
issue	of	Popular	Electronics.	This	is	the	moment	I	described	at	the	beginning
of	the	Foreword.	This	gave	reality	to	our	dreams	about	the	future.
January	1975	issue	of	Popular	Electronics
On	the	magazine's	cover	was	a	photograph	of	a	very	small	computer,	not
much	larger	than	a	toaster	oven.	It	had	a	name	only	slightly	more	dignified
t======================================================== to	a	large	monitor	and	to	the	corporate	network	in	the	office.
Notebook	computers	will	continue	to	get	thinner	until	they	are	nearly	the	size
of	a	tablet	of	paper.	Notebooks	are	the	smallest	and	most	portable	real
computers	today,	but	soon	there	will	be	pocket-size	computers	with	snapshot-

size	color	screens.	When	you	whip	one	out,	no	one	will	say,	"Wow!	You've
got	a	computer!"
1995:	Multimedia	notebook	computer	by	Digital	Equipment	Corporation
What	do	you	carry	on	your	person	now?	Probably	at	least	keys,	identification,
money,	and	a	watch.	Quite	possibly	you	also	carry	credit	cards,	a	checkbook,
traveler's	checks,	an	address	book,	an	appointment	book,	a	notepad,	reading
material,	a	camera,	a	pocket	tape	recorder,	a	cellular	phone,	a	pager,	concert
tickets,	a	map,	a	compass,	a	calculator,	an	electronic	entry	card,	photographs,
and	perhaps	a	loud	whistle	to	summon	help.
You'll	be	able	to	keep	all	these	and	more	in	another	information	appliance	we
call	the	wallet	PC.	It	will	be	about	the	same	size	as	a	wallet,	which	means
you'll	be	able	to	carry	it	in	your	pocket	or	purse.	It	will	display	messages	and
schedules	and	also	let	you	read	or	send	electronic	mail	and	faxes,	monitor
weather	and	stock	reports,	and	play	both	simple	and	sophisticated	games.	At	a
meeting	you	might	take	notes,	check	your	appointments,	browse	information
if	you're	bored,	or	choose	from	among	thousands	of	easy-to-call-up	photos	of
your	kids.
Rather	than	holding	paper	currency,	the	new	wallet	will	store	unforgeable
digital	money.	Today	when	you	hand	someone	a	dollar	bill,	check,	gift
certificate,	or	other	negotiable	instrument,	the	transfer	of	paper	represents	a
transfer	of	funds.	But	money	does	not	have	to	be	expressed	on	paper.	Credit
card	charges	and	wired	funds	are	exchanges	of	digital	financial	information.
Tomorrow	the	wallet	PC	will	make	it	easy	for	anyone	to	spend	and	accept
digital	funds.	Your	wallet	will	link	into	a	store's	computer	to	allow	money	to
be	transferred	without	any	physical	exchange	at	a	cash	register.	Digital	cash
will	be	used	in	interpersonal	transactions,	too.	If	your	son	needs	money,	you
might	digitally	slip	five	bucks	from	your	wallet	PC	to	his.

Prototype	of	a	wallet	PC
When	wallet	PCs	are	ubiquitous,	we	can	eliminate	the	bottlenecks	that	now
plague	airport	terminals,	theaters,	and	other	locations	where	people	queue	to
show	identification	or	a	ticket.	As	you	pass	through	an	airport	gate,	for
example,	your	wallet	PC	will	connect	to	the	airport's	computers	and	verify
that	you	have	paid	for	a	ticket.	You	won't	need	a	key	or	magnetic	card	key	to
get	through	doors	either.	Your	wallet	PC	will	identify	you	to	the	computer
controlling	the	lock.
As	cash	and	credit	cards	begin	to	disappear,	criminals	may	target	the	wallet
PC,	so	there	will	have	to	be	safeguards	to	prevent	a	wallet	PC	from	being
used	in	the	same	manner	as	a	stolen	charge	card.	The	wallet	PC	will	store	the
"keys"	you'll	use	to	identify	yourself.	You	will	be	able	to	invalidate	your	keys
easily,	and	they	will	be	changed	regularly.	For	some	important	transactions,
just	having	the	key	in	your	wallet	PC	won't	be	enough.	One	solution	is	to
have	you	enter	a	password	at	the	time	of	the	transaction.	Automatic	teller
machines	ask	you	to	provide	a	personal	identification	number,	which	is	just	a
very	short	password.	Another	option,	which	would	eliminate	the	need	for	you
to	remember	a	password,	is	the	use	of	biometric	measurements.	Individual
biometric	measurements	are	more	secure	and	almost	certainly	will	be
included	eventually	in	some	wallet	PCs.
A	biometric	security	system	records	a	physical	trait,	such	as	a	voiceprint	or	a
fingerprint.	For	example,	your	wallet	PC	might	demand	that	you	read	aloud	a
random	word	that	it	flashes	on	its	screen	or	that	you	press	your	thumb	against
the	side	of	the	device	whenever	you	are	about	to	conduct	a	transaction	with
significant	financial	implications.	The	wallet	will	compare	what	it	"heard"	or
"felt"	with	its	digital	record	of	your	voice-	or	thumbprint.
Wallet	PCs	with	the	proper	equipment	will	be	able	to	tell	you	exactly	where
you	are	anyplace	on	the	face	of	Earth.	The	Global	Positioning	System	(GPS)
satellites	in	an	orbit	around	Earth	broadcast	signals	that	permit	jetliners,
oceangoing	boats,	and	cruise	missiles,	or	hikers	with	handheld	GPS	receivers,
to	know	their	exact	location	to	within	a	few	hundred	feet.	Such	devices	are

currently	available	for	a	few	hundred	dollars,	and	they	will	be	built	into	many
wallet	PCs.
The	wallet	PC	will	connect	you	to	the	information	highway	while	you	travel	a
real	highway,	and	tell	you	where	you	are.	Its	built-in	speaker	will	be	able	to
dictate	directions	to	let	you	know	that	a	freeway	exit	is	coming	up	or	that	the
next	intersection	has	frequent	accidents.	It	will	monitor	digital	traffic	reports
and	warn	you	that	you'd	better	leave	for	an	airport	early,	or	suggest	an
alternate	route.	The	wallet	PC's	color	maps	will	overlay	your	location	with
whatever	kinds	of	information	you	desire—road	and	weather	conditions,
campgrounds,	scenic	spots,	even	fast-food	outlets.	You	might	ask,	"Where's
the	nearest	Chinese	restaurant	that	is	still	open?"	and	the	information
requested	will	be	transmitted	to	the	wallet	by	wireless	network.	Off	the	roads,
on	a	hike	in	the	woods,	it	will	be	your	compass	and	as	useful	as	your	Swiss
Army	knife.
In	fact,	I	think	of	the	wallet	PC	as	the	new	Swiss	Army	knife.	I	had	one	of
those	knives	when	I	was	a	kid.	Mine	was	neither	the	most	basic	with	just	two
blades	nor	the	one	with	a	workshop's	worth	of	equipment.	It	had	the	classic
shiny	red	handle	with	the	white	cross	and	lots	of	blades	and	attachments,
including	a	screwdriver,	a	tiny	pair	of	scissors,	and	even	a	corkscrew
(although	at	the	time	I	had	no	use	for	that	particular	accessory).	Some	wallet
PCs	will	be	simple	and	elegant	and	offer	only	the	essentials,	such	as	a	small
screen,	a	microphone,	a	secure	way	to	transact	business	with	digital	money,
and	the	capability	to	read	or	otherwise	use	basic	information.	Others	will
bristle	with	all	kinds	of	gadgets,	including	cameras,	scanners	that	will	be	able
to	read	printed	text	or	handwriting,	and	receivers	with	the	global-positioning
capability.	Most	will	have	a	panic	button	for	you	to	press	if	you	need
emergency	help.	Some	models	will	include	thermometers,	barometers,
altimeters,	and	heart-rate	sensors.
Prices	will	vary	accordingly,	but	generally	wallet	PCs	will	be	priced	about	the
way	cameras	are	today.	Simple,	single-purpose	"smart	cards"	for	digital
currency	will	cost	about	what	a	disposable	camera	does	now,	whereas,	like	an
elaborate	camera,	a	really	sophisticated	wallet	PC	might	cost	$1,000	or	more,
but	it	will	outperform	the	most	exotic	computer	of	just	a	decade	ago.	Smart
cards,	the	most	basic	form	of	the	wallet	PC,	look	like	credit	cards	and	are
popular	now	in	Europe.	Their	microprocessors	are	embedded	within	the
plastic.	The	smart	card	of	the	future	will	identify	its	owner	and	store	digital
money,	tickets,	and	medical	information.	It	won't	have	a	screen,	audio
capabilities,	or	any	of	the	more	elaborate	options	of	the	more	expensive	wallet
PCs.	It	will	be	handy	for	travel	or	as	a	backup,	and	may	be	sufficient	by	itself

for	some	people's	uses.
If	you	aren't	carrying	a	wallet	PC,	you'll	still	have	access	to	the	highway	by
using	kiosks—some	free,	some	requiring	payment	of	a	fee—which	will	be
found	in	office	buildings,	shopping	malls,	and	airports	in	much	the	same	spirit
as	drinking	fountains,	rest	rooms,	and	pay	phones.	In	fact,	they	will	replace
not	only	pay	phones	but	also	banking	machines,	because	they	will	offer	their
capabilities	as	well	as	all	the	other	highway	applications,	from	sending	and
receiving	messages	to	scanning	maps	and	buying	tickets.	Access	to	kiosks
will	be	essential,	and	available	everywhere.	Some	kiosks	will	display
advertising	links	to	specific	services	when	you	first	log	on—a	bit	like	the
phones	in	airports	that	connect	right	to	hotel	and	rental-car	reservations.	Like
the	cash	machines	we	find	in	airports	today,	they	will	look	like	rugged
devices,	but	inside	they	will	also	be	PCs.
No	matter	what	form	the	PC	takes,	users	will	still	have	to	be	able	to	navigate
their	way	through	its	applications.	Think	of	the	way	you	use	your	television
remote	control	today	to	choose	what	you	want	to	watch.	Future	systems	with
more	choices	will	have	to	do	better.	They'll	have	to	avoid	making	you	go
step-by-step	through	all	the	options.	Instead	of	having	to	remember	which
channel	number	to	use	to	find	a	program,	you	will	be	shown	a	graphical	menu
and	be	able	to	select	what	you	want	by	pointing	to	an	easy-to-understand
image.
You	won't	necessarily	have	to	point	to	make	your	point.	Eventually	we'll	also
be	able	to	speak	to	our	televisions,	personal	computers,	or	other	information
appliances.	At	first	we'll	have	to	keep	to	a	limited	vocabulary,	but	eventually
our	exchanges	will	become	quite	conversational.	This	capability	requires
powerful	hardware	and	software,	because	conversation	that	a	human	can
understand	effortlessly	is	very	hard	for	a	computer	to	interpret.	Already,	voice
recognition	works	fine	for	a	small	set	of	predefined	commands,	such	as	"Call
my	sister."	It's	much	more	difficult	for	a	computer	to	decipher	an	arbitrary
sentence,	but	in	the	next	ten	years	this	too	will	become	possible.
Some	users	will	find	it	convenient	to	handwrite	instructions	to	a	computer,
rather	than	speaking	or	typing	them.	Many	companies,	including	Microsoft,
have	spent	some	years	working	on	what	we	call	"pen-based	computers"
capable	of	reading	handwriting.	I	was	overly	optimistic	about	how	quickly	we
would	be	able	to	create	software	that	would	recognize	the	handwriting	of	a
broad	range	of	people.	The	difficulties	turned	out	to	be	quite	subtle.	When	we
tested	the	system	ourselves	it	worked	well,	but	new	users	continued	to	have
trouble	with	it.	We	discovered	we	were	unconsciously	making	our

handwriting	neater	and	more	recognizable	than	usual.	We	were	adapting	to
the	machine	rather	than	the	other	way======================================================== ange	seems	terse,	keep	in	mind	that	the	average	Microsoft
employee	receives	dozens	of	electronic	messages	a	day.	An	e-mail	message	is
like	a	statement	or	a	question	at	a	meeting—one	thought	or	inquiry	in	an	on-
going	communication.	Microsoft	provides	e-mail	for	business	purposes,	but,
like	the	office	telephone,	it	serves	many	other	purposes,	social	and	personal.
For	example,	hikers	can	reach	all	the	members	of	the	Microsoft	Hiking	Club
to	try	to	find	a	ride	to	the	mountain.	And	certainly	a	few	romances	around
Microsoft	have	benefited	from	e-mail.	When	my	wife,	Melinda,	and	I	were
first	going	out,	we	took	advantage	of	it.	For	some	reason	people	are	less	shy
about	sending	e-mail	than	communicating	on	the	phone	or	in	person.	This	can
be	a	benefit	or	a	problem,	depending	on	the	situation.
I	spend	several	hours	a	day	reading	and	answering	e-mail	to	and	from
employees,	customers,	and	partners	around	the	world.	Anyone	in	the
company	can	send	me	e-mail,	and	because	I	am	the	only	person	who	reads	it,
no	one	has	to	worry	about	protocol	in	a	message	to	me.
I	probably	wouldn't	have	to	spend	so	long	if	my	e-mail	address	weren't
semipublic.	There	is	actually	a	book	called	E-Mail	Addresses	of	the	Rich	&
Famous,	which	includes	my	e-mail	address	as	well	as	ones	for	Rush
Limbaugh	and	Senator	Ted	Kennedy.	When	John	Seabrook	was	writing	an
article	about	me	for	The	New	Yorker	magazine,	he	conducted	his	interview
primarily	on	e-mail.	It	was	a	very	effective	way	to	have	a	dialogue,	and	I
enjoyed	the	piece	when	it	appeared,	but	it	mentioned	my	e-mail	address.	The
result	has	been	an	avalanche	of	mail	ranging	from	students	asking	me,	in
effect,	to	do	their	homework	assignments,	to	people	asking	for	money,	to	mail
from	a	group	interested	in	whales	who	for	some	reason	added	my	e-mail
name	to	their	list.	My	address	is	also	a	target	for	both	rude	and	friendly
messages	from	strangers,	and	provocative	ones	from	the	press	("If	you	don't
answer	this	by	tomorrow	I	will	publish	a	story	about	you	and	that	topless
waitress!").
We	have	special	e-mail	addresses	at	Microsoft	for	job	applications,	product
feedback,	and	other	legitimate	communications.	But	a	lot	of	that	mail	still

comes	to	me	and	I	have	to	reroute	it.	There	are	also	three	e-mail	equivalents
of	chain	letters	that	keep	making	the	rounds.	One	threatens	general	bad	luck	if
it	isn't	forwarded.	Another	specifically	says	the	punishment	will	be	that	your
sex	life	will	suffer.	A	third,	which	has	been	going	around	for	six	years,
contains	a	cookie	recipe	and	a	story	about	a	company's	having	overcharged	a
woman	for	the	recipe,	and	so	she	wants	you	to	distribute	it	for	free.	In	the
various	versions	different	companies	are	named.	Apparently	it	is	the	idea	of
getting	back	at	a	corporation,	any	corporation,	that	has	made	that	one	such	a
perennial	favorite.	This	is	all	mixed	in	with	mail	that	really	should	come	to
me,	often	about	important	issues.	Fortunately,	e-mail	software	is	improving
all	the	time	and	it	now	includes	a	feature	that	lets	me	prioritize	mail	from
senders	I	have	designated.
When	I	travel,	I	connect	my	portable	computer	back	into	Microsoft's
electronic	mail	system	every	night	to	retrieve	new	messages	and	send	off	the
ones	I've	written	over	the	course	of	the	day	to	people	in	the	company.	Most
recipients	will	not	even	be	aware	that	I	am	out	of	the	ofrice.	When	I'm
connected	to	our	corporate	network	from	a	remote	site,	I	can	also	click	on	a
single	icon	to	see	how	sales	are	doing,	to	check	the	status	of	projects,	or	to
access	any	other	management	databases.	It	is	reassuring	to	check	my
electronic	in-box	when	I'm	thousands	of	miles	and	a	dozen	time	zones	away,
because	bad	news	almost	always	comes	through	on	e-mail.	So	if	nothing	bad
is	waiting	there,	I	don't	need	to	worry.
We	now	use	e-mail	in	all	sorts	of	ways	we	hadn't	anticipated.	For	example,	at
the	beginning	of	the	annual	Microsoft	Giving	Campaign,	which	raises	money
for	charity,	employees	receive	an	e-mail	message	encouraging	them	to
participate.	The	e-mail	message	contains	an	electronic	pledge-card	program.
When	the	icon	in	the	message	is	clicked,	the	pledge	card	appears	on	the
employee's	screen	and	he	or	she	can	pledge	a	cash	gift	or	sign	up	for	a	payroll
deduction.	If	the	latter	option	is	chosen,	the	information	is	automatically
entered	into	Microsofts	payroll	database.	From	the	electronic	form	employees
can	direct	their	gift	to	their	local	United	Way	or	to	another	nonprofit
organization.	If	they	want	to,	they	can	choose	to	have	their	donation	go	to	one
or	more	of	the	charities	the	United	Way	supports,	and	can	even	access	a
server	to	obtain	information	about	those	organizations	or	about	volunteering
in	their	community.	From	start	to	finish	it's	completely	electronic.	As	the
leader	of	the	company,	I	can	analyze	summary	information	day	by	day	to	find
out	if	we	are	getting	good	participation	or	if	we	need	to	have	a	few	more
rallies	to	get	out	the	message	about	how	important	we	think	the	giving
campaign	is.

Today,	besides	company-operated,	text-based	e-mail	systems,	the	kind
Microsoft	operates	for	its	own	use,	there	are	commercial	services	such	as
MCI	Mail	and	B.T.	Gold	(operated	by	British	Telecom).	There	are	also
offerings	from	all	of	the	commercial	on-line	systems	such	as	CompuServe,
Prodigy,	and	the	Microsoft	Network.	These	perform	some	of	the	same
functions	that	telegrams	and,	later,	telex	systems	once	did.	Users	connected	to
these	e-mail	systems	can	send	a	message	to	virtually	anyone	who	has	a
standard	Internet	e-mail	address.	Both	private	and	commercial	e-mail	systems
include	"gateways"	that	transfer	messages	sent	by	a	user	of	one	mail	system
to	a	recipient	on	another.	You	can	get	a	message	to	almost	anyone	who	has	a
PC	and	a	modem,	although	for	certain	communications	privacy	is	a	problem
because	transmissions	across	the	Internet	are	not	very	secure.	Some
commercial	services,	such	as	MCI,	will	also	deliver	a	message	by	fax,	telex,
or	traditional	mail	if	the	recipient	doesn't	have	an	electronic	mailbox.
Future	advances	in	electronic	mail	will	streamline	lots	of	activities	we	may
not	even	realize	are	inefficient.	For	example,	think	about	how	you	pay	bills.
More	often	than	not,	a	company	prints	out	a	bill	on	a	piece	of	paper	and	puts
it	in	an	envelope	that	is	physically	carried	to	your	house.	You	open	the	bill,
check	your	records	to	see	if	the	amount	and	details	seem	appropriate,	write	a
check,	and	then	try	to	time	when	you	mail	it	back	so	that	it	arrives	shortly
before	the	due	date.	We're	so	used	to	this	process	we	don't	even	think	about
how	wasteful	it	is.	Let's	say	you	disagree	with	a	bill.	You	call	the	company
up,	wait	on	hold,	and	try	to	get	through	to	the	right	person—who	may	not
really	be	the	right	person	at	all.	In	which	case	you	have	to	wait	for	someone
else	to	call	you	back.
Very	soon	you'll	check	your	PC,	wallet,	or	television	set	the	information
appliance	of	your	choice—for	e-mail,	including	bills.	When	a	bill	comes	in,
the	device	will	show	your	payment	history.	If	you	want	to	inquire	about	the
bill,	you'll	do	it	asynchronously—at	your	convenience—by	sending	e-mail:
"Hey	how	come	this	charge	is	so	high?"
Tens	of	thousands	of	businesses	in	the	United	States	already	exchange
information	via	an	electronic	system	called	Electronic	Document	Interchange,
or	EDI.	It	allows	companies	that	have	contractual	relationships	to	execute
specific	kinds	of	transactions	automatically.	Dealings	are	highly	structured—
reordering	products	or	checking	the	status	of	a	shipment—which	makes
conventional	EDI	unsuitable	for	ad	hoc	communications,	although	many
companies	are	working	to	combine	the	benefits	of	EDI	and	e-mail	into	a
single	system.

The	asynchronicity	of	e-mail	and	EDI	is	one	of	their	advantages,	but	there	is
still	a	place	for	synchronous	communications.	Sometimes	you	want	to	call
someone	up,	talk	directly,	and	get	an	immediate	response	rather	than	leaving	a
message.
Within	a	few	years	there	will	be	hybrid	communications	systems	that
combine	elements	of	synchronous	and	asynchronous	communications.	These
systems	will	use	DSVD	(and	later	ISDN)	telephone	connections	to	permit	the
simultaneous	transfer	of	voice	and	data,	even	before	the	full	information
highway	is	in	place.
It	will	work	this	way:	When	companies	post	information	about	their	products
on	the	Internet,	part	of	that	information	will	include	instructions	for	how	a
customer	can	connect	synchronously	with	a	sales	representative	who	will	be
able	to	answer	questions	through	a	voice-data	connection.	For	example,	if
you're	shopping	for	boots	on	Eddie	Bauer's	home	page	(an	electronic	catalog)
and	you	want	to	know	if	the	boots	you	like	are	appropriate	for	use	in	Florida's
Everglades	or	on	a	glacier,	you'll	be	able	to	click	a	button	to	get	a
representative	to	come	on	the	line	and	talk	to	you.	The	representative	will	see
immediately	that	you	are	looking	at	the	boots	and	will	have	whatever	other
information	about	yourself	you	have	decided	to	make	available,	not	just	your
clothing	and	shoe	sizes,	style	and	color	preferences,	but	your	athletic
interests,	your	past	purchases	from	other	companies,	and	even	your	price
range.	Some	people	will	choose	not	to	make	any	information	about
themselves	available.	Eddie	Bauer's	computer	may	route	your	inquiry	to	the
same	person	you	spoke	to	last	time,	or	it	may	route	you	to	someone	who	has
expertise	in	the	product	displayed	on	your	screen,	in	this	case,	boots.	Without
preamble,	you	will	be	able	to	ask,	"Do	these	boots	work	well	in	swamps	like
the	Everglades?"	or	whatever	your	question	is.	The	representative	doesn't
have	to	be	in	an	office.	He	can	be	anywhere	as	long	as	he	has	access	to	a	PC
and	has	indicated	he	is	available.	If	he	speaks	the	right	language	and	has	the
right	expertise,	he	can	help	out.
Or	if	you	decided	to	change	your	will,	you'd	phone	your	lawyer,	and	she
might	say,	"Let's	take	a	quick	look	at	that."	She	would	then	call	your	will	up
on	her	PC,	and	it	would	appear	on	your	screen	as	well	as	hers	courtesy	of
DSVD,	ISDN,	or	similar	techno======================================================== The	Road	Ahead
by	Bill	Gates
with	Nathon	Myhrvold
and	Peter	Rinearson

To	my	parents

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Bringing	a	major	software	project	to	market	can	require	the	combined	talents
of	hundreds	of	people.	Not	quite	that	many	helped	me	with	this	book,	but	I
certainly	couldn't	have	done	it	alone.	If	I've	inadvertently	left	someone	out
below,	I'm	really	sorry,	and	thank	you	too.
For	everything	from	conception	to	marketing,	and	lots	of	stops	along	the	way,
thanks	to	Jonathan	Lazarus	and	his	team:	Kelli	Jerome,	Mary	Engstrom,
Wendy	Langen,	and	Debbie	Walker.	Without	Jonathan's	guidance	and
persistence	this	book	never	would	have	happened.
For	their	helpful	suggestions	throughout	the	project,	special	thanks	to	Tren
Griffin,	Roger	McNamee,	Melissa	Waggener,	and	Ann	Winblad.
For	their	incisive	review	comments,	thanks	to	Stephen	Arnold,	Steve	Ballmer,
Harvey	Berger,	Paul	Carroll,	Mike	Delman,	Kimberly	Ellwanger,	Brian
Fleming,	Bill	Gates,	Sr.,	Melinda	Gates,	Bernie	Gifford,	Bob	Gomulkiewicz,
Meg	Greenfield,	Collins	Hemingway,	Jack	Hitt,	Rita	Jacobs,	Erik	Lacitis,
Mich	Matthews,	Scott	Miller,	Craig	Mundie,	Rick	Rashid,	Jon	Shirley,	Mike
Timpane,	Wendy	Wolf,	Min	Yee,	and	Mark	Zbikowski.
For	help	with	research,	transcription,	and	resource	material,	my	gratitude	to
Kerry	Carnahan,	Ina	Chang,	Peggy	Gunnoe,	Christine	Shannon,	Sean
Sheridan,	and	Amy	Dunn	Stephenson.	I'm	also	grateful	to	Elton	Welke	and
his	able	staff	at	Microsoft	Press,	including	Chris	Banks,	Judith	Bioch,	Jim
Brown,	Sally	Brunsman,	Mary	DeJong,	Jim	Fuchs,	Dail	Magee,	Jr.,	Erin
O'Connor,	JoAnne	Woodcock,	and	Mark	Young.
I'm	also	grateful	to	those	at	my	English-language	publisher,	Viking	Penguin,
for	their	help	and	patience.	In	particular,	I'd	like	to	thank	Peter	Mayer,	Marvin
Brown,	Barbara	Grossman,	Pamela	Dorman,	Cindy	Achar,	Kate	Griggs,
Theodora	Rosenbaum,	Susan	Hans	O'Connor,	and	Michael	Hardart.
Thanks,	too,	for	editorial	help,	go	to	Nancy	Nicholas	and	Nan	Graham.
My	special	gratitude	to	my	collaborators,	Peter	Rinearson	and	Nathan
Myhrvold.

FOREWORD
The	past	twenty	years	have	been	an	incredible	adventure	for	me.	It	started	on
a	day	when,	as	a	college	sophomore,	I	stood	in	Harvard	Square	with	my
friend	Paul	Allen	and	pored	over	the	description	of	a	kit	computer	in	Popular
Electronics	magazine.	As	we	read	excitedly	about	the	first	truly	personal
computer,	Paul	and	I	didn't	know	exactly	how	it	would	be	used,	but	we	were
sure	it	would	change	us	and	the	world	of	computing.	We	were	right.	The
personal-computer	revolution	happened	and	it	has	affected	millions	of	lives.	It
has	led	us	to	places	we	had	barely	imagined.
We	are	all	beginning	another	great	journey.	We	aren't	sure	where	this	one	will
lead	us	either,	but	again	I	am	certain	this	revolution	will	touch	even	more
lives	and	take	us	all	farther.	The	major	changes	coming	will	be	in	the	way
people	communicate	with	each	other.	The	benefits	and	problems	arising	from
this	upcoming	communications	revolution	will	be	much	greater	than	those
brought	about	by	the	PC	revolution.
There	is	never	a	reliable	map	for	unexplored	territory,	but	we	can
learn	important	lessons	from	the	creation	and	evolution	of	the	$120-billion
personal-computer	industry.	The	PC—its	evolving	hardware,	business
applications,	on-line	systems,	Internet	connections,	electronic	mail,	multi-
media	titles,	authoring	tools,	and	games—is	the	foundation	for	the	next
revolution.
During	the	PC	industry's	infancy,	the	mass	media	paid	little	attention	to	what
was	going	on	in	the	brand-new	business.	Those	of	us	who	were	enthralled	by
computers	and	the	possibilities	they	promised	were	unnoticed	outside	our
own	circles	and	definitely	not	considered	trendy.
But	this	next	journey,	to	the	so-called	information	highway,	is	the	topic	of
endless	newspaper	and	magazine	articles,	television	and	radio	broadcasts,
conferences,	and	rampant	speculation.	There	has	been	an	unbelievable
amount	of	interest	in	this	subject	during	the	last	few	years,	both	inside	and
outside	the	computer	industry.	The	interest	is	not	confined	only	to	developed
countries,	and	it	goes	well	beyond	even	the	very	large	numbers	of	personal-
computer	users.
Thousands	of	informed	and	uninformed	people	are	now	speculating	publicly

about	the	information	highway.	The	amount	of	misunderstanding	about	the
technology	and	its	possible	pitfalls	surprises	me.	Some	people	think	the
highway—also	called	the	network—is	simply	today's	Internet	or	the	delivery
of	500	simultaneous	channels	of	television.	Others	hope	or	fear	it	will	create
computers	as	smart	as	human	beings.	Those	developments	will	come,	but	they
are	not	the	highway.
The	revolution	in	communications	is	just	beginning.	It	will	take	place	over
several	decades,	and	will	be	driven	by	new	"applications"—new	tools,	often
meeting	currently	unforeseen	needs.	During	the	next	few	years,	major
decisions	will	have	to	be	made	by	governments,	companies,	and	individuals.
These	decisions	will	have	an	impact	on	the	way	the	highway	will	roll	out	and
how	much	benefit	those	deciding	will	realize.	It	is	crucial	that	a	broad	set	of
people—not	just	technologists	or	those	who	happen	to	be	in	the	computer
industry—participate	in	the	debate	about	how	this	technology	should	be
shaped.	If	that	can	be	done,	the	highway	will	serve	the	purposes	users	want.
Then	it	will	gain	broad	acceptance	and	become	a	reality.
I'm	writing	this	book	now	as	part	of	my	contribution	to	the	debate	and,
although	it's	a	tall	order,	I	hope	it	can	serve	as	a	travel	guide	for	the
forthcoming	journey.	I	do	this	with	some	trepidation.	We've	all	smiled	at
predictions	from	the	past	that	look	silly	today.	You	can	flip	through	old
Popular	Science	magazines	and	read	about	conveniences	to	come,	such	as	the
family	helicopter	and	nuclear	power	"too	cheap	to	meter."	History	is	full	of
now	ironic	examples—the	Oxford	professor	who	in	1878	dismissed	the
electric	light	as	a	gimmick;	the	commissioner	of	U.S.	patents	who	in	1899
asked	that	his	office	be	abolished	because	"everything	that	can	be	invented
has	been	invented."	This	is	meant	to	be	a	serious	book,	although	ten	years
from	now	it	may	not	appear	that	way.	What	I've	said	that	turned	out	to	be
right	will	be	considered	obvious	and	what	was	wrong	will	be	humorous.
I	believe	the	course	of	the	creation	of	the	highway	will	mirror,	in	many	ways,
the	history	of	the	personal-computer	industry.	I'm	including	a	bit	of	my
history—yes,	I	too	talk	about	the	house—and	that	of	computing	in	general,	to
help	explain	some	concepts	and	lessons	from	the	past.	Anyone	expecting	an
autobiography	or	a	treatise	on	what	it's	like	to	have	been	as	lucky	as	I	have
been	will	be	disappointed.	Perhaps	when	I've	retired	I	will	get	around	to
writing	that	book.	This	book	looks	primarily	to	the	future.
Anyone	hoping	for	a	technological	treatise	will	be	disappointed,	too.
Everyone	will	be	touched	by	the	information	highway,	and	everyone	ought	to
be	able	to	understand	its	implications.	That's	why	my	goal	from	the	very

beginning	was	to	write	a	book	that	as	many	people	as	possible	could
understand.
The	process	of	thinking	about	and	writing	The	Road	Ahead	took	longer	than	I
expected.	Indeed,	estimating	the	time	it	would	take	proved	to	be	as	difficult	as
projecting	the	development	schedule	of	a	major	software	project.	Even	with
able	help	from	Peter	Rinearson	and	Nathan	Myhrvold,	this	book	was	a	major
undertaking.	The	only	part	that	was	easy	was	the	cover	photo	by	Annie
Leibovitz,	which	we	finished	well	ahead	of	schedule.	I	enjoy	writing	speeches
and	had	thought	writing	a	book	would	be	like	writing	them.	I	innocently
imagined	writing	a	chapter	would	be	the	equivalent	of	writing	a	speech.	The
fallacy	in	my	thinking	was	similar	to	the	one	software	developers	often	run
into	a	program	ten	times	as	long	is	about	one	hundred	times	more	complicated
to	write.	I	should	have	known	better.	To	complete	the	book,	I	had	to	take	time
off	and	isolate	myself	in	my	summer	cabin	with	my	PC.
And	here	it	is.	I	hope	it	stimulates	understanding,	debate,	and	creative	ideas
about	how	we	can	take	advantage	of	all	that's	sure	to	be	happening	in	the
decade	ahead.

THE
ROAD
AHEAD

1
A	REVOLUTION
BEGINS
I	wrote	my	first	software	program	when	I	was	thirteen	years	old.	It	was	for
playing	tic-tac-toe.	The	computer	I	was	using	was	huge	and	cumbersome	and
slow	and	absolutely	compelling.
Letting	a	bunch	of	teenagers	loose	on	a	computer	was	the	idea	of	the	Mothers'
Club	at	Lakeside,	the	private	school	I	attended.	The	mothers	decided	that	the
proceeds	from	a	rummage	sale	should	be	used	to	install	a	terminal	and	buy
computer	time	for	students.	Letting	students	use	a	computer	in	the	late	1960s
was	a	pretty	amazing	choice	at	the	time	in	Seattle—and	one	I'll	always	be
grateful	for.
This	computer	terminal	didn't	have	a	screen.	To	play,	we	typed	in	our	moves
on	a	typewriter-style	keyboard	and	then	sat	around	until	the	results	came
chug-chugging	out	of	a	loud	printing	device	on	paper.	Then	we'd	rush	over	to
take	a	look	and	see	who'd	won	or	decide	our	next	move.	A	game	of	tic-tac-
toe,	which	would	take	thirty	seconds	with	a	pencil	and	paper,	might	consume
most	of	a	lunch	period.	But	who	cared?	There	was	just	something	neat	about
the	machine.
I	realized	later	part	of	the	appeal	was	that	here	was	an	enormous,	expensive,
grown-up	machine	and	we,	the	kids,	could	control	it.	We	were	too	young	to
drive	or	to	do	any	of	the	other	fun-seeming	adult	activities,	but	we	could	give
this	big	machine	orders	and	it	would	always	obey.	Computers	are	great
because	when	you're	working	with	them	you	get	immediate	results	that	let
you	know	if	your	program	works.	It's	feedback	you	don't	get	from	many	other
things.	That	was	the	beginning	of	my	fascination	with	software.	The	feedback
from	simple	programs	is	particularly	unambiguous.	And	to	this	day	it	still
thrills	me	to	know	that	if	I	can	get	the	program	right	it	will	always	work
perfectly,	every	time,	just	the	way	I	told	it	to.
As	my	friends	and	I	gained	confidence,	we	began	to	mess	around	with	the
computer,	speeding	things======================================================== able	to	simulate	the	world	as
well	as	explain	it.	Creating	or	using	a	computer	model	can	be	a	great
educational	tool.	Several	years	ago,	a	teacher	at	Sunnyside	High	School	in
Tucson,	Arizona,	organized	a	club	of	students	to	create	computer	simulations
of	real-world	behaviors.	The	students	discovered	the	grim	consequences	of
gang	behavior	by	modeling	it	for	themselves	mathematically.	The	success	of
the	club	led	eventually	to	a	complete	reorganization	of	the	mathematics
curriculum	around	the	idea	that	education	is	not	about	making	kids	give	the
"right"	answer,	but	about	giving	kids	methods	by	which	to	decide	whether	an
answer	is	"right"
The	teaching	of	science	lends	itself	particularly	well	to	using	models.	Kids
now	learn	trigonometry	by	measuring	the	height	of	real	mountains.	They
triangulate	from	two	points	rather	than	just	doing	abstract	exercises.	There	are
already	a	number	of	computer	models	that	teach	biology.	SimLife,	a	popular
software	program,	simulates	evolution,	so	kids	get	to	experience	the	process
instead	of	just	getting	facts	about	it.	You	don't	have	to	be	a	child	to	enjoy	this
program,	which	lets	you	design	plants	and	animals	and	then	watch	how	they
interact	and	evolve	in	an	ecosystem	that	you	also	design.	Maxis	Software,	the
publisher	of	SimLife	also	produces	another	program,	SimCity,	which	lets	you
design	a	city	with	all	of	its	interrelated	systems,	such	as	roads	and	public
transportation.	As	a	player,	you	get	to	be	the	mayor	or	city	planner	of	a	virtual
community	and	to	challenge	yourself	to	meet	your	own	goals	for	the
community,	rather	than	goals	artificially	imposed	by	the	software's	design.
You	build	farms,	factories,	homes,	schools,	universities,	libraries,	museums,
zoos,	hospitals,	prisons,	marinas,	freeways,	bridges,	even	subways.	You	cope
with	urban	growth	or	natural	disasters,	such	as	fires.	You	change	the	terrain
too.	When	you	modify	your	simulated	city	by	building	an	airport	or	raising
taxes,	the	changes	can	have	a	predictable	or	unexpected	effect	on	the
simulated	society.	It	is	a	great,	fast	way	to	find	out	how	the	real	world	works.
Or	use	a	simulation	to	find	out	about	what	goes	on	out	of	this	world.	Kids	can
navigate	the	solar	system	or	galaxy	in	a	simulated	spaceship	by	playing	with	a
space	simulator.	Kids	who	may	think	they	aren't	interested	in	biology	or	urban
design	or	outer	space	can	discover	they	are	by	exploring	and	experimenting
with	computer	simulations.	When	science	is	made	more	interesting	in	these
ways,	it	should	appeal	to	a
broader	set	of	students.

In	the	future,	students	of	all	ages	and	capabilities	will	be	able	to	visualize	and
interact	with	information.	For	example,	a	class	studying	weather	will	be	able
to	view	simulated	satellite	images	based	on	a	model	of	hypothetical
meteorological	conditions.	Students	will	propose	"what	if?"	questions,	such	as
"What	would	happen	to	the	next	day's	weather	if	the	wind	speed	increased	by
15	MPH?"	The	computer	will	model	the	predicted	results,	displaying	the
simulated	weather	system	as	it	would	appear	from	space.	Simulation	games
will	get	much	better,	but	even	now	the	best	of	them	are	fascinating	and	highly
educational.
When	simulations	get	completely	realistic,	we	enter	the	realm	of	virtual
reality.	I'm	sure	that	at	some	point	schools	will	have	virtual-reality	equipment
—or	maybe	even	VR	rooms,	the	way	some	now	have	music	rooms	and
theaters—to	allow	students	to	explore	a	place,	an	object,	or	a	subject	in	this
engrossing,	interactive	way.
Technology	will	not,	however,	isolate	students.	One	of	the	most	important
educational	experiences	is	collaboration.	In	some	of	the	world's	most	creative
classrooms,	computers	and	communications	networks	are	already	beginning
to	change	the	conventional	relationships	among	students	themselves,	and
between	students	and	teachers,	by	facilitating	collaborative	learning.
Teachers	at	the	Ralph	Bunche	school	(P.S.	125)	in	Harlem	created	a
computer-assisted	teaching	unit	to	show	New	York	inner-city	students	how	to
use	the	Internet	for	research,	to	communicate	with	electronic	pen	pals
worldwide,	and	to	collaborate	with	volunteer	tutors	at	nearby	Columbia
University.	Ralph	Bunche	was	one	of	the	first	elementary	schools	in	the
nation	to	put	its	own	home	page	on	the	Internet's	World	Wide	Web.	Its	Web
home	page,	the	work	of	a	student,	includes	links	to	such	things	as	the	school
newspaper,	student	artwork,	and	a	lesson	on	the	Spanish	alphabet	illustrated.
Especially	at	the	college	level,	academic	research	has	been	aided	enormously
by	the	Internet,	which	has	made	it	easier	for	far-flung	institutions	and
individuals	to	collaborate.	Computer	innovation	has	always	taken	place	at
universities.	Several	universities	are	centers	for	advanced	research	into	new
computer	technologies,	and	many	others	maintain	large	computer	labs	that
students	use	for	collaboration	and	homework.	Also,	today	some	of	the	most
interesting	home	pages	on	the	Internet's	World	Wide	Web	are	posted	on	behalf
of	universities	around	the	world.
Some	universities	put	the	network	to	less	global	uses.	At	the	University	of
Washington,	lesson	plans	and	assignments	for	some	classes	are	posted	on	the

World	Wide	Web.	Lecture	notes	are	often	published	on	the	Web	too,	a	free
service	I	would	have	loved	in	my	college	days.	Elsewhere,	an	English	teacher
requires	all	his	students	to	have	e-mail	addresses	and	use	e-mail	to	participate
in	after-hours	electronic	discussions.	Class	members	are	graded	on	their	e-
mail	contributions,	just	as	they	are	on	classroom	contributions	and	homework.
College	students	everywhere	already	understand	the	joys	of	e-mail,	both	for
educational	purposes	and	to	keep	in	touch	inexpensively	with	family	and
friends,	including	high	school	friends	who	have	gone	to	other	universities.	A
growing	number	of	parents	of	college	students	have	become	regular	e-mail
users	because	it	seems	to	be	the	best	way	to	contact	their	kids.	Even	some
elementary	schools	allow	older	students	to	have	Internet	accounts.	At
Lakeside,	my	old	school,	the	school's	network	is	now	connected	to	the
Internet,	which	permits	kids	to	browse	for	on-line	information	and	exchange
national	and	international	e-mail.	Nearly	all	Lakeside	students	requested	e-
mail	accounts,	and	in	one	typical	twelve-week	period	they	received	a	total	of
259,587	messages—an	average	of	about	30	messages	per	student	each	week.
About	49,000	messages	were	from	the	Internet	during	the	twelve-week
period,	and	the	students	sent	about	7,200	messages.
1995:	World	Wide	Web	home	page	from	Arbor	Heights	Elementary	School
Lakeside	doesn't	know	how	many	messages	each	student	sends,	and	it	doesn't
know	what	the	messages	are	about.	Some	e-mail	relates	to	school	studies	and
activities,	but	doubtless	a	lot	of	it,	including	much	of	Lakeside's	traffic	on	the
Internet,	concerns	students'	outside	interests.	Lakeside	doesn't	view	this	as	an
abuse	of	the	electronic	mail	system,	but	as	another	way	to	learn.
A	number	of	secondary	school	students,	like	those	at	New	York's	P.S.	125,	are
discovering	how	the	long-distance	access	afforded	by	computer	networks	can
help	them	learn	from	students	from	other	cultures,	and	participate	in
discussions	all	over	the	world.	Many	classrooms,	in	different	states	and
countries,	are	already	linking	up	in	what	are	sometimes	called	"learning

circles."	The	purpose	of	most	learning	circles	is	to	let	students	study	a	specific
topic,	in	collaboration	with	faraway	counterparts.	In	1989,	as	the	Berlin	Wall
was	falling,	West	German	students	were	able	to	discuss	the	event	with	their
contemporaries	in	other	countries.	One	learning	circle	that	was	studying	the
whaling	industry	included	Alaskan	Inuit	students,	whose	Eskimo	villages	still
depend	on	whales	for	food.	Students	outside	the	village	got	so	interested,	they
invited	an	Inuit	tribal	elder	to	their	class	for	a	learning	circle	discussion.
One	ambitious	plan	for	students	using	computer	networks	is	the	GLOBE
Project,	an	initiative	pushed	by	Vice	President	Al	Gore.	GLOBE	stands	for
Global	Learning	and	Observations	to	Benefit	the	Environment.	The	hope	is
that	it	will	be	funded	by	a	variety	of	governments	as	well	as	by	private
contributions.	It	would	ask	grade-schoolers	to	collaborate	internationally	on
collecting	scientific	information	about	Earth.	Children	would	routinely	collect
statistics,	such	as	temperature	and	rainfall,	and	relay	them	across	the	Internet
and	satellites	to	a	central	database	at	the	National	Oceanic	and	Atmospheric
Administration	in	Maryland,	where	the	information	would	be	used	to	create
composite
pictures	of	the	planet.	The	composites	would	be	relayed	back	to	the	students,
as	well	as	to	scientists	and	the	general	public.	No	one	knows	how	much
scientific	value	the	data	would	have,	especially	the	data	collected	by	the	very
young,	but	gathering	the	facts	and	seeing	the	composite	pictures	would	be	a
fine	way	for	large	numbers	of	children	from	many	nations	to	learn	about
global	cooperation,	communication,	and	environmental	issues.
1995:	World	Wide	Web	home	page	from	the	University	of	Connecticut,
featuring	archeological	resources	drawn	from	many	sources
The	highway's	educational	possibilities	will	also	be	open	to	the	world's
unofficial	students.	People	anywhere	will	be	able	to	take	the	best	courses
taught	by	great	teachers.	The	highway	will	make	adult	education,	including
job	training	and	career-enhancement	courses,	more	readily	available.

A	lot	of	parents,	professionals,	and	community	or	political	leaders	will	have
the	opportunity	to	participate	in	the	teaching	process,	even	if	only	for	an	hour
here	or	there.	It	will	be	practical,	inexpensive,	and,	I	think,	commonplace	for
knowledgeable	guests	to	lead	or	join	discussions,	via	videoconferences,	from
their	homes	or	offices.
Having	students	connected	directly	to	limitless	information	and	to	each	other
will	raise	policy	questions	for	schools	and	for	society	at	large.	I	discussed	the
issue	of	regulation	of	the	Internet.	Will	students	routinely	be	allowed	to	bring
their	portable	PCs	with	them	int======================================================== t	leaving	your	house.	Flexibility	is	going	to	be	increasingly
important	as	everyone	tries	to	balance	family	life	with	work	life.	You	won't
always	have	to	travel	to	see	friends	and	family	or	to	play	games.	Cultural
attractions	will	be	available	via	the	information	highway,	although	I'm	not
suggesting	that	a	Broadway	or	West	End	musical	will	be	the	same	experience
in	your	living	room	as	it	is	in	a	New	York	or	London	theater.	However,
improvements	in	screen	sizes	and	resolutions	will	enhance	all	video,
including	movies,	in	the	home.	Educational	programming	will	be	extensive.
All	of	this	will	liberate	those	who	would	like	to	abandon	city	living.
The	opening	of	the	interstate	highway	system	had	a	substantial	effect	on
where	in	the	United	States	people	chose	to	settle.	It	made	new	suburbs
accessible	and	contributed	to	the	culture	of	the	automobile.	There	will	be
significant	implications	for	city	planners,	real	estate	developers,	and	school
districts	if	the	opening	of	the	information	highway	also	encourages	people	to
move	away	from	city	centers.	If	large	pools	of	talent	disperse,	companies	will
feel	even	more	pressure	to	be	creative	about	how	to	work	with	consultants
and	employees	not	located	near	their	operations.	This	could	set	off	a	positive-
feedback	cycle,	encouraging	rural	living.
If	the	population	of	a	city	were	reduced	by	even	10	percent,	the	result	would
be	a	major	difference	in	property	values	and	wear	and	tear	on	transportation
and	other	urban	systems.	If	the	average	office	worker	in	any	major	city	stayed
home	one	or	two	days	a	week,	the	decreases	in	gasoline	consumption,	air
pollution,	and	traffic	congestion	would	be	significant.	The	net	effect,
however,	is	hard	to	foresee.	If	those	who	moved	out	of	cities	were	mostly	the
affluent	knowledge	workers,	the	urban	tax	base	would	be	reduced.	This	would
aggravate	the	inner	city's	woes	and	encourage	other	affluent	people	to	leave.
But	at	the	same	time,	the	urban	infrastructure	might	be	less	heavily	loaded.
Rents	would	fall,	creating	opportunities	for	a	better	standard	of	living	for
some	of	those	remaining	in	the	cities.

It	will	take	decades	to	implement	all	the	major	changes,	because	most	people
remain	comfortable	with	whatever	they	learn	early	and	are	reluctant	to	alter
familiar	patterns.	However,	new	generations	will	bring	new	perspectives.	Our
children	will	grow	up	comfortable	with	the	idea	of	working	with	information
tools	across	distances.	These	tools	will	be	as	natural	to	them	as	a	telephone	or
a	ballpoint	pen	is	to	us.	But	technology	isn't	going	to	wait	until	people	are
ready	for	it.	Within	the	next	ten	years	we	will	start	to	see	substantial	shifts	in
how	and	where	we	work,	the	companies	we	work	for,	and	the	places	we
choose	to	live.	My	advice	is	to	try	to	find	out	as	much	as	possible	about	the
technology	that	will	touch	you.	The	more	you	know	about	it,	the	less
disconcerting	it	will	seem.	Technology's	role	is	to	provide	more	flexibility	and
efficiency.	Forward-looking	business	managers	will	have	lots	of	opportunities
to	perform	better	in	the	years	ahead.

8
FRICTION-FREE
CAPITALISM
When	Adam	Smith	described	the	concept	of	markets	in	The	Wealth	of	Nations
in	1776,	he	theorized	that	if	every	buyer	knew	every	seller's	price,	and	every
seller	knew	what	every	buyer	was	willing	to	pay,	everyone	in	the	"market"
would	be	able	to	make	fully	informed	decisions	and	society's	resources	would
be	distributed	efficiently.	To	date	we	haven't	achieved	Smith's	ideal	because
would-be	buyers	and	would-be	sellers	seldom	have	complete	information
about	one	another.
Not	many	consumers	looking	to	buy	a	car	stereo	have	the	time	or	patience	to
canvass	every	dealer	and	thus	are	acting	on	imperfect	and	limited
information.	If	you've	bought	a	product	for	$500	and	see	it	advertised	in	the
paper	for	$300	a	week	or	two	later,	you	feel	foolish	for	overpaying.	But	you
feel	a	lot	worse	if	you	end	up	in	the	wrong	job	because	you	haven't	done
thorough	enough	research.
A	few	markets	are	already	working	fairly	close	to	Smith's	ideal.	Investors
buying	and	selling	currency	and	certain	other	commodities	participate	in
efficient	electronic	markets	that	provide	nearly	complete	instantaneous
information	about	worldwide	supply,	demand,	and	prices.	Everyone	gets
pretty	much	the	same	deal	because	news	about	all	offers,	bids,	and
transactions	speeds	across	wires	to	trading	desks	everywhere.	However,	most
marketplaces	are	very	inefficient.	For	instance,	if	you	are	trying	to	find	a
doctor,	lawyer,	accountant,	or	similar	professional,	or	are	buying	a	house,
information	is	incomplete	and	comparisons	are	difficult	to	make.
The	information	highway	will	extend	the	electronic	marketplace	and	make	it
the	ultimate	go-between,	the	universal	middleman.	Often	the	only	humans
involved	in	a	transaction	will	be	the	actual	buyer	and	seller.	All	the	goods	for
sale	in	the	world	will	be	available	for	you	to	examine,	compare,	and,	often,
customize.	When	you	want	to	buy	something	you'll	be	able	to	tell	your
computer	to	find	it	for	you	at	the	best	price	offered	by	any	acceptable	source
or	ask	your	computer	to	"haggle"	with	the	computers	of	various	sellers.
Information	about	vendors	and	their	products	and	services	will	be	available	to
any	computer	connected	to	the	highway.	Servers	distributed	worldwide	will

accept	bids,	resolve	offers	into	completed	transactions,	control	authentication
and	security,	and	handle	all	other	aspects	of	the	marketplace,	including	the
transfer	of	funds.	This	will	carry	us	into	a	new	world	of	low-friction,	low-
overhead	capitalism,	in	which	market	information	will	be	plentiful	and
transaction	costs	low.	It	will	be	a	shopper's	heaven.
Every	market,	from	a	bazaar	to	the	highway,	facilitates	competitive	pricing
and	allows	goods	to	move	from	seller	to	buyer	efficiently	with	modest
friction.	This	is	thanks	to	the	market	makers—those	whose	job	it	is	to	bring
buyers	and	sellers	together.	As	the	information	highway	assumes	the	role	of
market	maker	in	realm	after	realm,	traditional	middlemen	will	have	to
contribute	real	value	to	a	transaction	to	justify	a	commission.	For	example,
stores	and	services	that	until	now	have	profited	just	because	they	are
"there"—in	a	particular	geographic	location	may	find	they	have	lost	that
advantage.	But	those	who	provide	added	value	will	not	only	survive,	they	will
thrive,	because	the	information	highway	will	let	them	make	their	services
available	to	customers	everywhere.
This	idea	will	scare	a	lot	of	people.	Most	change	feels	a	bit	threatening,	and	I
expect	dramatic	changes	in	the	business	of	retailing	as	commerce	flows	across
the	highway.	But,	as	with	so	many	changes,	I	think	once	we	get	used	to	it
we'll	wonder	how	we	did	without	it.	The	consumer	will	get	not	only
competitive	cost	savings,	but	also	a	much	wider	variety	of	products	and
services	to	choose	from.	Although	there	may	be	fewer	stores,	if	people
continue	to	enjoy	shopping	in	today's	outlets,	as	many	stores	as	their	demand
justifies	will	remain	available.	And	because	the	highway	will	simplify	and
standardize	shopping,	it	will	also	save	time.	If	you	are	buying	a	gift	for	a
loved	one,	you	will	be	able	to	consider	more	choices	and	often	you	will	find
something	more	imaginative.	You	could	use	the	time	saved	from	shopping	to
think	up	a	fun	clue	to	put	on	the	package,	or	create	a	personalized	card.	Or
you	could	spend	the	time	you	save	with	the	recipient.
We	all	recognize	the	value	of	a	knowledgeable	salesperson	when	we	are
shopping	for	insurance,	clothes,	investments,	jewelry,	a	camera,	a	home
appliance,	or	a	home.	We	also	know	the	salesperson's	advice	is	sometimes
biased	because	he	or	she	is	ultimately	hoping	to	make	a	sale	from	a	particular
inventory.
On	the	information	highway	lots	of	product	information	will	be	available
directly	from	manufacturers.	As	they	do	today,	vendors	will	use	a	variety	of
entertaining	and	provocative	techniques	to	attract	us.	Advertising	will	evolve
into	a	hybrid,	combining	today's	television	commercials,	magazine	ads,	and	a

detailed	sales	brochure.	If	an	ad	catches	your	attention,	you'll	be	able	to
request	additional	information	directly	and	very	easily.	Links	will	let	you
navigate	through	whatever	information	the	advertiser	has	made	available,
which	might	be	product	manuals	consisting	of	video,	audio,	and	text.	Vendors
will	make	getting	information	about	their	products	as	simple	as	possible.
At	Microsoft,	we're	looking	forward	to	using	the	highway	to	get	information
out	about	our	products.	Today	we	print	millions	of	pages	of	product	brochures
and	data	sheets,	and	mail	them	out	to	people	who	ask	for	them.	But	we	never
know	how	much	information	to	put	onto	a	data	sheet;	we	don't	want	to
intimidate	casual	inquirers,	and	yet	there	are	people	out	there	who	want	to
know	all	the	detailed	product	specifications.	Also,	since	the	information
changes	fairly	rapidly,	we	are	often	in	the	position	of	having	just	printed	tens
of	thousands	of	copies	of	some	brochure,	and	then	having	to	throw	them	out
because	they	describe	a	version	of	a	product	we're	replacing.	We	expect	a
high	percentage	of	our	information	dissemination	will	shift	to	electronic
inquiry,	particularly	because	we	serve	computer	users.	We	have	already
eliminated	the	printing	of	millions	of	pages	of	paper	by	sending	quarterly	CD-
ROMs	and	using	on-line	services	to	reach	professional	software	developers,
some	of	Microsoft's	most	sophisticated	customers.
But	you	won't	have	to	depend	only	on	what	we	or	any	other	manufacturer
tells	you.	You'll	be	able	to	examine	product	reviews	in	search	of	less	biased
information.	After	you've	seen	the	advertising,	reviews,	and	multi-media
manuals,	you	might	ask	for	relevant	government	regulatory	data.	You'll	check
to	see	if	the	vendor	has	surveyed	owners.	Then	you	might	dig	deeper	into	one
area	of	particular	interest	to	you—for	instance,	durability.	Or	you	could	seek
the	advice	of	sales	consultants,	human	or	electronic,	who	will	create	and
publish	specialized	reviews	for	all	kinds	of	products,	from	drill	bits	t======================================================== it's	much	easier	to	check	facts,	transmit	a	story	from	the
field,	and	stay	in	touch	electronically	with	news	sources,	editors,	and	even
readers.	Plus,	the	inclusion	of	high-quality	diagrams	and	pictures	has	become
easier.	Just	look	at	the	presentation	of	science	topics.	Twenty	or	thirty	years
ago	it	was	unusual	to	find	top-quality	scientific	illustrations	anywhere	except
in	science	books	or	a	glossy	specialized	magazine	such	as	Scientific
American.	Today	some	newspapers	present	science	stories	well,	in	part
because	they	use	personal-computer	software	to	produce	detailed	drawings
and	illustrations	rapidly.
Businesses	of	all	sizes	have	received	different	benefits	from	personal
computers.	Small	businesses	arguably	have	been	the	greatest	beneficiaries,
because	low-cost	hardware	and	software	have	permitted	tiny	outfits	to
compete	better	with	large	multinational	corporations.	Big	organizations	tend
to	be	specialized:	one	department	writes	brochures,	another	deals	with
accounting,	yet	another	handles	customer	service,	and	so	forth.	When	you	call
a	large	company	to	talk	about	your	account,	you	expect	a	specialist	to	get	you
an	answer	pretty	quickly.
Expectations	for	small-business	operators	used	to	be	different,	because	they
couldn't	hire	specialists.	When	an	individual	opens	a	business	or	a	shop,	she	is
the	one	creating	brochures,	doing	the	financial	work,	and	dealing	with
customers.	It's	kind	of	amazing	how	many	different	tasks	a	small-business
owner	has	to	master.	Someone	running	a	small	business	can	buy	one	PC	and	a
few	software	packages,	and	she	will	have	electronic	support	for	all	the
different	functions	she	is	performing.	The	result	is	that	a	small	business	can
compete	more	effectively	with	the	big	boys.
For	a	large	company,	the	biggest	benefit	of	personal	computers	comes	from
improving	the	sharing	of	information.	PCs	do	away	with	the	huge	overhead
large	businesses	incur	staying	coordinated	through	meetings,	policies,	and
internal	processes.	Electronic	mail	has	done	more	for	big	companies	than	for
small	companies.
One	of	the	first	ways	Microsoft	began	using	information	tools	internally	was
by	phasing	out	printed	computer	reports.	In	many	companies,	when	you	go

into	a	top	executive's	office	you	see	books	of	bound	computer	printouts	with
monthly	financial	numbers,	dutifully	filed	away	on	a	shelf.	At	Microsoft,
those	numbers	are	made	available	only	on	a	computer	screen.	When	someone
wants	more	detail,	he	or	she	can	examine	it	by	time	period,	locale,	or	almost
any	other	way.	When	we	first	put	the	financial	reporting	system	on-line,
people	started	looking	at	the	numbers	in	new	ways.	For	example,	they	began
analyzing	why	our	market	share	in	one	geographic	area	was	different	from
our	share	somewhere	else.	As	we	all	started	working	with	the	information,	we
discovered	errors.	Our	data-processing	group	apologized.	"We're	very	sorry
about	these	mistakes"	they	said,	"but	we've	been	compiling	and	distributing
these	numbers	once	a	month	for	five	years	and	these	same	problems	were
there	all	along	and	no	one	mentioned	them."	People	hadn't	really	been	using
the	print	information	enough	to	discover	the	mistakes.
The	flexibility	that	comes	from	having	the	information	available
electronically	is	hard	to	convey	to	a	nonuser.	I	rarely	look	at	our	financial
reports	on	paper	anymore,	because	I	prefer	to	view	them	electronically.
When	the	first	electronic	spreadsheets	appeared	in	1978,	they	were	a	vast
improvement	over	paper	and	pencil.	What	they	made	possible	was	putting
formulas	behind	each	element	in	a	table	of	data.	These	formulas	could	refer	to
other	elements	of	the	table.	Any	change	in	one	value	would	immediately
affect	the	other	cells,	so	projections	such	as	sales,	growth,	or	changes	in
interest	rates	could	be	played	with	to	examine	"what	if"	scenarios,	and	the
impact	of	every	change	would	be	instantly	apparent.
Some	current	spreadsheets	let	you	view	tables	of	data	in	different	ways.
Simple	commands	permit	the	filtering	and	sorting	of	the	data.	The
spreadsheet	application	I	know	best,	Microsoft	Excel,	includes	a	feature
called	a	pivot	table	that	allows	you	to	look	at	summarized	information	in
nearly	countless	ways.	It's	number-crunching	made	easy.	The	summarizing
criterion	can	be	changed	with	the	click	of	a	mouse	on	a	selector	or	by	using
the	mouse	to	drag	a	column	header	from	one	side	of	the	table	to	another.	It's
simple	to	change	the	information	from	a	high-level	summary	report	to	an
analysis	of	any	data	category	or	to	an	examination	of	the	details	one	by	one.
Monthly	a	pivot	table	is	distributed	electronically	to	all	Microsoft	managers
containing	sales	data	by	office,	product,	and	sales	channel	for	current	and
previous	fiscal	years.	Each	manager	can	quickly	construct	a	personal	view	of
the	data	for	his	or	her	requirements.	Sales	managers	might	compare	sales	in
their	region	to	budget	or	the	prior	year.	Product	managers	can	look	at	their
products'	sales	by	country	and	sales	channel.	There	are	thousands	of

possibilities	just	a	click	and	a	drag	away.
Increases	in	computer	speed	will	soon	allow	PCs	to	display	very	high	quality
three-dimensional	graphics.	These	will	permit	us	to	show	data	in	a	more
effective	way	than	today's	two-dimensional	presentations.	Other	advances
will	make	it	easy	to	explore	databases	by	posing	questions	orally.	An	example
might	be,	"What	products	are	selling	best?"
These	innovations	will	first	show	up	in	the	mainstream	in	the	high-volume
office-productivity	packages:	word	processors,	spreadsheets,	presentation
packages,	databases,	and	electronic	mail.	Some	proponents	claim	these	tools
are	so	capable	already	that	there	will	never	be	a	need	for	newer	versions.	But
there	were	those	who	thought	that	about	software	five	and	ten	years	ago.	Over
the	next	few	years,	as	speech	recognition,	social	interfaces,	and	connections
to	the	information	highway	are	incorporated	into	core	applications,	I	think
individuals	and	companies	will	find	the	productivity	enhancements	these
improved	applications	will	bring	extremely	attractive.

The	greatest	improvement	in	productivity,	and	the	greatest	change	in	work
habits,	will	be	brought	about	because	of	networking.	The	original	use	for	the
PC	was	to	make	it	easier	to	create	documents	that	were	printed	on	paper	and
shared	by	passing	around	the	printed	output.	The	first	PC	networks	allowed
people	to	share	printers	and	store	files	on	central	servers.	Most	of	these	early
networks	connected	fewer	than	twenty	computers	together.	As	networks	get
larger,	they	are	being	connected	to	one	another	and	to	the	Internet	so	that
every	user	is	able	to	communicate	with	everyone	else.	Today,
communications	are	mostly	short	text	files,	but	eventually	they	will	include
the	full	richness	of	the	documents	discussed	in	chapter	6.	Increasingly,
companies	that	want	to	provide	the	benefits	of	document-sharing	to	every

employee	have	installed	extensive	networks,	often	at	substantial	cost.	For
example,	Microsoft's	subsidiary	in	Greece	pays	more	for	its	connection	to	our
worldwide	network	than	it	pays	in	salaries.
Now	electronic	mail	is	becoming	the	primary	tool	for	exchanging	messages.
Print	conventions	have	also	evolved.	If	you	want	a	sentence	to	end	with	a
chuckle	to	show	that	its	meaning	is	intended	to	be	humorous,	you	might	add	a
colon,	a	dash,	and	a	parenthesis.	This	composite	symbol,	:-),	if	viewed
sideways,	makes	a	smiling	face.	For	instance,	you	might	write,	"I'm	not	sure
that's	a	great	idea	:-)"—the	smiley	face	showing	that	your	words	are	good-
natured.	Using	the	opposite	parenthesis	turns	the	smiling	face	into	a	frowning
face,	:-(,	an	expression	of	disappointment.	These	"emoticons,"	which	are	half
cousins	of	the	exclamation	point,	probably	won't	survive	the	transition	of	e-
mail	into	a	medium	that	permits	audio	and	video.
Conventionally,	businesses	share	information	internally	by	exchanging
paperwork,	placing	telephone	calls,	and/or	gathering	around	a	conference
table	or	white	board.	Plenty	of	time	and	plenty	of	expensive	face-to-face
meetings	and	presentations	are	required	to	reach	good	decisions	this	way.	The
potential	for	inefficiency	is	enormous.	Companies	that	continue	to	rely	on
these	methods	exclusively	risk	losing	out	to	competitors	who	reach	decisions
faster	while	devoting	fewer	resources,	and	probably	fewer	layers	of
management,	to	the	process.
At	Microsoft,	because	we're	in	the	technology	business,	we	began	using
electronic	communication	early.	We	installed	our	first	e-mail	system	in	the
early	1980s.	Even	when	we	had	only	a	dozen	employees,	it	made	a	difference.
It	quickly	became	the	principal	method	of	internal	communication.	E-mail
was	used	in	place	of	paper	memos,	technology	discussions,	trip	reports,	and
phone	messages.	It	contributed	a	lot	to	the	efficiency	of	our	little	company.
Today,	with	thousands	of	employees,	it	is	essential.
E-mail	is	easy	to	use.	To	write	and	send	an	electronic	message,	I	click	on	a
large	button	labeled	"Compose."	This	brings	to	the	screen	a	simple	form.
First,	I	type	the	name	of	the	person	or	people	to	whom	I	am	addressing	the
message	or	choose	the	name	from	an	electronic	address	book.	I	can	even
indicate	that	I	want	the	message	sent	to	a	group	of	recipients.	For	example,
because	I	frequently	send	messages	to	key	employees	working	on	the
Microsoft	Office	project,	in	my	address	list	I	have	an	addressee	called
"Office."	If	I	choose	that	entry,	the	message	goes	to	everyone	concerned.
When	the	message	is	transmitted,	my	name	will	appear	automatically	in	the
"From"	space.	Then	I	type	a	short	heading	for	the	message,	so	the	recipients

will	have	an	idea	of	what	it's	about.	Then	I	type	the	message.
An	electronic	message	is	often	just	a	sentence	or	two	with	no	pleasantries.	I
might	send	an	electronic	message	to	three	or	four	people,	saying	nothing	more
than	"Let's	cancel	the	11:00	A.M.	Monday	meeting	and	use	the	time
individually	to	prepare	for	Tuesday's	presentation.	Objections?"	A	reply	to	my
message,	in	its	entirety,	might	be	as	succinct	as	"Fine."
If	this	exch======================================================== of	the	board	and	CEO	of	Bell	Atlantic,
comments,	"I	believe	a	combination	of	a	school	system	ready	for	fundamental
change	in	teaching	methods,	a	parent	body	that	was	supportive	and	wanted	to
be	involved,	and	the	careful	but	intensive	integration	of	technology	into	both
the	homes	and	classrooms	.	.	.	created	a	true	learning	community	in	which	the
home	and	school	reinforce	and	support	each	other."
At	Lester	B.	Pearson	School,	a	Canadian	high	school	serving	an	ethnically
diverse	neighborhood,	computers	are	an	integral	part	of	every	course	in	the
daily	curriculum.	For	the	1,200	students	there	are	more	than	300	personal
computers,	and	more	than	100	different	software	titles	are	in	use.	The	school
says	its	dropout	rate,	4	percent,	when	compared	with	a	national	average	of	30
percent,	is	Canada's	lowest.	Thirty-five	hundred	people	a	year	visit	to	see	how
a	high	school	can	"incorporate	technology	in	every	aspect	of	school	life."
When	the	information	highway	is	in	operation,	the	texts	of	millions	of	books
will	be	available.	A	reader	will	be	able	to	ask	questions,	print	the	text,	read	it
on-screen,	or	even	have	it	read	in	his	choice	of	voices.	He'll	be	able	to	ask
questions.	It	will	be	his	tutor.
Computers	with	social	interfaces	will	figure	out	how	to	present	information	so
that	it	is	customized	for	the	particular	user.	Many	educational	software
programs	will	have	distinct	personalities,	and	the	student	and	the	computer
will	get	to	know	each	other.	A	student	will	ask,	perhaps	orally,	"What	caused
the	American	Civil	War?"	His	or	her	computer	will	reply,	describing	the
conflicting	contentions:	that	it	was	primarily	a	battle	over	economics	or
human	rights.	The	length	and	approach	of	the	answer	will	vary	depending	on
the	student	and	the	circumstances.	A	student	will	be	able	to	interrupt	at	any
time	to	ask	the	computer	for	more	or	less	detail	or	to	request	a	different

approach	altogether.	The	computer	will	know	what	information	the	student
has	read	or	watched	and	will	point	out	connections	or	correlations	and	offer
appropriate	links.	If	the	computer	knows	the	student	likes	historical	fiction,
war	stories,	folk	music,	or	sports,	it	may	try	to	use	that	knowledge	to	present
the	information.	But	this	will	be	only	an	attention-getting	device.	The
machine,	like	a	good	human	teacher,	won't	give	in	to	a	child	who	has	lopsided
interests.	Instead	it	will	use	the	child's	predilections	to	teach	a	broader
curriculum.
Different	learning	rates	will	be	accommodated,	because	computers	will	be
able	to	pay	individual	attention	to	independent	learners.	Children	with
learning	disabilities	will	be	particularly	well	served.	Regardless	of	his	or	her
ability	or	disability,	every	student	will	be	able	to	work	at	an	individual	pace.
Another	benefit	of	computer-aided	learning	will	be	the	way	many	students
come	to	view	tests.	Today,	tests	are	pretty	depressing	for	many	kids.	They	are
associated	with	falling	short:	"I	got	a	bad	grade,"	or	"I	ran	out	of	time"	or	"I
wasn't	ready."	After	a	while,	many	kids	who	haven't	done	well	on	tests	may
think	to	themselves,	I'd	better	pretend	tests	aren't	important	to	me,	because	I
can	never	succeed	at	them.	Tests	can	cause	a	student	to	develop	a	negative
attitude	toward	all	education.
The	interactive	network	will	allow	students	to	quiz	themselves	anytime,	in	a
risk-free	environment.	A	self-administered	quiz	is	a	form	of	self-exploration,
like	the	tests	Paul	Allen	and	I	used	to	give	each	other.	Testing	will	become	a
positive	part	of	the	learning	process.	A	mistake	won't	call	forth	a	reprimand;	it
will	trigger	the	system	to	help	the	student	overcome	his	misunderstanding.	If
someone	really	gets	stuck,	the	system	will	offer	to	explain	the	circumstances
to	a	teacher.	There	should	be	less	apprehension	about	formal	tests	and	fewer
surprises,	because	on-going	self-quizzing	will	give	each	student	a	better	sense
of	where	he	or	she	stands.
Many	educational	software	and	textbook	companies	are	already	delivering
interactive	computer	products	in	mathematics,	languages,	economics,	and
biology	that	build	basic	skills	this	way.	For	example,	Academic	Systems	of
Palo	Alto,	California,	is	working	on	an	interactive	multi-media	instructional
system	for	colleges,	to	help	teach	basic	math	and	English	courses.	The
concept	is	called	"mediated	learning,"	and	it	blends	traditional	instruction
with	computer-based	learning.	Each	student	begins	by	taking	a	placement	test
to	determine	which	topics	he	or	she	understands	and	where	instruction	is
required.	The	system	then	creates	a	personalized	lesson	plan	for	the	student.
Periodic	tests	monitor	the	student's	progress,	and	the	lesson	plan	can	be

modified	as	the	student	masters	concepts.	The	program	can	also	report
problems	to	the	instructor,	who	can	then	give	the	student	individual	help.	So
far,	the	company	has	found	that	students	in	pilot	programs	like	the	new
learning	materials,	but	the	most	successful	classes	are	those	in	which	an
instructor	is	more	available.	These	results	underscore	the	point	that	new
technology,	by	itself,	is	not	sufficient	to	improve	education.
Some	parents	resist	the	use	of	computers	because	they	believe	they	can't
monitor	what	their	child	is	doing	and	can't	exert	any	control.	Most	parents	are
delighted	when	a	child	curls	up	with	an	engrossing	book,	but	less	enthusiastic
when	he	spends	hours	at	the	computer.	They're	probably	thinking	of	video
games.	A	kid	can	spend	a	great	deal	of	time	using	a	video	game	without
learning	much.	So	far,	a	great	deal	more	has	been	invested	in	computer
software	meant	to	entertain	than	in	software	to	educate.	It's	easier	to	create	an
addictive	game	than	it	is	to	expose	a	child	to	a	world	of	information	in	an
appealing	way.
However,	as	textbook	budgets	and	parental	spending	shift	to	interactive
material,	there	will	be	thousands	of	new	software	companies	working	with
teachers	to	create	entertainment-quality	interactive	learning	materials.	The
Lightspan	Partnership,	for	example,	is	using	Hollywood	talent	to	create	live
action	and	animated	programs.	Lightspan	hopes	its	sophisticated	production
techniques	will	capture	and	retain	the	interest	of	the	young	viewers—ages
five	through	eleven—and	encourage	them	to	spend	more	hours	learning.
Animated	characters	lead	students	through	lessons	that	explain	basic
concepts,	then	into	games	that	put	them	to	use.	The	Lightspan	lessons	are
grouped	by	two-year	age	spans	and	organized	into	series	intended	to
complement	elementary	school	curricula	in	mathematics,	reading,	and
language	arts.	These	programs	will	be	available	on	televisions	in	homes	and
community	centers	as	well	as	in	classrooms.	Until	interactive	television	is
widely	available,	this	kind	of	programming	will	be	offered	on	CD-ROMs	or
across	the	Internet	to	PC	users.
All	this	information,	however,	is	not	going	to	solve	the	serious	problems
facing	many	public	schools	today:	budget	cuts,	violence,	drugs,	high	dropout
rates,	dangerous	neighborhoods,	teachers	more	concerned	about	survival	than
education.	Offering	new	technology	won't	suffice.	Society	will	also	have	to
fix	the	fundamental	problems.
But	while	some	public	schools	face	major	challenges,	they	are	also	our
greatest	hope.	Imagine	a	situation	in	which	most	of	the	kids	in	inner-city
public	schools	are	on	the	dole,	are	barely	able	to	speak	the	national	language,

have	few	skills	and	an	uncertain	future.	This	was	America	in	the	early	1900s,
when	tens	of	millions	of	immigrants	had	overwhelmed	the	schools	and	social
services	of	our	big	cities.
Yet	that	generation	and	the	next	achieved	a	standard	of	living	unequaled	in
the	world.	The	problems	of	America's	schools	are	not	insurmountable,	just
extremely	complicated.	Even	today,	for	every	disastrous	public	school	there
are	dozens	of	successful	ones	you	don't	read	about.	I've	mentioned	several
examples	here.	It	is	outside	the	scope	of	this	book	to	go	deeply	into	this
subject,	but	communities	can,	and	have,	won	back	their	streets	and	schools.
It's	always	taken	an	intense	local	effort.	One	street	at	a	time,	one	school	at	a
time.	Then	parents	must	insist	that	their	kids	come	to	school	ready	to	learn.	If
the	attitude	is	"Let	the	school	(or	government)	do	it"	kids	will	fail.
Once	even	the	most	modest	positive	atmosphere	for	education	is	established,
the	information	highway	will	help	raise	the	educational	standards	for
everyone	in	future	generations.	The	highway	will	allow	new	methods	of
teaching	and	much	more	choice.	Quality	curriculums	can	be	created	with
government	funding	and	made	available	for	free.	Private	vendors	will
compete	to	enhance	the	free	material.	The	new	vendors	might	be	other	public
schools;	public-school	teachers	or	retired	teachers	going	into	business	for
themselves;	or	some	privately	run,	highway-based	school	service	program
wanting	to	prove	its	capabilities.	The	highway	would	be	a	way	for	schools	to
try	out	new	teachers	or	use	their	services	at	a	distance.
The	highway	will	also	make	home	schooling	easier.	It	will	allow	parents	to
select	some	classes	from	a	range	of	quality	possibilities	and	still	maintain
control	over	content.
Learning	with	a	computer	will	be	a	springboard	for	learning	away	from	the
computer.	Young	children	will	still	need	to	touch	toys	and	tools	with	their
hands.	Seeing	chemical	reactions	on	a	computer	screen	can	be	a	good
supplement	to	hands-on	work	in	a	chemistry	lab,	but	it	can't	replace	the	real
experience.	Children	need	personal	interaction	with	each	other,	and	with
adults,	to	learn	social	and	interpersonal	skills,	such	as	how	to	work
cooperatively.
The	good	teachers	of	the	future	will	be	doing	much	more	than	showing	kids
where	to	find	information	on	the	highway.	They	will	still	have	to	understand
when	to	probe,	observe,	stimulate,	or	agitate.	They'll	still	have	to	build	kids'
skills	in	written	and	oral	communications,	and	will	use	technology	as	a
starting	point	or	an	aid.	Successful	teachers	will	act	as	coaches,	partners,

creative	outlets,	and	communications	bridges	to	the	world.
Computers	on	the	information	highway	will	be======================================================== kets	already	served	by	others.	Interestingly,	in	the	cable	TV	business,	the
few	places	a	second	system	was	constructed,	the	"overbuilder"	never	made
money.	Having	two	or	more	general-purpose	connections	running	into	every
home	would	aid	competition,	but	the	extra	cost	is	immense.
Servers	for	the	information	highway	will	have	to	be	large	computers	with
gigantic	storage	capacity	that	run	twenty-four	hours	a	day,	seven	days	a	week.
Competition	to	supply	them	will	be	intense.	Various	companies	have	different
ideas	about	the	right	design	for	the	servers,	and	strategies	for	developing
them.	Not	surprisingly,	the	positions	held	by	the	various	potential	competitors
are	influenced	by	their	areas	of	expertise.	If	your	only	tool	is	a	hammer,	pretty
soon	every	new	problem	starts	to	look	like	a	nail	that	needs	pounding.	Mini-
computer	companies	such	as	Hewlett	Packard	envision	using	clusters	of	mini-
computers	as	servers.	A	variety	of	companies	that	primarily	make	personal
computers	believe	that	inexpensive	PCs,	connected	together	in	large	numbers,
will	prove	to	be	the	most	cost-effective	and	reliable	approach.	Mainframe
specialists	such	as	IBM	are	adapting	their	big	machines	to	be	servers.	They
cherish	a	fond	hope	that	the	information	highway	will	be	the	last	bastion	of
Big	Iron.
Software	companies	naturally	see	their	product	as	the	answer.	Software	is	so
inexpensive	to	duplicate	that	substituting	it	for	costly	hardware	reduces
system	costs.	Another	competition	is	shaping	up	to	supply	the	software
platforms	that	will	run	these	servers.	Oracle,	a	database-management
company	that	makes	software	for	mainframes	and	mini-computers,	envisions
the	server	as	a	supercomputer	or	mini-computer	running	Oracle	software.
AT&T,	with	its	experience	in	the	network	business,	will	probably	try	to

embed	most	of	the	system's	intelligence	in	the	servers	and	switches	of	the
network	and	put	relatively	little	processing	power	in	information	appliances
such	as	PCs	and	set-top	boxes.
At	Microsoft,	our	only	"hammer"	is	software.	We	expect	that	the	highway's
intelligence	will	be	evenly	divided	between	servers	and	information
appliances.	This	arrangement	is	sometimes	called	"client/server"	computing,
which	means	that	the	information	appliances	(the	clients)	and	the	servers	will
run	cooperating	software	applications.	We	don't	believe	that	giant
supercomputers,	mainframes,	or	even	clusters	of	mini-computers	will	be
necessary.	Instead,	Microsoft,	like	many	of	the	PC	manufacturers,	sees	the
server	as	a	network	of	dozens	to	hundreds	of	what	are	essentially	personal
computers.	They	won't	have	the	familiar	cases,	monitors,	and	keyboards,	and
may	be	housed	together	in	large	racks	at	the	headquarters	of	a	cable	system	or
the	central	office	of	a	telephone	system.	It	will	take	special	software
technology	to	harness	the	computing	horsepower	of	thousands	of	such
machines.	Our	approach	is	to	make	the	coordination	of	the	highway	a
software	problem	and	then	use	the	highest-volume	(and	therefore	cheapest)
computers	to	do	the	work—the	same	ones	used	in	the	PC	industry.
Our	approach	focuses	on	taking	full	advantage	of	all	the	advances	going	on	in
the	PC	industry,	including	the	software.	The	PC	will	be	one	of	the	primary
devices	used	on	the	highway.	We	think	the	set-top	box	should	share	as	many
technical	features	as	possible	with	the	PC	to	make	it	easy	for	developers	to
create	applications	and	services	that	will	work	with	both.	This	will	allow	the
Internet	to	evolve	upward	into	the	highway	in	a	compatible	fashion.	We
believe	tools	and	applications	available	on	the	PC	today	can	be	used	to	build
new	applications.	For	instance,	we	think	set-top	boxes	should	be	able	to	run
most	of	the	CD-ROM	titles	for	PCs	that	will	appear	over	the	next	decade.	One
could	argue	that	we	are	thinking	too	narrowly	by	trying	to	imagine	the	new
world	in	terms	of	the	PC.	But	there	are	more	than	50	million	PCs	sold	every
year	worldwide.	The	population	of	installed	PCs	will	provide	a	substantial
starter	market	for	a	prospective	developer	of	any	application	or	service.
Even	if	there	were	suddenly	a	million	of	one	type	of	set-top	box	in	use,	it	still
would	represent	a	tiny	market	compared	to	the	opportunity	for	multi-media
titles	for	the	PC.	A	developer	could	afford	to	spend	only	a	small	fraction	of	its
R&D	on	customers	with	these	specialized	boxes.	Only	the	very	largest
companies	are	able	to	invest	in	new	applications	without	concerning
themselves	about	the	near-term	audience	size.	We	believe	that	most	of	the
innovation	that	will	occur	will	be	extending	existing	markets,	and	that	using
the	PC/Internet	market	is	the	likeliest	means	of	extending	to	interactive	TV

and	the	highway.	But	similar	arguments	could	be	made	in	favor	of	other
computer	platforms	or	even	home	game	machines.
Other	software	companies	are	equally	confident	about	their	own	strategies	for
set-top	box	software.	Apple	proposes	to	use	Macintosh	technology,	and
Silicon	Graphics	intends	to	adapt	its	workstation	operating	system,	which	is	a
form	of	UNIX.	One	small	company	even	wants	to	repurpose	an	operating
system	that	is	currently	used	primarily	in	the	antilock-brake	systems	of
commercial	trucks!
Hardware	manufacturers	are	making	similar	decisions	about	which	approach
to	set-top	boxes	they	want	to	take.	Meanwhile,	consumer-electronics
companies	are	determining	what	sorts	of	information	appliances—from	wallet
PCs	to	TVs	they	will	build	and	what	software	they	will	use.
The	battle	among	software	architectures	will	play	out	over	a	long	period	and
may	involve	potential	competitors	who	have	not	yet	declared	their	interest.
All	software	components	will	be	compatible	to	a	degree,	the	way	all	of
today's	computer	systems	share	certain	degrees	of	compatibility.	You	can
connect	nearly	any	computer	to	the	Internet,	and	the	same	will	be	true	for	the
highway.
There	are	open	questions	such	as	to	what	extent	these	platforms	will	share	a
personality	or	user	interface.	A	single	common	user	interface	is	great—unless
you	happen	not	to	like	it.	Will	Mom,	Dad,	Grandma,	the	preschooler,	and	the
Generation	X-er	all	have	the	same	taste?	Must	one	size	fit	all	in	this,	the	most
flexible	medium?	Here,	too,	good	arguments	can	be	made	in	all	directions,	so
interface	is	another	area	in	which	the	industry	will	have	to	experiment,
innovate,	and	let	the	market	decide.
There	are	other,	similar	decisions	awaiting	the	judgment	of	the	marketplace.
For	instance,	will	advertising	play	a	large	role	in	underwriting	information
and	entertainment,	or	will	customers	pay	directly	for	most	services?	Will	you
control	all	of	what	you	see	when	you	first	turn	on	a	TV	or	other	information
appliance,	or	will	your	network	provider	get	some	part	of	your	first	screen	to
show	you	information	it	controls?
The	market	will	also	influence	technical	aspects	of	network	design.	Most
experts	believe	that	the	interactive	network	will	use	asynchronous	transfer
mode	(ATM),	but	today	ATM	costs	too	much	to	use.	If	ATM	equipment	prices
behave	like	other	chip-related	technologies,	they	will	come	down	rapidly.
However,	if	for	some	reason	they	stay	high	or	don't	drop	quickly	enough,
signals	may	have	to	be	translated	into	some	other	form	before	they	enter	a

consumer's	home.
A	wide	range	of	skills,	from	a	wide	range	of	companies,	will	be	necessary	to
put	the	information	highway	together	sufficiently	for	a	mass	market	to	begin.
It	will	be	tempting	for	a	company	strong	in	one	or	more	of	the	necessary
disciplines	to	try	to	find	a	way	to	do	every	piece	and	ignite	the	market	all	by
itself,	but	I	think	this	would	be	a	mistake.
I	have	always	believed	businesses	that	concentrate	on	a	very	few	core
competencies	will	do	the	best.	One	of	the	lessons	of	the	computer	industry—
as	well	as	of	life—is	that	it	is	almost	impossible	to	do	everything	well.	IBM
and	DEC	and	other	companies	in	the	old	computer	industry	tried	offering
everything,	including	chips,	software,	systems,	and	consulting.	When	the	pace
of	technology	was	accelerated	by	the	microprocessor	and	PC	standards,	the
diversified	strategy	proved	vulnerable,	because,	over	time,	competitors	who
had	focused	on	specific	areas	did	better.	One	company	did	great	chips,
another	did	great	PC	design,	yet	another	did	great	distribution	and	integration.
Each	successful	new	company	picked	a	narrow	slice	and	focused	on	it.
Beware!	Mergers	that	are	attempts	to	bring	all	aspects	of	highway	expertise
into	one	organization	should	be	viewed	skeptically.	Much	of	the	press
coverage	about	the	highway	has	concerned	just	such	huge	business	deals.
Media	companies	are	merging	and	trying	different	configurations.	Some
phone	companies	are	buying	cable	companies.	McCaw	Cellular	wireless
communications	company	was	bought	by	wire-based	AT&T.	Disney	has
purchased	Capital	Cities-ABC	and	Time-Warner	proposed	buying	Turner
Broadcasting.	It	will	be	a	long	time	before	the	corporations	making	these
investments	can	assess	how	wise	they	were.
Right	or	wrong,	deals	like	these	fascinate	the	public.	For	example,	when	the
proposed	$30	billion	merger	between	Bell	Atlantic	and	TCI	fell	through,	the
press	speculated	about	whether	it	was	a	setback	for	the	information	highway.
The	answer	is	no.	Both	companies	still	have	very	aggressive	investment	plans
for	building	the	highway's	infrastructure.
The	highway's	arrival	will	depend	on	the	evolution	of	the	PC,	the	Internet,
and	new	applications.	Companies	merging,	or	failing	to	merge,	is	no
indication	of	progress	or	the	lack	of	it.	The	deals	are	like	background	noise;
they	keep	rumbling	along	whether	or	not	anyone	is	listening.	Microsoft	plans
to	reach	out	to	hundreds	of	companies,	including	movie	studios,	television
networks,	and	newspaper	and	magazine	publishers.	We	hope	to	work	with
them	so	that	together	we	can	assemble	their	respective	content	assets	and

build	applications	for	CD-ROMs,	the	Internet,	and	the	highway.
We	believe	in	alliances	and	are	eager	to	participate	in	them.	Our	core	mission,
however,	is	to	build	a	number	of	software	components	for	the	information
h======================================================== omputers	at	an	early
age	we	can	ensure	that	they	play	their	rightful	role	in	all	the	work	that	benefits
from	computer	expertise.
My	own	experience	as	a	child,	and	that	of	my	friends	raising	children	today,
is	that	once	a	kid	is	exposed	to	computing,	he	or	she	is	hooked.	But	we	have
to	create	the	opportunity	for	that	exposure.	Schools	should	have	low-cost
access	to	computers	connected	to	the	information	highway,	and	teachers	need
to	become	comfortable	with	the	new	tools.
One	of	the	wonderful	things	about	the	information	highway	is	that	virtual
equity	is	far	easier	to	achieve	than	real-world	equity.	It	would	take	a	massive
amount	of	money	to	give	every	grammar	school	in	every	poor	area	the	same
library	resources	as	the	schools	in	Beverly	Hills.	However,	when	you	put
schools	on-line	they	all	get	the	same	access	to	information,	wherever	it	might
be	stored.	We	are	all	created	equal	in	the	virtual	world,	and	we	can	use	this
equality	to	help	address	some	of	the	sociological	problems	that	society	has	yet
to	solve	in	the	physical	world.	The	network	will	not	eliminate	barriers	of
prejudice	or	inequality,	but	it	will	be	a	powerful	force	in	that	direction.
The	question	of	how	to	price	intellectual	property,	such	as	entertainment	and
educational	materials,	is	fascinating.	Economists	understand	a	lot	about	how
the	pricing	of	classical	manufactured	goods	works.	They	can	show	how
rational	pricing	should	reflect	cost	structure	in	a	very	direct	manner.	In	a
market	with	multiple	competing	qualified	manufacturers,	prices	tend	to	drop
to	the	marginal	cost	of	making	one	more	of	whatever	they	are	selling.	But	this
model	doesn't	work	when	applied	to	intellectual	property.
A	basic	economics	course	describes	the	curves	of	supply	and	demand,	which
intersect	at	the	price	appropriate	for	a	product.	But	supply-and-demand
economics	gets	into	trouble	when	it	comes	to	intellectual	property,	because
ordinary	rules	regarding	manufacturing	costs	don't	apply.	Typically	there	are
huge	up-front	development	costs	for	intellectual	property.	These	fixed	costs
are	the	same	regardless	of	whether	one	copy	or	a	million	copies	of	the	work
are	sold.	George	Lucas's	next	movie	in	the	Star	Wars	series	will	cost	millions
to	make,	regardless	of	how	many	people	pay	to	see	it	in	theaters.

The	pricing	of	intellectual	property	is	more	complicated	than	most	pricing
because	today	it	is	relatively	inexpensive	to	manufacture	copies	of	most
intellectual	property.	Tomorrow,	on	the	information	highway,	the	cost	of
delivering	a	copy	of	a	work—which	will	amount	to	the	same	thing	as
manufacturing	it—will	be	even	lower,	and	dropping	every	year	because	of
Moore's	Law.	When	you	buy	a	new	medicine,	you're	paying	mostly	for	what
the	drug	company	spent	for	research,	development,	and	testing.	Even	if	the
marginal	cost	of	making	each	pill	is	minimal,	the	pharmaceutical	company
still	may	have	to	charge	quite	a	bit	for	each,	especially	if	the	market	is	not
huge.	The	revenue	from	the	average	patient	has	to	cover	a	sufficient	share	of
the	development	expenses	and	generate	enough	profit	to	make	investors	glad
they	took	the	substantial	financial	risks	involved	in	developing	a	new	drug.
When	a	poor	country	wants	the	medicine,	the	manufacturer	faces	a	moral
dilemma.	If	the	pharmaceutical	company	doesn't	waive	or	drastically	reduce
its	patent-licensing	fees,	the	medicine	won't	be	available	to	poor	countries.
However,	if	a	manufacturer	is	to	be	able	to	invest	in	R&D,	some	users	must
pay	more	than	the	marginal	cost.	Prices	for	drugs	vary	greatly	from	country	to
country	and	discriminate	against	poor	people	in	rich	countries	except	where
governments	cover	medical	costs.
One	possible	solution,	a	scheme	whereby	a	rich	person	pays	more	to	buy	a
new	medicine,	to	see	a	movie	or	to	read	a	book,	may	seem	inequitable;
however,	it	is	identical	to	a	system	already	in	place	today—taxation.	Through
the	income	tax	and	other	taxes,	people	with	high	incomes	pay	more	for	roads,
schools,	the	army,	and	every	other	government	facility	than	the	average
person	does.	It	cost	me	more	than	$100	million	last	year	to	get	those	services
because	I	paid	a	significant	capital	gains	tax	after	selling	some	Microsoft
shares.	I	have	no	complaint,	but	it	is	an	example	of	the	same	services	being
provided	at	vastly	different	prices.
The	pricing	for	highway	access	may	be	set	politically	rather	than	on	the	basis
of	costs.	It	is	going	to	be	expensive	to	enfranchise	people	in	remote	locations
because	the	cost	of	bringing	wiring	to	far-flung	homes	and	even	small
communities	is	very	high.	Companies	may	not	be	eager	to	make	the	necessary
investment,	and	the	geographically	disenfranchised	may	not	be	in	a	position
to	make	the	investment	on	their	own	behalf.	We	should	expect	heated	debate
about	whether	the	government	should	subsidize	connections	to	rural	areas,	or
impose	regulations	that	cause	urban	users	to	subsidize	rural	ones.	The
precedent	for	this	is	a	doctrine	known	as	"universal	service"	which	was
created	to	subsidize	rural	mail,	phone,	and	electrical	services	in	the	United
States.	It	dictates	a	single	price	for	the	delivery	of	a	letter,	a	phone	call,	or
electrical	power	regardless	of	where	you	live.	It	applies	even	though	it	is

more	expensive	to	deliver	services	in	rural	areas,	where	homes	and	businesses
are	farther	apart	than	in	areas	of	concentrated	population.
There	was	no	equivalent	policy	for	the	delivery	of	newspapers	or	radio	or
television	reception.	Nonetheless,	these	services	are	widely	available,	so
clearly	under	some	circumstances	government	intervention	isn't	necessary	to
ensure	high	availability.	The	U.S.	Postal	Service	was	founded	as	part	of	the
government	on	the	assumption	that	that	was	the	only	way	to	provide	truly
universal	service.	UPS	and	Federal	Express	might	disagree	on	this	point,
however,	because	they	have	managed	to	provide	broad	coverage	and	make
money.	The	debate	as	to	whether,	or	to	what	degree,	government	needs	to	be
involved	to	guarantee	broad	access	to	the	information	highway	is	certain	to
rage	on	for	many	years.
The	highway	will	let	those	who	live	in	remote	places	consult,	collaborate,	and
be	involved	with	the	rest	of	the	world.	Because	many	people	will	find	the
combination	of	rural	lifestyle	and	urban	information	attractive,	network
companies	will	have	an	incentive	to	run	fiber-optic	lines	to	high-income
remote	areas.	It	is	likely	that	some	states,	or	communities,	or	even	private	real
estate	developers	will	promote	their	areas	by	providing	great	connectivity.
This	will	lead	to	what	one	might	call	the	"Aspen-ization"	of	parts	of	the
country.	Interesting	rural	communities	with	high	marks	for	quality	of	life	will
deliberately	set	out	to	attract	a	new	class	of	sophisticated	urban	citizen.	Taken
as	a	whole,	urban	areas	will	tend	to	get	their	connections	before	rural	ones.
The	highway	will	spread	information	and	opportunity	across	borders	to
developing	nations,	too.	Cheap	global	communications	can	bring	people
anywhere	into	the	mainstream	of	the	world	economy.	An	English-speaking
Ph.D.	in	China	will	be	able	to	bid	against	colleagues	in	London	for	consulting
work.	Knowledge	workers	in	industrialized	countries	will,	in	a	sense,	face
new	competition—just	as	some	manufacturing	workers	in	industrialized
countries	have	experienced	competition	from	developing	nations	over	the	past
decade.	This	will	make	the	information	highway	a	powerful	force	for
international	trade	in	intellectual	goods	and	services,	just	as	the	availability	of
relatively	inexpensive	air	cargo	and	containerized	shipping	helped	propel
international	trade	in	physical	goods.
The	net	effect	will	be	a	wealthier	world,	which	should	be	stabilizing.
Developed	nations,	and	workers	in	those	nations,	are	likely	to	maintain	a
sizable	economic	lead.	However,	the	gap	between	the	have	and	have-not
nations	will	diminish.	Starting	out	behind	is	sometimes	an	advantage.	It	lets
those	who	adopt	late	skip	steps,	and	avoid	the	mistakes	of	the	trailblazers.

Some	countries	will	never	have	industrialization.	They	will	move	directly	into
the	Information	Age.	Europe	didn't	adopt	television	until	several	years	after
the	United	States.	The	result	was	higher	picture
quality,	because	by	the	time	Europe	set	its	standard	a	better	choice	was
available.	As	a	result,	Europeans	have	enjoyed	better-looking	television
pictures	for	decades.
Telephone	systems	are	another	example	of	how	starting	late	can	provide	an
advantage.	In	Africa,	China,	and	other	parts	of	the	developing	world,	many
citizens	who	have	phones	use	cellular	instruments.	Cellular	telephone	service
is	spreading	rapidly	in	Asia,	Latin	America,	and	other	developing	regions,
because	it	does	not	require	that	copper	wires	be	strung.	Many	people	in	the
cellular	industry	predict	that	improvements	in	technology	will	mean	that	these
areas	may	never	get	a	conventional	copper	wire-based	telephone	system.
These	countries	will	never	have	to	cut	down	a	million	trees	for	telephone
poles	or	string	a	hundred	thousand	miles	of	telephone	lines	only	to	rip	them
all	down	and	bury	the	entire	network.	The	wireless	telephone	system	will	be
their	first	telephone	system.	They	will	get	increasingly	better	cellular	systems
wherever	they	can't	afford	a	full	broadband	connection.
The	presence	of	advanced	communications	systems	promises	to	make	nations
more	alike	and	reduce	the	importance	of	national	boundaries.	The	fax
machine,	the	portable	videocamera,	and	Cable	News	Network	are	among	the
forces	that	brought	about	the	end	of	communist	regimes	and	the	Cold	War,
because	they	allowed	news	to	pass	both	ways	through	what	was	called	the
Iron	Curtain.
Now,	commercial	satellite	broadcasts	to	nations	such	as	China	and	Iran	offer
citizens	glimpses	of	the	outside	world	that	are	not	necessarily	sanctioned	by
their	governments.	This	new	access	to	information	can	draw	people	together
by	increasing	their	understanding	of	other	cultures.	Some	believe	it	will	cause
discontent	and	worse,	a	"Revolution	of	Expectations,"	when	disenfranchised
people	get	enough	data	a======================================================== tomers,	we
have	a	chance	to	continue	to	lead	the	way.	We	can	certainly	keep	providing
better	and	better	software	to	make	the	PC	a	universally	empowering	tool.	I
often	say	I	have	the	best	job	in	the	world,	and	I	mean	it.
I	think	this	is	a	wonderful	time	to	be	alive.	There	have	never	been	so	many
opportunities	to	do	things	that	were	impossible	before.	It's	also	the	best	time
ever	to	start	new	companies,	advance	sciences	such	as	medicine	that	improve
quality	of	life,	and	stay	in	touch	with	friends	and	relatives.	It's	important	that

both	the	good	and	bad	points	of	the	technological	advances	be	discussed
broadly	so	that	society	as	a	whole,	rather	than	just	technologists,	can	guide	its
direction.
Now	it's	back	to	you.	I	explained	in	the	Foreword	that	I	was	writing	this	book
to	help	get	a	dialogue	started	and	to	call	attention	to	a	number	of	the
opportunities	and	issues	that	individuals,	companies,	and	nations	will	face.
My	hope	is	that	after	reading	this	book	you	will	share	some	of	my	optimism,
and	will	join	the	discussion	about	how	we	should	be	shaping	the	future.======================================================== will	connect	to	the	wireless	part	of	the	highway,	a	switch	will
connect	that	to	the	wired	part,	and	then	to	the	computer/server	in	your	home
or	office	and	bring	you	the	information	you	asked	for.
There	will	also	be	local,	less	expensive	kinds	of	wireless	networks	available
inside	businesses	and	most	homes.	These	networks	will	allow	you	to	connect
to	the	highway	or	your	own	computer	system	without	paying	time	charges	so
long	as	you	are	within	a	certain	range.	Local	wireless	networks	will	use
technology	different	from	the	one	used	by	the	wide-area	wireless	networks.
However,	portable	information	devices	will	automatically	select	the	least
expensive	network	they	are	able	to	connect	to,	so	the	user	won't	be	aware	of
the	technological	differences.	The	indoor	wireless	networks	will	allow	wallet
PCs	to	be	used	in	place	of	remote	controls.
Wireless	service	poses	obvious	concerns	about	privacy	and	security,	because
radio	signals	can	easily	be	intercepted.	Even	wired	networks	can	be	tapped.
The	highway	software	will	have	to	encrypt	transmission	to	avoid
eavesdropping.
Governments	have	long	understood	the	importance	of	keeping	information
private,	for	both	economic	and	military	reasons.	The	need	to	make	personal,
commercial,	military,	or	diplomatic	messages	secure	(or	to	break	into	them)
has	attracted	powerful	intellects	through	the	generations.	It	is	very	satisfying
to	break	an	encoded	message.	Charles	Babbage,	who	made	dramatic	advances
in	the	art	of	code	breaking	in	the	mid-1800s,	wrote:	"Deciphering	is,	in	my
opinion,	one	of	the	most	fascinating	of	arts,	and	I	fear	I	have	wasted	upon	it
more	time	than	it	deserves."	I	discovered	its	fascination	as	a	kid	when,	like
kids	everywhere,	a	bunch	of	us	played	with	simple	ciphers.	We	would	encode
messages	by	substituting	one	letter	of	the	alphabet	for	another.	If	a	friend	sent
me	a	cipher	that	began	"ULFW	NZXX"	it	would	be	fairly	easy	to	guess	that
this	represented	"DEAR	BILL,"	and	that	U	stood	for	D,	and	L	for	E,	and	so
forth.	With	those	seven	letters	it	wasn't	hard	to	unravel	the	rest	of	the	cipher
fairly	quickly.

Past	wars	have	been	won	or	lost	because	the	most	powerful	governments	on
earth	didn't	have	the	cryptological	power	any	interested	junior	high	school
student	with	a	personal	computer	can	harness	today.	Soon	any	child	old
enough	to	use	a	computer	will	be	able	to	transmit	encoded	messages	that	no
government	on	earth	will	find	easy	to	decipher.	This	is	one	of	the	profound
implications	of	the	spread	of	fantastic	computing	power.
When	you	send	a	message	across	the	information	highway	it	will	be	"signed"
by	your	computer	or	other	information	appliance	with	a	digital	signature	that
only	you	are	capable	of	applying,	and	it	will	be	encrypted	so	that	only	the
intended	recipient	will	be	able	to	decipher	it.	You'll	send	a	message,	which
could	be	information	of	any	kind,	including	voice,	video,	or	digital	money.
The	recipient	will	be	able	to	be	almost	positive	that	the	message	is	really	from
you,	that	it	was	sent	at	exactly	the	indicated	time,	that	it	has	not	been
tampered	with	in	the	slightest,	and	that	others	cannot	decipher	it.
The	mechanism	that	will	make	this	possible	is	based	on	mathematical
principles,	including	what	are	called	"one-way	functions"	and	"public-key
encryption."	These	are	quite	advanced	concepts,	so	I'm	only	going	to	touch	on
them.	Keep	in	mind	that	regardless	of	how	complicated	the	system	is
technically,	it	will	be	extremely	easy	for	you	to	use.	You'll	just	tell	your
information	appliance	what	you	want	it	to	do	and	it	will	seem	to	happen
effortlessly.
A	one-way	function	is	something	that	is	much	easier	to	do	than	undo.
Breaking	a	pane	of	glass	is	a	one-way	function,	but	not	one	useful	for
encoding.	The	sort	of	one-way	function	required	for	cryptography	is	one	that
is	easy	to	undo	if	you	know	an	extra	piece	of	information	and	very	difficult	to
undo	without	that	information.	There	are	a	number	of	such	one-way	functions
in	mathematics.	One	involves	prime	numbers.	Kids	learn	about	prime
numbers	in	school.	A	prime	number	cannot	be	divided	evenly	by	any	number
except	1	and	itself.	Among	the	first	dozen	numbers,	the	primes	are	2,	3,	5,	7,
and	11.	The	numbers	4,	6,	8,	and	10	are	not	prime	because	2	divides	into	each
of	them	evenly.	The	number	9	is	not	prime	because	3	divides	into	it	evenly.
There	are	an	infinite	number	of	prime	numbers,	and	there	is	no	known	pattern
to	them	except	that	they	are	prime.	When	you	multiply	two	prime	numbers
together,	you	get	a	number	that	can	be	divided	evenly	only	by	those	same	two
primes.	For	example,	only	5	and	7	can	be	divided	evenly	into	35.	Finding	the
primes	is	called	"factoring"	the	number.
It	is	easy	to	multiply	the	prime	numbers	11,927	and	20,903	and	get	the
number	249,310,081,	but	it	is	much	harder	to	recover	from	the	product,

249,310,081,	the	two	prime	numbers	that	are	its	factors.	This	one-way
function,	the	difficulty	of	factoring	numbers,	underlies	an	ingenious	kind	of
cipher:	the	most	sophisticated	encryption	system	in	use	today.	It	takes	a	long
time	for	even	the	largest	computers	to	factor	a	really	large	product	back	into
its	constituent	primes.	A	coding	system	based	on	factoring	uses	two	different
decoding	keys,	one	to	encipher	a	message	and	a	different	but	related	one	to
decipher.	With	only	the	enciphering	key,	it's	easy	to	encode	a	message,	but
deciphering	it	within	any	practical	period	of	time	is	nearly	impossible.
Deciphering	requires	a	separate	key,	available	only	to	the	intended	recipient
of	the	message—or,	rather,	to	the	recipient's	computer.	The	enciphering	key	is
based	on	the	product	of	two	huge	prime	numbers,	whereas	the	deciphering
key	is	based	on	the	primes	themselves.	A	computer	can	generate	a	new	pair	of
unique	keys	in	a	flash,	because	it	is	easy	for	a	computer	to	generate	two	large
prime	numbers	and	multiply	them	together.	The	enciphering	key	thus	created
can	be	made	public	without	appreciable	risk,	because	of	the	difficulty	even
another	computer	would	have	factoring	it	to	obtain	the	deciphering	key.
The	practical	application	of	this	encryption	will	be	at	the	center	of	the
information	highway's	security	system.	The	world	will	become	quite	reliant
on	this	network,	so	it	is	important	that	security	be	handled	competently.	You
can	think	of	the	information	highway	as	a	postal	network	where	everyone	has
a	mailbox	that	is	impervious	to	tampering	and	has	an	unbreakable	lock.	Each
mailbox	has	a	slot	that	lets	anyone	slide	information	in,	but	only	the	owner	of
a	mailbox	has	the	key	to	get	information	out.	(Some	governments	may	insist
that	each	mailbox	have	a	second	door	with	a	separate	key	that	the	government
keeps,	but	we'll	ignore	that	political	consideration	for	now	and	concentrate	on
the	security	that	software	will	provide.)
Each	user's	computer	or	other	information	appliance	will	use	prime	numbers
to	generate	an	enciphering	key,	which	will	be	listed	publicly,	and	a
corresponding	deciphering	key,	which	only	the	user	will	know.	This	is	how	it
will	work	in	practice:	I	have	information	I	want	to	send	you.	My	information
appliance/computer	system	looks	up	your	public	key	and	uses	it	to	encrypt	the
information	before	sending	it.	No	one	can	read	the	message,	even	though	your
key	is	public	knowledge,	because	your	public	key	does	not	contain	the
information	needed	for	decryption.	You	receive	the	message	and	your
computer	decrypts	it	with	a	private	key	that	corresponds	to	your	public	key.
You	want	to	answer.	Your	computer	looks	up	my	public	key	and	uses	it	to
encrypt	your	reply.	No	one	else	can	read	the	message,	even	though	it	was
encrypted	with	a	key	that	is	totally	public.	Only	I	can	read	it	because	only	I
have	the	private	deciphering	key.	This	is	very	practical,	because	no	one	has	to

trade	keys	in	advance.
How	big	do	the	prime	numbers	and	their	products	have	to	be	to	ensure	an
effective	one-way	function?.
The	concept	of	public-key	encryption	was	invented	by	Whitfield	Diffie	and
Martin	Hellman	in	1977.	Another	set	of	computer	scientists,	Ron	Rivest,	Adi
Shamir,	and	Leonard	Adelman,	soon	came	up	with	the	notion	of	using	prime
factorization	as	part	of	what	is	now	known	as	the	RSA	cryptosystem,	after	the
initials	of	their	last	names.	They	projected	that	it	would	take	millions	of	years
to	factor	a	130-digit	number	that	was	the	product	of	two	primes,	regardless	of
how	much	computing	power	was	brought	to	bear.	To	prove	the	point,	they
challenged	the	world	to	find	the	two	factors	in	this	129-digit	number,	known
to	people	in	the	field	as	RSA	129:
114,381,625,757,888,867,669,235,779,976,146,612,010,218,296,
721,242,362,562,561,842,935,706,935,245,733,897,830,597,123,563,958,705,058,989,075,147,599,29.0,026,879,543,541
They	were	sure	that	a	message	they	had	encrypted	using	the	number	as	the
public	key	would	be	totally	secure	forever.	But	they	hadn't	anticipated	either
the	full	effects	of	Moore's	Law,	as	discussed	in	chapter	2,	which	has	made
computers	much	more	powerful,	or	the	success	of	the	personal	computer,
which	has	dramatically	increased	the	number	of	computers	and	computer
users	in	the	world.	In	1993	a	group	of	more	than	600	academics	and	hobbyists
from	around	the	world	began	an	assault	on	the	129-digit	number,	using	the
Internet	to	coordinate	the	work	of	various	computers.	In	less	than	a	year	they
factored	the	number	into	two	primes,	one	64	digits	long	and	the	other	65.	The
primes	are	as	follows:
3,490,529,510,847,650,949,147,849,619,903,898,133,417,764,638,
493,387,843,990,820,577
and
32,769,132,993,266,709,549,961,988,190,834,461,413,177,642,
967,992,942,539,798,288,533
And	the	encoded	message	says:	"The	magic	words	are	squeamish	and
ossifrage."
One	lesson	that	came	out	of	this	challenge	is	that	a	129-digit	public	key	is	not
long	enough	if	the	information	being	encrypted	is	really	important	and
sensitive.	Another	is	that	no	one	should	get	too	cocksure	about	the	security	of

encryption.
Increasing	the	key	just	a	few	digits	makes	it	much	more	difficult	to	crack.
Mathematicians	today	believe	that	a	250-digit-long	pr