======================================================== r	car.	With	modern	technology	you	have	to	decide
when	and	where	you	want	to	be	available.	In	the	future,	when	you	will	be	able
to	work	anywhere,	reach	anyone	from	anywhere,	and	be	reached	anywhere,
you	will	be	able	to	determine	easily	who	and	what	can	intrude.	By	explicitly
indicating	allowable	interruptions,	you	will	be	able	to	reestablish	your	home
—or	anywhere	you	choose	—as	your	sanctuary.
The	information	highway	will	help	by	prescreening	all	incoming
communications,	whether	live	phone	calls,	multi-media	documents,	e-mail,
advertisements,	or	even	news	flashes.	Anyone	who	has	been	approved	by	you
will	be	able	to	get	through	to	your	electronic	in-box	or	ring	your	phone.	You
might	allow	some	people	to	send	you	mail	but	not	to	telephone.	You	might	let
others	call	when	you	have	indicated	you're	not	busy	and	let	still	others	get
through	anytime.	You	won't	want	to	receive	thousands	of	unsolicited
advertisements	every	day,	but	if	you	are	looking	for	tickets	to	a	sold-out
concert,	you'll	want	to	get	responses	to	your	solicitations	right	away.
Incoming	communications	will	be	tagged	by	source	and	type—for	instance,
ads,	greetings,	inquiries,	publications,	work-related	documents,	or	bills.	You'll
set	explicit	delivery	policies.	You'll	decide	who	can	make	your	phone	ring
during	dinner,	who	can	reach	you	in	your	car,	or	when	you're	on	vacation,	and
which	kinds	of	calls	or	messages	are	worth	waking	you	for	in	the	middle	of
the	night.	You'll	be	able	to	make	as	many	distinctions	as	you	need	and	to
change	the	criteria	whenever	you	want.	Instead	of	giving	out	your	telephone
number,	which	can	be	passed	around	and	used	indefinitely,	you	will	add	a
welcome	caller's	name	to	a	constantly	updated	list	indicating	your	level	of
interest	in	receiving	his	messages.	If	someone	not	on	any	of	your	lists	wants
to	get	to	you,	he'll	have	to	have	someone	who	is	listed	forward	the	message.
You'll	always	be	able	to	demote	someone	to	a	lower	level	or	delete	a	name
altogether	from	all	level	lists.	If	you	do	that,	to	get	your	attention	the	caller
will	have	to	send	you	a	paid	message,	as	discussed	in	chapter	8.
The	changes	in	technology	will	start	to	influence	architecture.	As	the	ways	in
which	homes	are	used	change,	the	buildings	will	evolve.	Computer-controlled
displays	of	various	sizes	will	be	built	into	the	design	of	the	house.	Wires	to
connect	components	will	be	installed	during	construction,	and	thought	will	be
given	to	the	placement	of	screens	in	relation	to	windows	to	minimize
reflection	and	glare.	When	information	appliances	are	connected	to	the
highway,	there	will	be	less	need	for	many	physical	things—reference	books,
stereo	receivers,	compact	discs,	fax	machines,	file	drawers,	and	storage	boxes
for	records	and	receipts.	A	lot	of	space-consuming	clutter	will	collapse	into

digital	information	that	can	be	recalled	at	will.	Even	old	photographs	will	be
able	to	be	stored	digitally	and	called	up	on	a	screen	instead	of	having	to	sit	in
a	frame.
I've	been	giving	these	details	a	lot	of	thought	because	I'm	building	a	house
now,	and	in	it	I'm	trying	to	anticipate	the	near	future.	My	house	is	being
designed	and	constructed	so	that	it's	a	bit	ahead	of	its	time,	but	perhaps	it
suggests	things	about	the	future	of	homes.	When	I	describe	the	plans,	people
sometimes	give	me	a	look	that	says,	"You're	sure	you	really	want	to	do	this?"
Like	almost	anyone	who	contemplates	building	a	house,	I	want	mine	to	be	in
harmony	with	its	surroundings	and	with	the	needs	of	the	people	who	will
occupy	it.	I	want	it	to	be	architecturally	appealing.	Mostly,	though,	I	want	it	to
be	comfortable.	It's	where	my	family	and	I	will	live.	A	house	is	an	intimate
companion	or,	in	the	words	of	the	great	twentieth-century	architect	Le
Corbusier,	"a	machine	for	living	in."
My	house	is	made	of	wood,	glass,	concrete,	and	stone.	It's	built	into	a	hillside
and	most	of	the	glass	faces	west	over	Lake	Washington	to	Seattle	to	take
advantage	of	the	sunset	and	Olympic	mountain	views.
My	house	is	also	made	of	silicon	and	software.	The	installation	of	silicon
microprocessors	and	memory	chips,	and	the	software	that	makes	them	useful,
will	let	the	house	approximate	some	of	the	features	the	information	highway
will,	in	a	few	years,	bring	to	millions	of	houses.	The	technology	I'll	use	is
experimental	today,	but	over	time	portions	of	what	I'm	doing	could	become
widely	accepted	and	will	get	less	expensive.	The	entertainment	system	will	be
a	close	enough	simulation	of	how	media	usage	will	work	that	I	will	be	able	to
get	a	sense	of	what	it	will	be	like	to	live	with	various	technologies.
It	won't,	of	course,	be	possible	to	simulate	the	highway's	applications,	which
require	that	a	lot	of	people	be	connected.	A	private	information	highway	is	a
little	like	only	one	person	having	a	telephone.	The	really	interesting	highway
applications	will	grow	out	of	the	participation	of	tens	or	hundreds	of	millions
of	people,	who	will	not	just	consume	entertainment	and	other	information,	but
will	create	it,	too.	Until	millions	of	people	are	communicating	with	one
another,	exploring	subjects	of	common	interest	and	making	all	sorts	of	multi-
media	contributions,	including	high-quality	video,	there	won't	be	an
information	highway.
The	cutting-edge	technology	in	the	house	I'm	building	won't	just	be	for
previewing	entertainment	applications.	It	will	also	help	meet	the	usual
domestic	needs:	for	heat,	light,	comfort,	convenience,	pleasure,	and	security.

This	technology	will	be	replacing	older	forms	that	we	take	for	granted	now.	It
wasn't	that	long	ago	that	the	public	would	have	been	amazed	at	the	idea	of	a
house	with	electric	lights,	flush	toilets,	telephones,	and	air-conditioning.	My
goal	is	a	house	that	offers	entertainment	and	stimulates	creativity	in	a	relaxed,
pleasant,	welcoming	atmosphere.	These	desires	aren't	very	different	from
those	of	people	who	could	afford	adventurous	houses	in	the	past.	I'm
experimenting	to	find	out	what	works	best,	but	there's	a	long	tradition	of	that,
too.
In	1925,	when	William	Randolph	Hearst,	the	newspaper	magnate,	moved	into
his	California	castle,	San	Simeon,	he	wanted	the	best	in	modern	technology.
In	those	days	it	was	awkward	and	time-consuming	to	tune	radio	receivers	to
stations,	so	he	had	several	radios	installed	in	the	basement	of	San	Simeon,
each	tuned	to	a	different	station.	The	speaker	wires	ran	to	Hearst's	private
suite	on	the	third	floor,	where	they	were	routed	into	a	fifteenth-century	oak
cabinet.	At	the	push	of	a	button,	Hearst	could	listen	to	the	station	of	his
choice.	It	was	a	marvel	in	its	day.	Today	this	is	a	standard	feature	on	every	car
radio.
I	am	certainly	in	no	way	comparing	my	house	with	San	Simeon,	one	of	the
West	Coast's	monuments	to	excess.	The	only	connection	I'm	making	is	that
the	technological	innovations	I	have	in	mind	for	my	house	are	not	really
different	in	spirit	from	those	Hearst	wanted	in	his.	He	wanted	news	and
entertainment,	all	at	a	touch.	So	do	I.
I	began	thinking	about	building	a	new	house	in	the	late	1980s.	I	wanted
craftsmanship	but	nothing	ostentatious.	I	wanted	a	house	that	would
accommodate	sophisticated,	changing	technology,	but	in	an	unobtrusive	way
that	made	it	clear	that	technology	was	the	servant,	not	the	master.	I	didn't
want	the	house	to	be	defined	by	its	use	of	technology.	Originally	the	house
was	designed	as	a	bachelor	pad,	but	when	Melinda	and	I	got	married	we
changed	the	plan	to	make	it	more	suitable	for	a	family.	For	instance,	the
kitchen	was	improved	so	it	could	better	accommodate	a	family.	However,	the
appliances	have	no	more	advanced	technology	than	you'd	find	in	any	other
well-appointed	kitchen.	Melinda	also	pointed	out	and	corrected	the	fact	that	I
had	a	great	study	but	there	was	no	place	designated	for	her	to	work.
I	found	some	property	on	the	shore	of	Lake	Washington	within	easy
commuting	distance	of	Microsoft.	In	1990,	work	on	a	guest	cottage	began.
Then,	in	1992,	we	began	excavating	and	laying	the	foundation	for	the	main
residence.	This	was	a	big	job,	requiring	a	lot	of	concrete,	because	Seattle	is	an
earthquake	zone	at	least	as	perilous	as	California.

Living	space	will	be	about	average	for	a	large	house.	The	family	living	room
will	be	about	fourteen	by	twenty-eight	feet,	including	an	area	for	watching
television	or	listening	to	music.	And	there	will	be	cozy	spaces	for	one	or	two
people,	although	there	will	also	be	a	reception	hall	to	entertain	one	hundred
comfortably	for	dinner.	I	enjoy	having	get-togethers	for	new	Microsoft
employees	and	summer	hires.	The	house	will	also	have	a	small	movie	theater,
a	pool,	and	a	trampoline	room.	A	sport	court	will	sit	amid	some	trees	near	the
water's	edge,	behind	a	dock	for	water-skiing,	one	of	my	favorite	sports.	A
small	estuary,	to	be	fed	with	groundwater	from	the	hill	behind	the	house,	is
planned.	We'll	seed	the	estuary	with	sea-run	cutthroat	trout,	and	I'm	told	to
expect	river	otters.
Computer	rendering	of	the	Gateses'	future	home,	showing	the	view	from	the
northwest	across	Lake	Washington
If	you	come	to	visit,	you'll	drive	down	a	gently	winding	driveway	that
approaches	the	house	through	an	emergent	forest	of	maple	and	alder,
punctuated	with	Douglas	fir.	Several	years	ago,	decomposing	duff	from	the
forest	floor	of	a	logging	area	was	gathered	and	spread	across	the	back	of	the
property.	All	kinds	of	interesting	things	are	growing	now.	After	a	few
decades,	as	the	forest	matures,	Douglas	fir	will	dominate	the	site,	just	as	the
big	trees	did	before	the	area	was	logged	for	the	first	time	at	the	turn	of	the
twentieth	century.
When	you	stop	your	car	in	the	semicircular	turnaround,	although	you	will	be
at	the	front	door	you	won't	see	much	of	the	house.	That's	because	you'll	be
entering	onto	the	top	floor.	First	thing,	as	you	come	in,	you'll	be	presented
with	an	electronic	pin	to	clip	to	your	clothes.	This	pin	will	connect	you	to	the
electronic	services	of	the	house.	Next,	you	will	descend	either	by	elevator	or
down	a	staircase	that	runs	straight	toward	the	water	under	a	sloping	glass
ceiling	suppo======================================================== t	leaving	your	house.	Flexibility	is	going	to	be	increasingly
important	as	everyone	tries	to	balance	family	life	with	work	life.	You	won't
always	have	to	travel	to	see	friends	and	family	or	to	play	games.	Cultural
attractions	will	be	available	via	the	information	highway,	although	I'm	not
suggesting	that	a	Broadway	or	West	End	musical	will	be	the	same	experience
in	your	living	room	as	it	is	in	a	New	York	or	London	theater.	However,
improvements	in	screen	sizes	and	resolutions	will	enhance	all	video,
including	movies,	in	the	home.	Educational	programming	will	be	extensive.
All	of	this	will	liberate	those	who	would	like	to	abandon	city	living.
The	opening	of	the	interstate	highway	system	had	a	substantial	effect	on
where	in	the	United	States	people	chose	to	settle.	It	made	new	suburbs
accessible	and	contributed	to	the	culture	of	the	automobile.	There	will	be
significant	implications	for	city	planners,	real	estate	developers,	and	school
districts	if	the	opening	of	the	information	highway	also	encourages	people	to
move	away	from	city	centers.	If	large	pools	of	talent	disperse,	companies	will
feel	even	more	pressure	to	be	creative	about	how	to	work	with	consultants
and	employees	not	located	near	their	operations.	This	could	set	off	a	positive-
feedback	cycle,	encouraging	rural	living.
If	the	population	of	a	city	were	reduced	by	even	10	percent,	the	result	would
be	a	major	difference	in	property	values	and	wear	and	tear	on	transportation
and	other	urban	systems.	If	the	average	office	worker	in	any	major	city	stayed
home	one	or	two	days	a	week,	the	decreases	in	gasoline	consumption,	air
pollution,	and	traffic	congestion	would	be	significant.	The	net	effect,
however,	is	hard	to	foresee.	If	those	who	moved	out	of	cities	were	mostly	the
affluent	knowledge	workers,	the	urban	tax	base	would	be	reduced.	This	would
aggravate	the	inner	city's	woes	and	encourage	other	affluent	people	to	leave.
But	at	the	same	time,	the	urban	infrastructure	might	be	less	heavily	loaded.
Rents	would	fall,	creating	opportunities	for	a	better	standard	of	living	for
some	of	those	remaining	in	the	cities.

It	will	take	decades	to	implement	all	the	major	changes,	because	most	people
remain	comfortable	with	whatever	they	learn	early	and	are	reluctant	to	alter
familiar	patterns.	However,	new	generations	will	bring	new	perspectives.	Our
children	will	grow	up	comfortable	with	the	idea	of	working	with	information
tools	across	distances.	These	tools	will	be	as	natural	to	them	as	a	telephone	or
a	ballpoint	pen	is	to	us.	But	technology	isn't	going	to	wait	until	people	are
ready	for	it.	Within	the	next	ten	years	we	will	start	to	see	substantial	shifts	in
how	and	where	we	work,	the	companies	we	work	for,	and	the	places	we
choose	to	live.	My	advice	is	to	try	to	find	out	as	much	as	possible	about	the
technology	that	will	touch	you.	The	more	you	know	about	it,	the	less
disconcerting	it	will	seem.	Technology's	role	is	to	provide	more	flexibility	and
efficiency.	Forward-looking	business	managers	will	have	lots	of	opportunities
to	perform	better	in	the	years	ahead.

8
FRICTION-FREE
CAPITALISM
When	Adam	Smith	described	the	concept	of	markets	in	The	Wealth	of	Nations
in	1776,	he	theorized	that	if	every	buyer	knew	every	seller's	price,	and	every
seller	knew	what	every	buyer	was	willing	to	pay,	everyone	in	the	"market"
would	be	able	to	make	fully	informed	decisions	and	society's	resources	would
be	distributed	efficiently.	To	date	we	haven't	achieved	Smith's	ideal	because
would-be	buyers	and	would-be	sellers	seldom	have	complete	information
about	one	another.
Not	many	consumers	looking	to	buy	a	car	stereo	have	the	time	or	patience	to
canvass	every	dealer	and	thus	are	acting	on	imperfect	and	limited
information.	If	you've	bought	a	product	for	$500	and	see	it	advertised	in	the
paper	for	$300	a	week	or	two	later,	you	feel	foolish	for	overpaying.	But	you
feel	a	lot	worse	if	you	end	up	in	the	wrong	job	because	you	haven't	done
thorough	enough	research.
A	few	markets	are	already	working	fairly	close	to	Smith's	ideal.	Investors
buying	and	selling	currency	and	certain	other	commodities	participate	in
efficient	electronic	markets	that	provide	nearly	complete	instantaneous
information	about	worldwide	supply,	demand,	and	prices.	Everyone	gets
pretty	much	the	same	deal	because	news	about	all	offers,	bids,	and
transactions	speeds	across	wires	to	trading	desks	everywhere.	However,	most
marketplaces	are	very	inefficient.	For	instance,	if	you	are	trying	to	find	a
doctor,	lawyer,	accountant,	or	similar	professional,	or	are	buying	a	house,
information	is	incomplete	and	comparisons	are	difficult	to	make.
The	information	highway	will	extend	the	electronic	marketplace	and	make	it
the	ultimate	go-between,	the	universal	middleman.	Often	the	only	humans
involved	in	a	transaction	will	be	the	actual	buyer	and	seller.	All	the	goods	for
sale	in	the	world	will	be	available	for	you	to	examine,	compare,	and,	often,
customize.	When	you	want	to	buy	something	you'll	be	able	to	tell	your
computer	to	find	it	for	you	at	the	best	price	offered	by	any	acceptable	source
or	ask	your	computer	to	"haggle"	with	the	computers	of	various	sellers.
Information	about	vendors	and	their	products	and	services	will	be	available	to
any	computer	connected	to	the	highway.	Servers	distributed	worldwide	will

accept	bids,	resolve	offers	into	completed	transactions,	control	authentication
and	security,	and	handle	all	other	aspects	of	the	marketplace,	including	the
transfer	of	funds.	This	will	carry	us	into	a	new	world	of	low-friction,	low-
overhead	capitalism,	in	which	market	information	will	be	plentiful	and
transaction	costs	low.	It	will	be	a	shopper's	heaven.
Every	market,	from	a	bazaar	to	the	highway,	facilitates	competitive	pricing
and	allows	goods	to	move	from	seller	to	buyer	efficiently	with	modest
friction.	This	is	thanks	to	the	market	makers—those	whose	job	it	is	to	bring
buyers	and	sellers	together.	As	the	information	highway	assumes	the	role	of
market	maker	in	realm	after	realm,	traditional	middlemen	will	have	to
contribute	real	value	to	a	transaction	to	justify	a	commission.	For	example,
stores	and	services	that	until	now	have	profited	just	because	they	are
"there"—in	a	particular	geographic	location	may	find	they	have	lost	that
advantage.	But	those	who	provide	added	value	will	not	only	survive,	they	will
thrive,	because	the	information	highway	will	let	them	make	their	services
available	to	customers	everywhere.
This	idea	will	scare	a	lot	of	people.	Most	change	feels	a	bit	threatening,	and	I
expect	dramatic	changes	in	the	business	of	retailing	as	commerce	flows	across
the	highway.	But,	as	with	so	many	changes,	I	think	once	we	get	used	to	it
we'll	wonder	how	we	did	without	it.	The	consumer	will	get	not	only
competitive	cost	savings,	but	also	a	much	wider	variety	of	products	and
services	to	choose	from.	Although	there	may	be	fewer	stores,	if	people
continue	to	enjoy	shopping	in	today's	outlets,	as	many	stores	as	their	demand
justifies	will	remain	available.	And	because	the	highway	will	simplify	and
standardize	shopping,	it	will	also	save	time.	If	you	are	buying	a	gift	for	a
loved	one,	you	will	be	able	to	consider	more	choices	and	often	you	will	find
something	more	imaginative.	You	could	use	the	time	saved	from	shopping	to
think	up	a	fun	clue	to	put	on	the	package,	or	create	a	personalized	card.	Or
you	could	spend	the	time	you	save	with	the	recipient.
We	all	recognize	the	value	of	a	knowledgeable	salesperson	when	we	are
shopping	for	insurance,	clothes,	investments,	jewelry,	a	camera,	a	home
appliance,	or	a	home.	We	also	know	the	salesperson's	advice	is	sometimes
biased	because	he	or	she	is	ultimately	hoping	to	make	a	sale	from	a	particular
inventory.
On	the	information	highway	lots	of	product	information	will	be	available
directly	from	manufacturers.	As	they	do	today,	vendors	will	use	a	variety	of
entertaining	and	provocative	techniques	to	attract	us.	Advertising	will	evolve
into	a	hybrid,	combining	today's	television	commercials,	magazine	ads,	and	a

detailed	sales	brochure.	If	an	ad	catches	your	attention,	you'll	be	able	to
request	additional	information	directly	and	very	easily.	Links	will	let	you
navigate	through	whatever	information	the	advertiser	has	made	available,
which	might	be	product	manuals	consisting	of	video,	audio,	and	text.	Vendors
will	make	getting	information	about	their	products	as	simple	as	possible.
At	Microsoft,	we're	looking	forward	to	using	the	highway	to	get	information
out	about	our	products.	Today	we	print	millions	of	pages	of	product	brochures
and	data	sheets,	and	mail	them	out	to	people	who	ask	for	them.	But	we	never
know	how	much	information	to	put	onto	a	data	sheet;	we	don't	want	to
intimidate	casual	inquirers,	and	yet	there	are	people	out	there	who	want	to
know	all	the	detailed	product	specifications.	Also,	since	the	information
changes	fairly	rapidly,	we	are	often	in	the	position	of	having	just	printed	tens
of	thousands	of	copies	of	some	brochure,	and	then	having	to	throw	them	out
because	they	describe	a	version	of	a	product	we're	replacing.	We	expect	a
high	percentage	of	our	information	dissemination	will	shift	to	electronic
inquiry,	particularly	because	we	serve	computer	users.	We	have	already
eliminated	the	printing	of	millions	of	pages	of	paper	by	sending	quarterly	CD-
ROMs	and	using	on-line	services	to	reach	professional	software	developers,
some	of	Microsoft's	most	sophisticated	customers.
But	you	won't	have	to	depend	only	on	what	we	or	any	other	manufacturer
tells	you.	You'll	be	able	to	examine	product	reviews	in	search	of	less	biased
information.	After	you've	seen	the	advertising,	reviews,	and	multi-media
manuals,	you	might	ask	for	relevant	government	regulatory	data.	You'll	check
to	see	if	the	vendor	has	surveyed	owners.	Then	you	might	dig	deeper	into	one
area	of	particular	interest	to	you—for	instance,	durability.	Or	you	could	seek
the	advice	of	sales	consultants,	human	or	electronic,	who	will	create	and
publish	specialized	reviews	for	all	kinds	of	products,	from	drill	bits	t======================================================== itches	to	handle	ISDN
with	very	little	idea	of	how	it	would	be	used.	The	good	news	is	that	the	PC
will	drive	explosive	demand.	An	add-in	card	for	a	PC	to	support	ISDN	costs
$500	in	1995,	but	the	price	should	drop	to	less	than	$200	over	the	next	few
years.	The	line	costs	vary	by	location	but	are	generally	about	$50	per	month
in	the	United	States.	I	expect	this	will	drop	to	less	than	$20,	not	much	more
than	a	regular	phone	connection.	We	are	among	companies	working	to
convince	phone	companies	all	over	the	world	to	lower	these	charges	in	order
to	encourage	PC	owners	to	connect,	using	ISDN.
Cable	companies	have	interim	technologies	and	strategies	of	their	own.	They
want	to	use	their	existing	coaxial	cable	networks	to	compete	with	the	phone
companies	to	provide	local	telephone	service.	They	have	also	already
demonstrated	that	special	cable	modems	can	connect	personal	computers	to
cable	networks.	This	allows	cable	companies	to	offer	bandwidth	somewhat
greater	than	ISDN's.
For	cable	companies	another	interim	step	will	be	to	increase	the	number	of
broadcast	channels	they	carry	five-	to	tenfold.	They'll	do	it	by	using	digital-
compression	technology	to	squeeze	more	channels	onto	existing	cables.

This	so-called	500-channel	approach—which	often	will	really	only	have	150
channels—makes	possible	near-video-on-demand,	although	only	for	a	limited
number	of	television	shows	and	movies.	You	would	choose	from	a	list	on-
screen	rather	than	selecting	a	numbered	channel.	A	popular	movie	might	run
on	twenty	of	the	channels,	with	the	starting	time	staggered	at	five-minute
intervals	so	that	you	could	begin	watching	it	within	five	minutes	of	whenever
you	wanted.	You	would	choose	from	among	the	available	starting	times	for
movies	and	television	programs,	and	the	set-top	box	would	switch	to	the
appropriate	channel.	The	half-hour-long	CNN	Headline	News	might	be
offered	on	six	channels	instead	of	one,	with	the	6:00	P.M.	broadcast	shown
again	at	6:05,	6:10,	6:15,	6:20,	and	6:25.	There	would	be	a	new,	live
broadcast	every	half	hour,	just	as	there	is	now.	Five	hundred	channels	will	get
used	up	pretty	fast	this	way.
The	cable	companies	are	under	pressure	to	add	channels	partly	as	a	reaction	to
competition.	Direct-broadcast	satellites	such	as	Hughes	Electronics'
DIRECTV	are	already	beaming	hundreds	of	channels	directly	into	homes.
Cable	companies	want	to	increase	their	channel	lineup	rapidly	to	avoid	losing
customers.	If	the	only	reason	for	the	information	highway	were	to	deliver	a
limited	number	of	movies,	then	a	500-channel	system	would	be	adequate.
A	500-channel	system	will	still	be	mostly	synchronous,	will	limit	your
choices,	and	will	provide	only	a	low-bandwidth	back	channel,	at	best.	A
"back	channel"	is	an	information	path	dedicated	to	carrying	instructions	and
other	information	from	a	consumer's	information	appliance	back	up	the	cable
to	the	network.	A	back	channel	on	a	500-channel	system	might	let	you	use
your	television	set-top	box	to	order	products	or	programs,	respond	to	polls	or
game-show	questions,	and	participate	in	certain	kinds	of	multiplayer	games.
But	a	low-bandwidth	back	channel	can't	offer	the	full	flexibility	and
interactivity	the	most	interesting	applications	will	require.	It	won't	let	you
send	a	video	of	your	children	to	their	grandparents,	or	play	truly	interactive
games.
Cable	and	phone	companies	around	the	world	will	progress	along	four
parallel	paths.	First,	each	will	be	going	after	the	others'	business.	Cable
companies	will	offer	telephone	service,	and	phone	companies	will	offer	video
services,	including	television.	Second,	both	systems	will	be	providing	better
ways	to	connect	PCs	with	either	ISDN	or	cable	modems.	Third,	both	will	be
converting	to	digital	technology	in	order	to	provide	more	television	channels
and	higher-quality	signals.	Fourth,	both	will	be	conducting	trials	of	broadband
systems	connected	to	television	sets	and	PCs.	Each	of	the	four	strategies	will
motivate	investment	in	digital	network	capacity.	There	will	be	intense

competition	between	the	telephone	companies	and	cable	television	networks
to	be	the	first	network	provider	in	a	neighborhood.
Eventually,	the	Internet	and	the	other	transitional	technologies	will	be
subsumed	within	the	real	information	highway.	The	highway	will	combine	the
best	qualities	of	both	the	telephone	and	the	cable	network	systems:	Like	the
telephone	network,	it	will	offer	private	connections	so	that	everyone	using	the
network	can	pursue	his	or	her	own	interests,	on	his	or	her	own	schedule.	It
will	also	be	fully	two-way	like	the	telephone	network,	so	that	rich	forms	of
interaction	are	possible.	Like	the	cable	television	network,	it	will	be	high
capacity,	so	there	will	be	sufficient	bandwidth	to	allow	multiple	televisions	or
personal	computers	in	a	single	household	to	connect	simultaneously	to
different	video	programs	or	sources	of	information.
Most	of	the	wires	connecting	servers	with	one	another,	and	with	the
neighborhoods	of	the	world,	will	be	made	of	incredibly	clear	fiber-optic
cable,	the	"asphalt"	of	the	information	highway.	All	of	the	major	long-
distance	trunk	lines	that	carry	telephone	calls	within	the	United	States	today
use	fiber,	but	the	lines	that	connect	our	homes	to	these	data	thoroughfares	are
still	copper	wire.	Telephone	companies	will	replace	the	copper-wire,
microwave,	and	satellite	links	in	their	networks	with	fiber-optic	cable	so	they
will	have	the	bandwidth	to	carry	enough	bits	to	deliver	high-quality	video.
Cable	television	companies	will	increase	the	amount	of	fiber	they	use.	At	the
same	time	fiber	is	being	deployed,	telephone	and	cable	companies	will	be
incorporating	new	switches	into	their	networks	so	that	digital	video	signals
and	other	information	can	be	routed	from	any	point	to	any	other	point.	The
costs	of	upgrading	the	existing	networks	to	prepare	for	the	highway	will	be
less	than	a	quarter	of	what	they	would	be	to	run	new	wires	into	every	home.
You	can	think	of	a	fiber	trunk	as	being	like	the	foot-wide	water	main	that
carries	water	up	your	street.	It	doesn't	come	directly	to	your	house;	instead,	a
smaller	pipe	at	the	curb	connects	the	main	to	your	home.	At	first,	the	fiber
will	probably	run	only	to	neighborhood	distribution	points	and	the	signals	will
be	carried	from	the	neighborhood	fiber	on	either	the	coaxial	cable	that	brings
you	cable	television	or	on	the	"twisted-pair"	copper-wire	connections	that
provide	telephone	service.	Eventually,	though,	fiber	connections	may	run
directly	into	your	home	if	you	use	lots	of	data.
Switches	are	the	sophisticated	computers	that	shunt	streams	of	data	from	one
track	to	another,	like	boxcars	in	a	train	yard.	Millions	of	simultaneous	streams
of	communications	will	flow	on	large	networks,	and	no	matter	how	many
intermediate	waypoints	are	required,	all	the	different	bits	of	information	will

have	to	be	guided	to	their	destinations,	with	an	assurance	they	will	arrive	in
the	right	places	and	on	time.	To	grasp	how	big	the	task	will	be	in	the	era	of
the	information	highway,	imagine	billions	of	boxcars	that	have	to	be	routed
along	railroad	tracks	through	vast	systems	of	switches	and	arrive	at	their
destinations	on	schedule.	Because	the	cars	are	attached	to	one	another,
switchyards	get	clogged	waiting	for	long,	multicar	trains	to	pass	through.
There	would	be	fewer	tie-ups	if	each	boxcar	could	travel	independently	and
find	its	own	way	through	the	switches,	then	reassemble	as	a	train	at	the
destination.
Information	traversing	the	information	highway	will	be	broken	up	into	tiny
packets,	and	each	packet	will	be	routed	independently	through	the	network,
the	way	individual	automobiles	navigate	roads.	When	you	order	a	movie,	it
will	be	broken	into	millions	of	tiny	pieces,	each	one	of	which	will	find	its	way
through	the	network	to	your	television.
This	routing	of	packets	will	be	accomplished	through	the	use	of	a
communications	protocol	known	as	asynchronous	transfer	mode,	or	ATM
(not	to	be	confused	with	"automatic	teller	machine").	It	will	be	one	of	the
building	blocks	of	the	information	highway.	Phone	companies	around	the
world	are	already	beginning	to	rely	on	ATM,	because	it	takes	great	advantage
of	fiber's	amazing	bandwidth.	One	strength	of	ATM	is	its	ability	to	guarantee
timely	delivery	of	information.	ATM	breaks	each	digital	stream	into	uniform
packets,	each	of	which	contains	48	bytes	of	the	information	to	be	transported
and	5	bytes	of	control	information	that	allow	the	highway's	switches	to	route
the	packets	very	quickly	to	their	destinations.	At	their	destinations	the	packets
are	recombined	into	a	stream.
ATM	delivers	streams	of	information	at	very	high	speeds—up	to	155	million
bits	per	second	at	first,	later	jumping	to	622	million	bits	per	second	and
eventually	to	2	billion	bits	per	second.	This	technology	will	make	it	possible
to	send	video	as	easily	as	voice	calls,	and	at	very	low	cost.	Just	as	advances	in
chip	technology	have	driven	down	the	cost	of	computing,	ATM,	because	it
will	also	be	able	to	carry	enormous	numbers	of	old-fashioned	voice	calls,	will
drive	down	the	cost	of	long-distance	phone	calls.
High-bandwidth	cable	connections	will	link	most	information	appliances	to
the	highway,	but	some	devices	will	connect	wirelessly.	We	already	use	a
number	of	wireless	communication	devices—cellular	telephones,	pagers,	and
consumer-electronics	remote	controls.	They	send	radio	signals	and	allow	us
mobility,	but	the	bandwidth	is	limited.	The	wireless	networks	of	the	future
will	be	faster,	but	unless	there	is	a	major	breakthrough,	wired	networks	will

have	far	greater	bandwidth.	Mobile	devices	will	be	able	to	send	and	receive
messages,	but	it	will	be	expensive	and	unusual	to	use	them	to	receive	an
individual	video	stream.
The	wireless	networks	that	will	allow	us	to	communicate	when	we	are	mobile
will	grow	out	of	today's	cellular-telephone	systems	and	the	new	alternative
wireless	phone	service,	called	PCS.	When	you	are	on	the	road	and	want
information	from	your	home	or	office	computer,	your	portable	information
appliance======================================================== logy.	As	she	scrolls	through	the	document,	the
two	of	you	would	discuss	your	needs.	Then,	if	she	was	particularly	adept,	you
might	even	watch	her	do	the	editing.	However,	if	you	wanted	a	hand	in
editing	the	document	instead	of	just	watching	it	run	on	your	lawyer's
computer,	you	could	join	in	and	work	together.	You	would	be	able	not	only	to
talk	to	each	other	but	also	to	see	the	same	image	on	your	computer	screens.

You	won't	need	to	have	the	same	software.	The	application	just	has	to	run	on
one	end	of	the	connection,	the	lawyer's	end	in	this	case.	On	your	end,	you
would	need	only	an	appropriate	modem	and	DSVD	software.
Another	important	use	of	voice/data	connections	will	be	to	improve	product
support.	Microsoft	has	thousands	of	employees	whose	job	is	to	answer
product-support	questions	about	Microsoft	software.	In	fact,	we	have	as	many
product-support	people	answering	questions	about	our	software	as	we	have
engineers	building	it.	This	is	wonderful,	because	we	log	all	that	feedback	and
use	it	to	improve	our	products.	We	get	lots	of	these	questions	by	e-mail,	but
most	of	our	customers	still	telephone	us.	These	phone	conversations	are
inefficient.	A	customer	calls	in	to	say	his	particular	computer	is	configured	in
a	specific	way	and	is	giving	a	certain	error	message.	The	product-support
specialist	listens	to	this	description,	and	then	suggests	something,	which	it
takes	the	caller	a	few	minutes	to	do.	Then	the	conversation	resumes.	The
average	call	takes	fifteen	minutes,	and	some	take	an	hour.	But	once	everyone
is	using	DSVD,	the	product-support	specialist	will	be	able	to	see	what's	on	the
caller's	computer	screen	(with	the	caller's	explicit	permission,	of	course)	and
examine	the	caller's	computer	directly	rather	than	having	to	rely	on	the	caller
to	explain	what	he	is	seeing.	This	will	have	to	be	done	carefully,	to	ensure	that
no	one's	privacy	is	invaded.	The	process	will	reduce	the	length	of	the	average
call	by	30	or	40	percent,	which	will	make	customers	a	lot	happier	and	will	cut
costs	and	product	prices.
The	picture	transmitted	during	a	DSVD	(or	ISDN)	telephone	connection
won't	necessarily	have	to	be	of	a	document.	One	or	both	people	participating
will	also	be	able	to	transmit	still	images	of	themselves.	If	you	are	calling	in	to
buy	a	product,	you	might	expect	the	company's	service	representative	to	be
there,	smiling.	But	you,	as	the	customer,	might	choose	to	transmit	only	your
voice.	You	can	select	images	of	yourself	dressed	appropriately	for	the
occasion,	so	it	won't	matter	what	you	are	actually	wearing.	Or	you	might
decide	to	have	available	several	pictures	of	yourself,	one	smiling,	one
laughing,	one	contemplative,	and	maybe	one	that	is	angry.	During	the	course
of	the	conversation,	you	could	change	the	image	to	suit	your	mood	or	the
point	you	were	making.
Electronic	mail	and	shared	screens	will	eliminate	the	need	for	many	meetings.
Presentation	meetings,	called	primarily	so	participants	can	listen	and	learn,
can	be	replaced	with	e-mail	messages	with	spreadsheets	and	other	exhibits
enclosed	as	attachments.	When	face-to-face	meetings	do	take	place,	they	will
be	more	efficient	because	participants	will	already	have	exchanged
background	information	by	e-mail.

It	will	also	be	easier	to	schedule	meetings	because	software	will	handle	it.	For
example,	if	you	want	to	sit	down	face-to-face	with	your	lawyer,	your
scheduling	program	and	hers	will	be	able	to	communicate	across	the	network
—even	the	phone	network—and	pick	a	date	and	time	that	you	both	have	free.
Then	the	appointment	would	just	show	up	on	your	respective	electronic
calendars.
This	will	also	be	an	efficient	way	to	schedule	restaurant	or	theater
reservations,	but	it	raises	an	interesting	issue.	Let's	say	a	restaurant	isn't
getting	much	business,	or	tickets	to	a	show	aren't	selling	well,	or	your	lawyer
doesn't	want	you	to	know	that	you're	her	only	client.	Such	companies	and
individuals	might	instruct	their	scheduling	programs	just	to	respond	to
meeting	requests.	Your	scheduling	program	wouldn't	be	able	to	ask	your
lawyer's	program	to	list	all	the	times	she	is	free.	However,	if	it	asked	for	a
specific	two-hour	block,	the	response	would	be:	"Yes,	we	can	schedule	you
for	Tuesday	at	eleven	o'clock."
Clients	will	expect	their	lawyers,	dentists,	accountants,	and	other
professionals	to	be	able	to	schedule	appointments	and	exchange	documents
electronically.	You	might	have	a	quick	follow-up	question	for	your	doctor—
for	instance,	whether	a	generic	version	of	a	drug	is	acceptable.	It	is	hard	to
interrupt	a	doctor,	but	you'll	expect	to	be	able	to	trade	e-mail	with	all	of	the
professionals	you	work	with.	We're	going	to	see	competition	based	on	how
effectively	one	professional	group	has	adopted	these	communications	tools
and	how	much	more	accessible	and	efficient	this	makes	them.	I'm	sure	we'll
then	begin	seeing	ads	in	which	a	firm	will	tout	how	much	more	advanced	it
has	become	in	the	use	of	PC	communications.
When	the	information	highway	is	available,	people	won't	be	limited	to	audio
and	still	images,	because	the	highway	will	also	transmit	high-quality	video.
The	meetings	they	schedule	will	more	and	more	often	be	conducted
electronically,	using	shared-screen	videoconferencing.	Each	electronic
participant,	wherever	he	or	she	is,	will	look	at	a	different	physical	screen:	a
video	white	board,	a	television	set,	or	a	PC,	but	each	screen	will	show	much
the	same	image.	Part	of	the	screen	might	show	someone's	face,	while	another
part	might	display	a	document.	If	anyone	modifies	the	document,	the	change
will	appear	almost	immediately	on	all	the	screens.	Geographically	distant
collaborators	will	be	able	to	work	together	in	rich	ways.	This	is	synchronous
or	real-time	sharing,	which	means	that	the	computer	screens	will	keep	up	with
the	people	using	them.
If	a	group	were	to	meet	electronically	to	collaborate	on	a	press	release,	each

member	would	be	able	to	use	his	or	her	PC	or	notebook	computer	to	move
paragraphs	around	and	drop	in	a	photograph	or	a	video.	The	rest	of	the	group
would	be	able	to	look	at	the	result	on	their	individual	screens	and	see	each
contributor's	work	as	it	is	actually	happening.
We're	already	accustomed	to	watching	video	meetings.	Anyone	who	tunes	in
to	television	news	shows,	such	as	Nightline,	which	feature	long-distance
debates,	is	seeing	a	videoconference.	The	host	and	guests	may	be	separated
by	continents,	yet	they	engage	in	give-and-take	as	if	they	were	in	the	same
room,	and	to	viewers	it	almost	appears	that	they	are.
Today,	in	order	to	videoconference,	it	is	necessary	to	go	to	a	specially
equipped	facility	with	special	phone	lines.	Microsoft	has	at	least	one
dedicated	videoconference	room	in	each	of	its	sales	offices	around	the	world.
They're	used	quite	a	bit,	but	the	setting	is	fairly	formal.	These	facilities	have
saved	us	lots	of	traveling.	Employees	in	other	offices	"sit	in"	on	staff
meetings,	and	customers	and	vendors	have	"visited"	us	without	traveling	to
our	headquarters	outside	Seattle.	Such	meetings	will	become	very	popular
because	they	save	time	and	money	and	are	often	more	productive	than	audio-
only	phone	conferences	or	even	face-to-face	meetings,	because	people	seem
to	be	more	attentive	if	they	know	they	are	on-camera.
I've	noticed	that	it	does	take	some	getting	used	to,	though.	If	one	person	is	on
a	videoconference	screen,	he	or	she	tends	to	get	much	more	attention	than
others	in	the	meeting.	I	first	noticed	this	when	a	bunch	of	us	in	Seattle	were
videoconferencing	with	Steve	Ballmer,	who	was	in	Europe.	It	was	as	if	we
were	all	glued	to	The	Steve	Ballmer	Show.	If	Steve	took	off	his	shoes,	we'd
all	look	at	each	other's	reactions.	When	the	meeting	was	over	I	could	have
told	you	all	about	Steve's	new	haircut	but	I	might	not	have	been	able	to	name
the	other	people	who'd	been	in	the
room	with	me.	I	think	this	distortion	will	go	away	as	videoconferences
become	commonplace.
It's	currently	fairly	expensive	to	set	up	a	videoconference	room—it	costs	at
least	$40,000.	However,	desktop	systems	that	attach	to	PCs	are	coming,	and
they	will	reduce	the	cost—and	the	formality—dramatically.	Our	facilities	are
generally	connected	with	ISDN	lines	operating	at	384,000	bits	per	second,
which	provide	reasonable	picture	and	sound	quality	for	about	$20	to	$35	an
hour	for	connections	within	the	United	States	and	about	$250	to	$300	an	hour
for	an	international	connection.
The	cost	of	videoconferencing,	like	that	of	almost	every	other	computer-

driven	service,	is	going	to	drop	as	technology	and	communications	costs	do.
Small	video	devices	using	cameras	attached	to	personal	computers	or
television	sets	will	allow	us	to	meet	readily	across	the	information	highway
with	much	higher	quality	pictures	and	sound	for	lower	prices.	As	ISDN
connected	to	PCs	becomes	popular,	videoconferences	will	be	as	standard	a
business	procedure	as	using	a	copier	to	duplicate	a	document	for	distribution
is	now.
Some	people	worry	that,	by	eliminating	the	subtlety	of	human	dynamics	in	a
meeting,	videoconferences	and	shared	screens	will	give	corporate	gatherings
all	the	spontaneity	of	a	congressional	photo	opportunity.	How	will	people
whisper,	roll	their	eyes	at	a	tedious	speaker,	or	pass	notes?	Actually,
clandestine	communication	will	be	simpler	at	a	video	meeting	because	the
network	will	facilitate	individual	communications	on	the	side.	Meetings	have
always	had	unwritten	rules,	but	when	the	network	is	mediating
videoconferences,	some	rules	will	have	to	become	explicit.	Will	people	be
able	to	signal,	publicly	or	privately,	individually	or	collectively,	that	they	are
bored?	To	what	degree	should	a	participant	be	allowed	to	block	his	or	her
video	or	audio	from	others?	Should	private	side	conversations,	one	PC	to
another,	be	permitted?	Over	time,	as	we	use	these	facilities,	new	rules	of
meeting	etiquette	will	emerge.
Home	videoconferences	will	naturally	be	somewhat	different.	If	the
conference	has	only	two	participants,	it	will	amount	to	a	video	phone	call.
That	will	be	great	for	saying	hello	to	y======================================================== verhead	projectors	represent	the	state	of	the	art.
Reed	Hundt,	chairman	of	the	U.S.	Federal	Communications	Commission,
commented	on	this.	"There	are	thousands	of	buildings	in	this	country	with
millions	of	people	in	them	who	have	no	telephones,	no	cable	television	and
no	reasonable	prospect	of	broadband	services,"	he	said.	"They	are	called
schools"
Despite	these	constraints,	genuine	change	is	going	to	come.	It	won't	happen
abruptly.	On	the	face	of	it,	the	basic	patterns	of	education	will	remain	the
same.	Students	will	continue	to	attend	classes,	listen	to	teachers,	ask
questions,	participate	in	individual	and	group	work	(including	hands-on
experiments),	and	do	homework.
There	seems	to	be	a	universal	commitment	to	having	more	computers	in
schools,	but	the	rate	at	which	they	are	being	supplied	varies	from	country	to
country.	Only	a	few	countries,	such	as	the	Netherlands,	already	have
computers	in	nearly	every	school.	In	France	and	many	other	places,	although
few	installations	have	taken	place,	governments	have
pledged	to	equip	all	their	classrooms	with	computers.	Britain,	Japan,	and	the
People's	Republic	of	China	have	begun	the	process	of	incorporating
information	technology	into	their	national	curricula,	with	a	focus	on
vocational	training.	I	believe	most	countries	will	decide	to	make	increased
investments	in	education,	and	computer	use	in	schools	will	catch	up	to	its	use
in	homes	and	businesses.	Over	time—longer	in	less	developed	countries—we
are	likely	to	see	computers	installed	in	every	classroom	in	the	world.
The	cost	of	computer	hardware	gets	cheaper	almost	by	the	month,	and
educational	software	will	become	quite	affordable	when	purchased	in
quantity.	Already	many	cable	and	telephone	companies	in	the	United	States
have	promised	free	or	reduced-price	network	connections	to	schools	and
libraries	in	their	areas.	For	example,	Pacific	Bell	has	announced	a	plan	to
provide	free	ISDN	service	to	every	school	in	California	for	one	year,	and	TCI
and	Viacom	offer	free	cable	to	schools	in	every	community	they	serve.
Although	a	classroom	will	still	be	a	classroom,	technology	will	transform	a
lot	of	the	details.	Classroom	learning	will	include	multi-media	presentations,
and	homework	will	involve	exploring	electronic	documents	as	much	as
textbooks,	perhaps	even	more.	Students	will	be	encouraged	to	pursue	areas	of
particular	interest,	and	it	will	be	easy	for	them	to	do	so.	Each	pupil	will	be
able	to	have	his	own	question	answered	simultaneously	with	the	other
students'	queries.	A	class	will	spend	part	of	a	day	at	a	personal	computer

exploring	information	individually	or	in	groups.	Then	the	students	will	bring
back	their	thoughts	and	questions	about	the	information	they	have	discovered
to	the	teacher,	who	will	be	able	to	decide	which	questions	should	be	brought
to	the	attention	of	the	full	class.	While	students	are	at	their	computers,	the
teacher	will	be	free	to	work	with	individuals	or	small	groups	and	focus	less	on
lecturing	and	more	on	problem	solving.
Educators,	like	so	many	in	today's	economy,	are,	among	other	things,
facilitators.	Like	many	other,	similar	workers,	they	will	have	to	adapt	and
readapt	to	changing	conditions.	Unlike	some	professions,	however,	the	future
of	teaching	looks	extremely	bright.	As	innovation	has	improved	the	standard
of	living,	there	has	always	been	an	increase	in	the	portion	of	the	workforce
dedicated	to	education.	Educators	who	bring	energy	and	creativity	to	a
classroom	will	thrive.	So	will	teachers	who	build	strong	relationships	with
children,	because	kids	love	classes	taught	by	adults	they	know	genuinely	care
about	them.
We've	all	had	teachers	who	made	a	difference.	I	had	a	great	chemistry	teacher
in	high	school	who	made	his	subject	immensely	interesting.	Chemistry
seemed	enthralling	compared	to	biology.	In	biology,	we	were	dissecting	frogs
—just	hacking	them	to	pieces,	actually—and	our	teacher	didn't	explain	why.
My	chemistry	teacher	sensationalized	his	subject	a	bit	and	promised	that	it
would	help	us	understand	the	world.	When	I	was	in	my	twenties,	I	read	James
D.	Watson's	Molecular	Biology	of	the	Gene	and	decided	my	high	school
experience	had	misled	me.	The	understanding	of	life	is	a	great	subject.
Biological	information	is	the	most	important	information	we	can	discover,
because	over	the	next	several	decades	it	will	revolutionize	medicine.	Human
DNA	is	like	a	computer	program	but	far,	far	more	advanced	than	any	software
ever	created.	It	seems	amazing	to	me	now	that	one	great	teacher	made
chemistry	endlessly	fascinating	while	I	found	biology	totally	boring.
When	teachers	do	excellent	work	and	prepare	wonderful	materials,	only	their
few	dozen	students	benefit	each	year.	It's	difficult	for	teachers	in	different
locations	to	build	on	one	another's	work.	The	network	will	enable	teachers	to
share	lessons	and	materials,	so	that	the	best	educational	practices	can	spread.
In	most	cases	watching	a	lecture	on	video	is	much	less	interesting	than
actually	being	in	the	room	with	the	teacher.	But	sometimes	the	value	of	being
able	to	hear	a	particular	teacher	outweighs	the	loss	of	interactivity.	A	few
years	ago,	a	friend	and	I	discovered	in	the	University	of	Washington's	catalog
videotapes	of	a	series	of	lectures	by	the	distinguished	physicist	Richard
Feynman.	We	were	able	to	watch	the	lectures	on	vacation	ten	years	after
Feynman	gave	the	talks	at	Cornell.	We	might	have	gotten	more	from	the

lectures	if	we	had	been	in	the	lecture	hall	or	been	able	to	ask	him	questions
via	a	videoconference.	But	the	clarity	of	his	thinking	explained	many	of	the
concepts	of	physics	better	than	any	book	or	any	instructor	I've	ever	had.	He
brought	the	subject	to	life.	I	think	anyone	studying	physics	should	have	these
lectures	easily	accessible.	With	the	information	highway	there	will	be	lots	of
such	uniquely	valuable	resources	available	to	teachers	and	students.
If	a	teacher	in	Providence,	Rhode	Island,	happened	to	have	a	particularly
good	way	of	explaining	photosynthesis,	her	lecture	notes	and	multi-media
demonstrations	could	be	obtained	by	educators	around	the	world.	Some
teachers	will	use	material	exactly	as	it	comes	off	the	highway,	but	others	will
take	advantage	of	easy-to-use	authoring	software	to	adapt	and	combine	bits
and	pieces	of	what	they	find.	Feedback	from	other	interested	instructors	will
be	easy	to	get	and	will	help	refine	the	lesson.	In	a	short	time	the	improved
material	could	be	in	thousands	of	classrooms	all	over	the	world.	It	will	be
easy	to	tell	what	materials	are	popular,	because	the	network	will	be	able	to
count	the	number	of	times	they	are	accessed,	or	to	poll	teachers	electronically.
Corporations	wanting	to	help	with	education	could	provide	recognition	and
cash	awards	to	teachers	whose	materials	are	making	a	difference.
It	is	hard	for	a	teacher	to	prepare	in-depth,	interesting	material	for	twenty-five
students,	six	hours	a	day,	180	days	a	year.	This	is	particularly	true	if	students'
extensive	television	watching	has	raised	their	entertainment	expectations.	I
can	imagine	a	middle-school	science	teacher	a	decade	or	so	from	now,
working	on	a	lecture	about	the	sun,	explaining	not	only	the	science	but	also
the	history	of	discoveries	that	made	it	possible.	When	a	teacher	wants	to
select	a	picture,	still	or	video,	whether	it's	a	piece	of	art	or	a	portrait	of	a	great
solar	scientist,	the	highway	will	allow	her	to	select	from	a	comprehensive
catalog	of	images.	Snippets	of	video	and	narrated	animations	from	countless
sources	will	be	available.	It	will	only	take	minutes	to	pull	together	a	visual
show	that	would	now	require	days	of	work	to	organize.	As	she	lectures	about
the	sun,	she	will	have	images	and	diagrams	appear	at	appropriate	times.	If	a
student	asks	her	about	the	source	of	the	sun's	power,	she	can	answer	using
animated	graphics	of	hydrogen	and	helium	atoms,	she'll	be	able	to	show	solar
flares	or	sunspots	or	other	phenomena,	or	she	might	call	up	a	brief	video	on
fusion	energy	to	the	white	board.	The	teacher	will	have	organized	the	links	to
servers	on	the	information	highway	in	advance.	She	will	make	the	list	of	links
available	to	her	students,	so	that	during	study	times	in	the	library	or	at	home,
they	will	be	able	to	review	the	material	from	as	many	perspectives	as	they
find	helpful.
Think	of	a	high	school	art	teacher	using	a	digital	white	board	to	display	a

high-quality	digital	reproduction	of	Seurat's	Bathers	at	Asnières,	which	shows
young	men	relaxing	on	the	bank	of	the	Seine	River	in	the	1880s	against	a
background	of	sailboats	and	smokestacks.	The	white	board	will	pronounce	the
name	of	the	painting	in	the	original	French—Une	Baignade	à	Asnières	and
show	a	map	of	the	outskirts	of	Paris,	with	the	town	of	Asnières	highlighted.
The	teacher	might	use	the	painting,	which	presaged	Pointillism,	to	illustrate
the	end	of	Impressionism.	Or	she	will	use	it	to	get	into	broader	topics,	such	as
life	in	France	at	the	end	of	the	nineteenth	century,	the	Industrial	Revolution,
or	even	the	way	the	eye	sees	complementary	colors.
She	might	point	to	the	orangish-red	hat	of	a	figure	standing	on	the	far	right
side	of	the	composition	and	say:	"Look	at	the	vibrancy	of	the	hat.	Seurat	has
tricked	the	eye.	The	hat	is	red,	but	he	has	added	tiny	dots	of	orange	and	blue.
You	don't	really	notice	the	blue	unless	you	look	closely."	As	the	teacher	says
this,	the	picture	will	zoom	in	on	the	hat,	until	the	texture	of	the	canvas	is
apparent.	At	this	magnification,	specks	of	blue	will	be	obvious,	and	the
teacher	will	explain	that	blue	is	the	complement	of	orange.	A	color	wheel	will
appear	on	the	white	board,	and	either	the	teacher	or	the	multi-media	document
itself	will	explain:	"Every	color	on	this	wheel	is	arranged	opposite	its
complement.	Red	is	opposite	green,	yellow	is	opposite	purple,	and	blue	is
opposite	orange.	It	is	a	quirk	of	the	eye	that	staring	at	a	color	creates	an
afterimage	of	its	complementary	color.	Seurat	used	this	trick	to	make	the	red
and	orange	hues	of	the	hat	more	vivid	by	sneaking	in	dots	of	blue."
Computers	conn======================================================== ange	seems	terse,	keep	in	mind	that	the	average	Microsoft
employee	receives	dozens	of	electronic	messages	a	day.	An	e-mail	message	is
like	a	statement	or	a	question	at	a	meeting—one	thought	or	inquiry	in	an	on-
going	communication.	Microsoft	provides	e-mail	for	business	purposes,	but,
like	the	office	telephone,	it	serves	many	other	purposes,	social	and	personal.
For	example,	hikers	can	reach	all	the	members	of	the	Microsoft	Hiking	Club
to	try	to	find	a	ride	to	the	mountain.	And	certainly	a	few	romances	around
Microsoft	have	benefited	from	e-mail.	When	my	wife,	Melinda,	and	I	were
first	going	out,	we	took	advantage	of	it.	For	some	reason	people	are	less	shy
about	sending	e-mail	than	communicating	on	the	phone	or	in	person.	This	can
be	a	benefit	or	a	problem,	depending	on	the	situation.
I	spend	several	hours	a	day	reading	and	answering	e-mail	to	and	from
employees,	customers,	and	partners	around	the	world.	Anyone	in	the
company	can	send	me	e-mail,	and	because	I	am	the	only	person	who	reads	it,
no	one	has	to	worry	about	protocol	in	a	message	to	me.
I	probably	wouldn't	have	to	spend	so	long	if	my	e-mail	address	weren't
semipublic.	There	is	actually	a	book	called	E-Mail	Addresses	of	the	Rich	&
Famous,	which	includes	my	e-mail	address	as	well	as	ones	for	Rush
Limbaugh	and	Senator	Ted	Kennedy.	When	John	Seabrook	was	writing	an
article	about	me	for	The	New	Yorker	magazine,	he	conducted	his	interview
primarily	on	e-mail.	It	was	a	very	effective	way	to	have	a	dialogue,	and	I
enjoyed	the	piece	when	it	appeared,	but	it	mentioned	my	e-mail	address.	The
result	has	been	an	avalanche	of	mail	ranging	from	students	asking	me,	in
effect,	to	do	their	homework	assignments,	to	people	asking	for	money,	to	mail
from	a	group	interested	in	whales	who	for	some	reason	added	my	e-mail
name	to	their	list.	My	address	is	also	a	target	for	both	rude	and	friendly
messages	from	strangers,	and	provocative	ones	from	the	press	("If	you	don't
answer	this	by	tomorrow	I	will	publish	a	story	about	you	and	that	topless
waitress!").
We	have	special	e-mail	addresses	at	Microsoft	for	job	applications,	product
feedback,	and	other	legitimate	communications.	But	a	lot	of	that	mail	still

comes	to	me	and	I	have	to	reroute	it.	There	are	also	three	e-mail	equivalents
of	chain	letters	that	keep	making	the	rounds.	One	threatens	general	bad	luck	if
it	isn't	forwarded.	Another	specifically	says	the	punishment	will	be	that	your
sex	life	will	suffer.	A	third,	which	has	been	going	around	for	six	years,
contains	a	cookie	recipe	and	a	story	about	a	company's	having	overcharged	a
woman	for	the	recipe,	and	so	she	wants	you	to	distribute	it	for	free.	In	the
various	versions	different	companies	are	named.	Apparently	it	is	the	idea	of
getting	back	at	a	corporation,	any	corporation,	that	has	made	that	one	such	a
perennial	favorite.	This	is	all	mixed	in	with	mail	that	really	should	come	to
me,	often	about	important	issues.	Fortunately,	e-mail	software	is	improving
all	the	time	and	it	now	includes	a	feature	that	lets	me	prioritize	mail	from
senders	I	have	designated.
When	I	travel,	I	connect	my	portable	computer	back	into	Microsoft's
electronic	mail	system	every	night	to	retrieve	new	messages	and	send	off	the
ones	I've	written	over	the	course	of	the	day	to	people	in	the	company.	Most
recipients	will	not	even	be	aware	that	I	am	out	of	the	ofrice.	When	I'm
connected	to	our	corporate	network	from	a	remote	site,	I	can	also	click	on	a
single	icon	to	see	how	sales	are	doing,	to	check	the	status	of	projects,	or	to
access	any	other	management	databases.	It	is	reassuring	to	check	my
electronic	in-box	when	I'm	thousands	of	miles	and	a	dozen	time	zones	away,
because	bad	news	almost	always	comes	through	on	e-mail.	So	if	nothing	bad
is	waiting	there,	I	don't	need	to	worry.
We	now	use	e-mail	in	all	sorts	of	ways	we	hadn't	anticipated.	For	example,	at
the	beginning	of	the	annual	Microsoft	Giving	Campaign,	which	raises	money
for	charity,	employees	receive	an	e-mail	message	encouraging	them	to
participate.	The	e-mail	message	contains	an	electronic	pledge-card	program.
When	the	icon	in	the	message	is	clicked,	the	pledge	card	appears	on	the
employee's	screen	and	he	or	she	can	pledge	a	cash	gift	or	sign	up	for	a	payroll
deduction.	If	the	latter	option	is	chosen,	the	information	is	automatically
entered	into	Microsofts	payroll	database.	From	the	electronic	form	employees
can	direct	their	gift	to	their	local	United	Way	or	to	another	nonprofit
organization.	If	they	want	to,	they	can	choose	to	have	their	donation	go	to	one
or	more	of	the	charities	the	United	Way	supports,	and	can	even	access	a
server	to	obtain	information	about	those	organizations	or	about	volunteering
in	their	community.	From	start	to	finish	it's	completely	electronic.	As	the
leader	of	the	company,	I	can	analyze	summary	information	day	by	day	to	find
out	if	we	are	getting	good	participation	or	if	we	need	to	have	a	few	more
rallies	to	get	out	the	message	about	how	important	we	think	the	giving
campaign	is.

Today,	besides	company-operated,	text-based	e-mail	systems,	the	kind
Microsoft	operates	for	its	own	use,	there	are	commercial	services	such	as
MCI	Mail	and	B.T.	Gold	(operated	by	British	Telecom).	There	are	also
offerings	from	all	of	the	commercial	on-line	systems	such	as	CompuServe,
Prodigy,	and	the	Microsoft	Network.	These	perform	some	of	the	same
functions	that	telegrams	and,	later,	telex	systems	once	did.	Users	connected	to
these	e-mail	systems	can	send	a	message	to	virtually	anyone	who	has	a
standard	Internet	e-mail	address.	Both	private	and	commercial	e-mail	systems
include	"gateways"	that	transfer	messages	sent	by	a	user	of	one	mail	system
to	a	recipient	on	another.	You	can	get	a	message	to	almost	anyone	who	has	a
PC	and	a	modem,	although	for	certain	communications	privacy	is	a	problem
because	transmissions	across	the	Internet	are	not	very	secure.	Some
commercial	services,	such	as	MCI,	will	also	deliver	a	message	by	fax,	telex,
or	traditional	mail	if	the	recipient	doesn't	have	an	electronic	mailbox.
Future	advances	in	electronic	mail	will	streamline	lots	of	activities	we	may
not	even	realize	are	inefficient.	For	example,	think	about	how	you	pay	bills.
More	often	than	not,	a	company	prints	out	a	bill	on	a	piece	of	paper	and	puts
it	in	an	envelope	that	is	physically	carried	to	your	house.	You	open	the	bill,
check	your	records	to	see	if	the	amount	and	details	seem	appropriate,	write	a
check,	and	then	try	to	time	when	you	mail	it	back	so	that	it	arrives	shortly
before	the	due	date.	We're	so	used	to	this	process	we	don't	even	think	about
how	wasteful	it	is.	Let's	say	you	disagree	with	a	bill.	You	call	the	company
up,	wait	on	hold,	and	try	to	get	through	to	the	right	person—who	may	not
really	be	the	right	person	at	all.	In	which	case	you	have	to	wait	for	someone
else	to	call	you	back.
Very	soon	you'll	check	your	PC,	wallet,	or	television	set	the	information
appliance	of	your	choice—for	e-mail,	including	bills.	When	a	bill	comes	in,
the	device	will	show	your	payment	history.	If	you	want	to	inquire	about	the
bill,	you'll	do	it	asynchronously—at	your	convenience—by	sending	e-mail:
"Hey	how	come	this	charge	is	so	high?"
Tens	of	thousands	of	businesses	in	the	United	States	already	exchange
information	via	an	electronic	system	called	Electronic	Document	Interchange,
or	EDI.	It	allows	companies	that	have	contractual	relationships	to	execute
specific	kinds	of	transactions	automatically.	Dealings	are	highly	structured—
reordering	products	or	checking	the	status	of	a	shipment—which	makes
conventional	EDI	unsuitable	for	ad	hoc	communications,	although	many
companies	are	working	to	combine	the	benefits	of	EDI	and	e-mail	into	a
single	system.

The	asynchronicity	of	e-mail	and	EDI	is	one	of	their	advantages,	but	there	is
still	a	place	for	synchronous	communications.	Sometimes	you	want	to	call
someone	up,	talk	directly,	and	get	an	immediate	response	rather	than	leaving	a
message.
Within	a	few	years	there	will	be	hybrid	communications	systems	that
combine	elements	of	synchronous	and	asynchronous	communications.	These
systems	will	use	DSVD	(and	later	ISDN)	telephone	connections	to	permit	the
simultaneous	transfer	of	voice	and	data,	even	before	the	full	information
highway	is	in	place.
It	will	work	this	way:	When	companies	post	information	about	their	products
on	the	Internet,	part	of	that	information	will	include	instructions	for	how	a
customer	can	connect	synchronously	with	a	sales	representative	who	will	be
able	to	answer	questions	through	a	voice-data	connection.	For	example,	if
you're	shopping	for	boots	on	Eddie	Bauer's	home	page	(an	electronic	catalog)
and	you	want	to	know	if	the	boots	you	like	are	appropriate	for	use	in	Florida's
Everglades	or	on	a	glacier,	you'll	be	able	to	click	a	button	to	get	a
representative	to	come	on	the	line	and	talk	to	you.	The	representative	will	see
immediately	that	you	are	looking	at	the	boots	and	will	have	whatever	other
information	about	yourself	you	have	decided	to	make	available,	not	just	your
clothing	and	shoe	sizes,	style	and	color	preferences,	but	your	athletic
interests,	your	past	purchases	from	other	companies,	and	even	your	price
range.	Some	people	will	choose	not	to	make	any	information	about
themselves	available.	Eddie	Bauer's	computer	may	route	your	inquiry	to	the
same	person	you	spoke	to	last	time,	or	it	may	route	you	to	someone	who	has
expertise	in	the	product	displayed	on	your	screen,	in	this	case,	boots.	Without
preamble,	you	will	be	able	to	ask,	"Do	these	boots	work	well	in	swamps	like
the	Everglades?"	or	whatever	your	question	is.	The	representative	doesn't
have	to	be	in	an	office.	He	can	be	anywhere	as	long	as	he	has	access	to	a	PC
and	has	indicated	he	is	available.	If	he	speaks	the	right	language	and	has	the
right	expertise,	he	can	help	out.
Or	if	you	decided	to	change	your	will,	you'd	phone	your	lawyer,	and	she
might	say,	"Let's	take	a	quick	look	at	that."	She	would	then	call	your	will	up
on	her	PC,	and	it	would	appear	on	your	screen	as	well	as	hers	courtesy	of
DSVD,	ISDN,	or	similar	techno======================================================== omputers	at	an	early
age	we	can	ensure	that	they	play	their	rightful	role	in	all	the	work	that	benefits
from	computer	expertise.
My	own	experience	as	a	child,	and	that	of	my	friends	raising	children	today,
is	that	once	a	kid	is	exposed	to	computing,	he	or	she	is	hooked.	But	we	have
to	create	the	opportunity	for	that	exposure.	Schools	should	have	low-cost
access	to	computers	connected	to	the	information	highway,	and	teachers	need
to	become	comfortable	with	the	new	tools.
One	of	the	wonderful	things	about	the	information	highway	is	that	virtual
equity	is	far	easier	to	achieve	than	real-world	equity.	It	would	take	a	massive
amount	of	money	to	give	every	grammar	school	in	every	poor	area	the	same
library	resources	as	the	schools	in	Beverly	Hills.	However,	when	you	put
schools	on-line	they	all	get	the	same	access	to	information,	wherever	it	might
be	stored.	We	are	all	created	equal	in	the	virtual	world,	and	we	can	use	this
equality	to	help	address	some	of	the	sociological	problems	that	society	has	yet
to	solve	in	the	physical	world.	The	network	will	not	eliminate	barriers	of
prejudice	or	inequality,	but	it	will	be	a	powerful	force	in	that	direction.
The	question	of	how	to	price	intellectual	property,	such	as	entertainment	and
educational	materials,	is	fascinating.	Economists	understand	a	lot	about	how
the	pricing	of	classical	manufactured	goods	works.	They	can	show	how
rational	pricing	should	reflect	cost	structure	in	a	very	direct	manner.	In	a
market	with	multiple	competing	qualified	manufacturers,	prices	tend	to	drop
to	the	marginal	cost	of	making	one	more	of	whatever	they	are	selling.	But	this
model	doesn't	work	when	applied	to	intellectual	property.
A	basic	economics	course	describes	the	curves	of	supply	and	demand,	which
intersect	at	the	price	appropriate	for	a	product.	But	supply-and-demand
economics	gets	into	trouble	when	it	comes	to	intellectual	property,	because
ordinary	rules	regarding	manufacturing	costs	don't	apply.	Typically	there	are
huge	up-front	development	costs	for	intellectual	property.	These	fixed	costs
are	the	same	regardless	of	whether	one	copy	or	a	million	copies	of	the	work
are	sold.	George	Lucas's	next	movie	in	the	Star	Wars	series	will	cost	millions
to	make,	regardless	of	how	many	people	pay	to	see	it	in	theaters.

The	pricing	of	intellectual	property	is	more	complicated	than	most	pricing
because	today	it	is	relatively	inexpensive	to	manufacture	copies	of	most
intellectual	property.	Tomorrow,	on	the	information	highway,	the	cost	of
delivering	a	copy	of	a	work—which	will	amount	to	the	same	thing	as
manufacturing	it—will	be	even	lower,	and	dropping	every	year	because	of
Moore's	Law.	When	you	buy	a	new	medicine,	you're	paying	mostly	for	what
the	drug	company	spent	for	research,	development,	and	testing.	Even	if	the
marginal	cost	of	making	each	pill	is	minimal,	the	pharmaceutical	company
still	may	have	to	charge	quite	a	bit	for	each,	especially	if	the	market	is	not
huge.	The	revenue	from	the	average	patient	has	to	cover	a	sufficient	share	of
the	development	expenses	and	generate	enough	profit	to	make	investors	glad
they	took	the	substantial	financial	risks	involved	in	developing	a	new	drug.
When	a	poor	country	wants	the	medicine,	the	manufacturer	faces	a	moral
dilemma.	If	the	pharmaceutical	company	doesn't	waive	or	drastically	reduce
its	patent-licensing	fees,	the	medicine	won't	be	available	to	poor	countries.
However,	if	a	manufacturer	is	to	be	able	to	invest	in	R&D,	some	users	must
pay	more	than	the	marginal	cost.	Prices	for	drugs	vary	greatly	from	country	to
country	and	discriminate	against	poor	people	in	rich	countries	except	where
governments	cover	medical	costs.
One	possible	solution,	a	scheme	whereby	a	rich	person	pays	more	to	buy	a
new	medicine,	to	see	a	movie	or	to	read	a	book,	may	seem	inequitable;
however,	it	is	identical	to	a	system	already	in	place	today—taxation.	Through
the	income	tax	and	other	taxes,	people	with	high	incomes	pay	more	for	roads,
schools,	the	army,	and	every	other	government	facility	than	the	average
person	does.	It	cost	me	more	than	$100	million	last	year	to	get	those	services
because	I	paid	a	significant	capital	gains	tax	after	selling	some	Microsoft
shares.	I	have	no	complaint,	but	it	is	an	example	of	the	same	services	being
provided	at	vastly	different	prices.
The	pricing	for	highway	access	may	be	set	politically	rather	than	on	the	basis
of	costs.	It	is	going	to	be	expensive	to	enfranchise	people	in	remote	locations
because	the	cost	of	bringing	wiring	to	far-flung	homes	and	even	small
communities	is	very	high.	Companies	may	not	be	eager	to	make	the	necessary
investment,	and	the	geographically	disenfranchised	may	not	be	in	a	position
to	make	the	investment	on	their	own	behalf.	We	should	expect	heated	debate
about	whether	the	government	should	subsidize	connections	to	rural	areas,	or
impose	regulations	that	cause	urban	users	to	subsidize	rural	ones.	The
precedent	for	this	is	a	doctrine	known	as	"universal	service"	which	was
created	to	subsidize	rural	mail,	phone,	and	electrical	services	in	the	United
States.	It	dictates	a	single	price	for	the	delivery	of	a	letter,	a	phone	call,	or
electrical	power	regardless	of	where	you	live.	It	applies	even	though	it	is

more	expensive	to	deliver	services	in	rural	areas,	where	homes	and	businesses
are	farther	apart	than	in	areas	of	concentrated	population.
There	was	no	equivalent	policy	for	the	delivery	of	newspapers	or	radio	or
television	reception.	Nonetheless,	these	services	are	widely	available,	so
clearly	under	some	circumstances	government	intervention	isn't	necessary	to
ensure	high	availability.	The	U.S.	Postal	Service	was	founded	as	part	of	the
government	on	the	assumption	that	that	was	the	only	way	to	provide	truly
universal	service.	UPS	and	Federal	Express	might	disagree	on	this	point,
however,	because	they	have	managed	to	provide	broad	coverage	and	make
money.	The	debate	as	to	whether,	or	to	what	degree,	government	needs	to	be
involved	to	guarantee	broad	access	to	the	information	highway	is	certain	to
rage	on	for	many	years.
The	highway	will	let	those	who	live	in	remote	places	consult,	collaborate,	and
be	involved	with	the	rest	of	the	world.	Because	many	people	will	find	the
combination	of	rural	lifestyle	and	urban	information	attractive,	network
companies	will	have	an	incentive	to	run	fiber-optic	lines	to	high-income
remote	areas.	It	is	likely	that	some	states,	or	communities,	or	even	private	real
estate	developers	will	promote	their	areas	by	providing	great	connectivity.
This	will	lead	to	what	one	might	call	the	"Aspen-ization"	of	parts	of	the
country.	Interesting	rural	communities	with	high	marks	for	quality	of	life	will
deliberately	set	out	to	attract	a	new	class	of	sophisticated	urban	citizen.	Taken
as	a	whole,	urban	areas	will	tend	to	get	their	connections	before	rural	ones.
The	highway	will	spread	information	and	opportunity	across	borders	to
developing	nations,	too.	Cheap	global	communications	can	bring	people
anywhere	into	the	mainstream	of	the	world	economy.	An	English-speaking
Ph.D.	in	China	will	be	able	to	bid	against	colleagues	in	London	for	consulting
work.	Knowledge	workers	in	industrialized	countries	will,	in	a	sense,	face
new	competition—just	as	some	manufacturing	workers	in	industrialized
countries	have	experienced	competition	from	developing	nations	over	the	past
decade.	This	will	make	the	information	highway	a	powerful	force	for
international	trade	in	intellectual	goods	and	services,	just	as	the	availability	of
relatively	inexpensive	air	cargo	and	containerized	shipping	helped	propel
international	trade	in	physical	goods.
The	net	effect	will	be	a	wealthier	world,	which	should	be	stabilizing.
Developed	nations,	and	workers	in	those	nations,	are	likely	to	maintain	a
sizable	economic	lead.	However,	the	gap	between	the	have	and	have-not
nations	will	diminish.	Starting	out	behind	is	sometimes	an	advantage.	It	lets
those	who	adopt	late	skip	steps,	and	avoid	the	mistakes	of	the	trailblazers.

Some	countries	will	never	have	industrialization.	They	will	move	directly	into
the	Information	Age.	Europe	didn't	adopt	television	until	several	years	after
the	United	States.	The	result	was	higher	picture
quality,	because	by	the	time	Europe	set	its	standard	a	better	choice	was
available.	As	a	result,	Europeans	have	enjoyed	better-looking	television
pictures	for	decades.
Telephone	systems	are	another	example	of	how	starting	late	can	provide	an
advantage.	In	Africa,	China,	and	other	parts	of	the	developing	world,	many
citizens	who	have	phones	use	cellular	instruments.	Cellular	telephone	service
is	spreading	rapidly	in	Asia,	Latin	America,	and	other	developing	regions,
because	it	does	not	require	that	copper	wires	be	strung.	Many	people	in	the
cellular	industry	predict	that	improvements	in	technology	will	mean	that	these
areas	may	never	get	a	conventional	copper	wire-based	telephone	system.
These	countries	will	never	have	to	cut	down	a	million	trees	for	telephone
poles	or	string	a	hundred	thousand	miles	of	telephone	lines	only	to	rip	them
all	down	and	bury	the	entire	network.	The	wireless	telephone	system	will	be
their	first	telephone	system.	They	will	get	increasingly	better	cellular	systems
wherever	they	can't	afford	a	full	broadband	connection.
The	presence	of	advanced	communications	systems	promises	to	make	nations
more	alike	and	reduce	the	importance	of	national	boundaries.	The	fax
machine,	the	portable	videocamera,	and	Cable	News	Network	are	among	the
forces	that	brought	about	the	end	of	communist	regimes	and	the	Cold	War,
because	they	allowed	news	to	pass	both	ways	through	what	was	called	the
Iron	Curtain.
Now,	commercial	satellite	broadcasts	to	nations	such	as	China	and	Iran	offer
citizens	glimpses	of	the	outside	world	that	are	not	necessarily	sanctioned	by
their	governments.	This	new	access	to	information	can	draw	people	together
by	increasing	their	understanding	of	other	cultures.	Some	believe	it	will	cause
discontent	and	worse,	a	"Revolution	of	Expectations,"	when	disenfranchised
people	get	enough	data	a======================================================== to	choose	the	camera
angles,	the	replays,	and	even	the	commentators	for	your	version.	You'll	be
able	to	listen	to	any	song,	anytime,	anywhere,	piped	in	from	the	world's
largest	record	store:	the	information	highway.	Perhaps	you'll	hum	a	little	tune
of	your	own	invention	into	a	microphone,	and	then	play	it	back	to	hear	what	it
could	sound	like	if	orchestrated	or	performed	by	a	rock	group.	Or	you'll	watch
Gone	With	the	Wind	with	your	own	face	and	voice	replacing	that	of	Vivien
Leigh	or	Clark	Gable.	Or	see	yourself	walking	down	the	runway	at	a	fashion
show,	wearing	the	latest	Paris	creations	adjusted	to	fit	your	body	or	the	one
you	wish	you	had.
Users	with	curiosity	will	be	mesmerized	by	the	abundance	of	information.
Want	to	know	how	a	mechanical	clock	works?	You'll	peer	inside	one	from
any	vantage	point	and	be	able	to	ask	questions.	Eventually	you	may	even	be
able	to	crawl	around	inside	a	clock,	using	a	virtual-reality	application.	Or
you'll	be	able	to	assume	the	role	of	a	heart	surgeon	or	play	the	drums	at	a
sold-out	rock	concert,	thanks	to	the	information	highway's	ability	to	deliver
rich	simulations	to	home	computers.	Some	of	the	choices	on	the	highway	will
be	supersets	of	today's	software,	but	the	graphics	and	animation	will	be	far,
far	better.
Other	applications	will	be	strictly	practical.	For	example,	when	you	go	on
vacation	a	home-management	application	will	be	able	to	turn	down	the	heat,
notify	the	post	office	to	hold	your	mail	and	the	newspaper	carrier	not	to
deliver	the	printed	paper,	cycle	your	indoor	lighting	so	that	it	appears	you	are
home,	and	automatically	pay	routine	bills.
Still	other	applications	will	be	completely	serious.	My	dad	broke	his	finger
badly	one	weekend	and	went	to	the	nearest	emergency	room,	which	happened
to	be	Children's	Hospital	in	Seattle.	They	refused	to	do	anything	for	him
because	he	was	a	few	decades	too	old.	Had	there	been	an	information
highway	at	the	time,	it	would	have	saved	him	some	trouble	by	telling	him	not
to	bother	trying	that	hospital.	An	application,	communicating	on	the	highway,
would	have	told	him	which	nearby	emergency	rooms	were	in	the	best	position
to	help	him	at	that	particular	time.
If	my	dad	were	to	break	another	finger	a	few	years	from	now,	he	not	only

would	be	able	to	use	an	information	highway	application	to	find	an
appropriate	hospital,	he	might	even	be	able	to	register	electronically	with	the
hospital	while	driving	there	and	avoid	conventional	paperwork	entirely.	The
hospital's	computer	would	match	his	injury	to	a	suitable	doctor,	who	would	be
able	to	retrieve	my	father's	medical	records	from	a	server	on	the	information
highway.	If	the	doctor	called	for	an	X	ray,	it	would	be	stored	in	digital	form
on	a	server,	available	for	immediate	review	by	any	authorized	doctor	or
specialist	throughout	the	hospital	or	the	world.	Comments	made	by	anyone
reviewing	the	X	ray,	whether	oral	or	in	text	form,	would	be	linked	to	Dad's
medical	records.	Afterward	my	father	would	be	able	to	look	at	the	X	rays
from	home	and	listen	to	the	professional	commentary.	He	could	share	the	X
rays	with	his	family:	"Look	at	the	size	of	that	fracture!	Listen	to	what	the
doctor	said	about	it!"
Most	of	these	applications,	from	checking	a	pizza	menu	to	sharing	centralized
medical	records,	are	already	starting	to	appear	on	PCs.	Interactive	information
sharing	is	quickly	moving	closer	to	becoming	a	part	of	everyday	life.
However,	before	that	happens,	a	lot	of	pieces	of	the	highway	still	have	to	be
put	in	place.

5
PATHS	TO	THE	HIGHWAY
Before	we	can	enjoy	the	benefits	of	the	applications	and	appliances	described
in	the	preceding	chapter,	the	information	highway	has	to	exist.	It	doesn't	yet.
This	may	surprise	some	people,	who	hear	everything	from	a	long-distance
telephone	network	to	the	Internet	described	as	"the	information
superhighway."	The	truth	is	that	the	full	highway	is	unlikely	to	be	available	in
homes	for	at	least	a	decade.
Personal	computers,	multi-media	CD-ROM	software,	high-capacity	cable
television	networks,	wired	and	wireless	telephone	networks,	and	the	Internet
are	all	important	precursors	of	the	information	highway.	Each	is	suggestive	of
the	future.	But	none	represents	the	actual	information	highway.
Constructing	the	highway	will	be	a	big	job.	It	will	require	the	installation	not
only	of	physical	infrastructure,	such	as	fiber-optic	cable	and	high-speed
switches	and	servers,	but	also	the	development	of	software	platforms.	In
chapter	3,	I	discussed	the	evolution	of	the	hardware	and	the	software	platform
that	enabled	the	PC.	Applications	for	the	information	highway,	such	as	those	I
described	in	chapter	4,	will	also	have	to	be	built	on	a	platform—one	that	will
evolve	out	of	the	PC	and	the	Internet.	The	same	sort	of	competition	that	took
place	within	the	PC	industry	during	the	1980s	is	taking	place	now	to	create
the	software	components	that	will	constitute	the	information	highway
platform.
The	software	that	runs	the	highway	will	have	to	offer	great	navigation	and
security,	electronic	mail	and	bulletin	board	capabilities,	connections	to
competing	software	components,	and	billing	and	accounting	services.
Component	providers	for	the	highway	will	make	available	tools	and	user-
interface	standards	so	it	will	be	easy	for	designers	to	create	applications,	set
up	forms,	and	manage	databases	of	information	on	the	system.	To	make	it
possible	for	applications	to	work	together	seamlessly,	the	platform	will	have
to	define	a	standard	for	user	profiles	so	that	information	about	user
preferences	can	be	passed	from	one	application	to	another.	This	sharing	of
information	will	enable	applications	to	do	their	best	to	meet	user	needs.
A	number	of	companies,	including	Microsoft,	confident	that	there	will	be	a

profitable	business	in	supplying	software	for	the	highway,	are	competing	to
develop	components	of	the	platform.	These	components	will	be	the
foundation	on	which	information	highway	applications	can	be	built.	There
will	be	more	than	one	successful	software	provider	for	the	highway,	and	their
software	will	interconnect.
The	highway's	platform	will	also	have	to	support	many	different	kinds	of
computers,	including	servers	and	all	the	information	appliances.	The
customers	for	much	of	this	software	will	be	the	cable	systems,	telephone
companies,	and	other	network	providers,	rather	than	individuals,	but
consumers	will	ultimately	decide	which	succeed.	The	network	providers	will
gravitate	toward	the	software	that	offers	consumers	the	best	applications	and
the	broadest	range	of	information.	So	the	first	competition	among	companies
developing	platform	software	will	be	waged	for	the	hearts	and	minds	of
applications	developers	and	information	providers,	because	their	work	will
create	most	of	the	value.
As	applications	develop,	they	will	demonstrate	the	value	of	the	information
highway	to	potential	investors—a	crucial	step,	considering	the	amount	of
money	building	the	highway	will	require.	Today's	estimates	put	the	cost	at
about	$1,200,	give	or	take	a	couple	of	hundred	dollars,	depending	on
architecture	and	equipment	choices,	to	connect	one	information	appliance
(such	as	a	TV	or	a	PC)	in	each	U.S.	home	to	the	highway.	This	price	includes
running	the	fiber	into	every	neighborhood,	the	servers,	the	switches	and
electronics	in	the	home.	With	roughly	100	million	homes	in	the	United	States,
this	works	out	to	around	$120	billion	of	investment	in	one	country	alone.
Nobody	is	going	to	spend	this	kind	of	money	until	it	is	clear	that	the
technology	really	works	and	that	consumers	will	pay	enough	for	the	new
applications.	The	fees	customers	will	pay	for	television	service,	including
video-on-demand,	won't	pay	for	building	the	highway.	To	finance	the
construction,	investors	will	have	to	believe	new	services	will	generate	almost
as	much	revenue	again	as	cable	television	does	today.	If	the	financial	return
on	the	highway	is	not	evident,	investment	money	isn't	going	to	materialize
and	construction	of	the	highway	will	be	delayed.	This	is	just	as	it	should	be.	It
would	be	ridiculous	to	do	the	buildout	until	private	firms	see	the	likelihood	of
a	return	on	their	investment.	I	think	investors	will	become	confident	of	such	a
return	as	innovators	bring	new	ideas	to	the	trials.	Once	investors	begin	to
understand	the	new	applications	and	services	and	the	potential	financial
payback	for	the	highway	infrastructure	is	proven,	there	will	be	little	trouble
raising	the	necessary	capital.	The	outlay	will	be	no	greater	than	that	for	other
infrastructures	we	take	for	granted.	The	roads,	water	mains,	sewers,	and

electrical	connections	that	run	to	a	house	each	costs	as	much.
I'm	optimistic.	The	growth	of	the	Internet	over	the	past	few	years	suggests
that	highway	applications	will	quickly	become	extremely	popular	and	justify
large	investments.	The	"Internet"	refers	to	a	group	of	computers	connected
together,	using	standard	"protocols"	(descriptions	of	technologies)	to
exchange	information.	It's	a	long	way	from	being	the	highway,	but	it's	the
closest	approximation	we	have	today,	and	will	evolve	into	the	highway.
The	popularity	of	the	Internet	is	the	most	important	single	development	in	the
world	of	computing	since	the	IBM	PC	was	introduced	in	1981.	The	PC
analogy	is	apt	for	many	reasons.	The	PC	wasn't	perfect.	Aspects	of	it	were
arbitrary	or	even	poor.	Despite	that,	its	popularity	grew	to	the	point	where	it
became	the	standard	for	applications	development.	Companies	that	tried	to
fight	the	PC	standards	often	had	good	reasons	for	doing	so,	but	their	efforts
failed	because	so	many	other	companies	were	continuing	to	work	to	try	and
improve	the	PC.
Today's	Internet	is	made	up	of	a	loose	collection	of	interconnecting
commercial	and	noncommercial	computer	networks,	including	on-line
information	services	to	which	users	subscribe.	Servers	are	scattered	around
the	world,	linked	to	the	Internet	on	a	variety	of	high-	and	low-capacity	paths.
Most	consumers	use	personal	computers	to	plug	into	the	system	through	the
telephone	network,	which	has	a	low	bandwidth======================================================== tomers,	we
have	a	chance	to	continue	to	lead	the	way.	We	can	certainly	keep	providing
better	and	better	software	to	make	the	PC	a	universally	empowering	tool.	I
often	say	I	have	the	best	job	in	the	world,	and	I	mean	it.
I	think	this	is	a	wonderful	time	to	be	alive.	There	have	never	been	so	many
opportunities	to	do	things	that	were	impossible	before.	It's	also	the	best	time
ever	to	start	new	companies,	advance	sciences	such	as	medicine	that	improve
quality	of	life,	and	stay	in	touch	with	friends	and	relatives.	It's	important	that

both	the	good	and	bad	points	of	the	technological	advances	be	discussed
broadly	so	that	society	as	a	whole,	rather	than	just	technologists,	can	guide	its
direction.
Now	it's	back	to	you.	I	explained	in	the	Foreword	that	I	was	writing	this	book
to	help	get	a	dialogue	started	and	to	call	attention	to	a	number	of	the
opportunities	and	issues	that	individuals,	companies,	and	nations	will	face.
My	hope	is	that	after	reading	this	book	you	will	share	some	of	my	optimism,
and	will	join	the	discussion	about	how	we	should	be	shaping	the	future.======================================================== oduct	of	two	primes
would	take	millions	of	years	to	factor	with	any	foreseeable	amount	of	future
computing	power.	But	who	really	knows.	This	uncertainty—and	the	unlikely
but	conceivable	possibility	that	someone	could	come	up	with	an	easy	way	of
factoring	big	numbers—means	that	a	software	platform	for	the	information
highway	will	have	to	be	designed	in	such	a	way	that	its	encryption	scheme
can	be	changed	readily.
One	thing	we	don't	have	to	worry	about	is	running	out	of	prime	numbers,	or
the	prospect	of	two	computers'	accidentally	using	the	same	numbers	as	keys.
There	are	far	more	prime	numbers	of	appropriate	length	than	there	are	atoms
in	the	universe,	so	the	chance	of	an	accidental	duplication	is	vanishingly
small.
Key	encryption	allows	more	than	just	privacy.	It	can	also	assure	the
authenticity	of	a	document	because	a	private	key	can	be	used	to	encode	a
message	that	only	the	public	key	can	decode.	It	works	like	this:	If	I	have
information	I	want	to	sign	before	sending	it	to	you,	my	computer	uses	my
private	key	to	encipher	it.	Now	the	message	can	be	read	only	if	my	public	key
—which	you	and	everyone	else	knows—is	used	to	decipher	it.	This	message
is	verifiably	from	me,	because	no	one	else	has	the	private	key	that	could	have
encrypted	it	in	this	way.
My	computer	takes	this	enciphered	message	and	enciphers	it	again,	this	time
using	your	public	key.	Then	it	sends	this	double-coded	message	to	you	across
the	information	highway.
Your	computer	receives	the	message	and	uses	your	private	key	to	decipher	it.
This	removes	the	second	level	of	encoding	but	leaves	the	level	I	applied	with
my	private	key.	Then	your	computer	uses	my	public	key	to	decipher	the
message	again.	Because	it	really	is	from	me,	the	message	deciphers	correctly
and	you	know	it	is	authentic.	If	even	one	bit	of	information	was	changed,	the
message	would	not	decode	properly	and	the	tampering	or	communications
error	would	be	apparent.	This	extraordinary	security	will	enable	you	to
transact	business	with	strangers	or	even	people	you	distrust,	because	you'll	be
able	to	be	sure	that	digital	money	is	valid	and	signatures	and	documents	are
provably	authentic.
Security	can	be	increased	further	by	having	time	stamps	incorporated	into
encrypted	messages.	If	anyone	tries	to	tinker	with	the	time	that	a	document

supposedly	was	written	or	sent,	the	tinkering	will	be	detectable.	This	will
rehabilitate	the	evidentiary	value	of	photographs	and	videos,	which	has	been
under	assault	because	digital	retouching	has	become	so	easy	to	do.
My	description	of	public-key	encryption	oversimplifies	the	technical	details
of	the	system.	For	one	thing,	because	it	is	relatively	slow,	it	will	not	be	the
only	form	of	encipherment	used	on	the	highway.	But	public-key	encryption
will	be	the	way	that	documents	are	signed,	authenticity	is	established,	and	the
keys	to	other	kinds	of	encryption	are	distributed	securely.
The	major	benefit	of	the	PC	revolution	has	been	the	way	it	has	empowered
people.	The	highway's	low-cost	communications	will	empower	in	an	even
more	fundamental	way.	The	beneficiaries	won't	just	be	technology-oriented
individuals.	As	more	and	more	computers	are	connected	to	high-bandwidth
networks,	and	as	software	platforms	provide	a	foundation	for	great
applications,	everyone	will	have	access	to	most	of	the	world's	information.

6
THE	CONTENT
REVOLUTION
For	more	than	500	years,	the	bulk	of	human	knowledge	and	information	has
been	stored	as	paper	documents.	You've	got	one	in	your	hands	right	now
(unless	you're	reading	this	from	the	CD-ROM	or	a	future	on-line	edition).
Paper	will	be	with	us	indefinitely,	but	its	importance	as	a	means	of	finding,
preserving,	and	distributing	information	is	already	diminishing.
When	you	think	of	a	"document"	you	probably	visualize	pieces	of	paper	with
something	printed	on	them,	but	that	is	a	narrow	definition.	A	document	can	be
any	body	of	information.	A	newspaper	article	is	a	document,	but	the	broadest
definition	also	includes	a	television	show,	a	song,	or	an	interactive	video
game.	Because	all	information	can	be	stored	in	a	digital	form,	documents	will
be	easy	to	find,	store,	and	send	on	the	highway.	Paper	is	harder	to	transmit
and	very	limiting	if	the	contents	are	more	than	text	with	drawings	and	images.
Future	digitally	stored	documents	will	include	pictures,	audio,	programming
instructions	for	interactivity,	and	animation,	or	a	combination	of	these	and
other	elements.
On	the	information	highway,	rich	electronic	documents	will	be	able	to	do
things	no	piece	of	paper	can.	The	highway's	powerful	database	technology
will	allow	them	to	be	indexed	and	retrieved	using	interactive	exploration.	It
will	be	extremely	cheap	and	easy	to	distribute	them.	In	short,	these	new
digital	documents	will	replace	many	printed	paper	ones	because	they	will	be
able	to	help	us	in	new	ways.
But	not	for	quite	some	time.	The	paper-based	book,	magazine,	or	newspaper
still	has	a	lot	of	advantages	over	its	digital	counterpart.	To	read	a	digital
document	you	need	an	information	appliance	such	as	a	personal	computer.	A
book	is	small,	lightweight,	high-resolution,	and	inexpensive	compared	to	the
cost	of	a	computer.	For	at	least	a	decade	it	won't	be	as	convenient	to	read	a
long,	sequential	document	on	a	computer	screen	as	on	paper.	The	first	digital
documents	to	achieve	widespread	use	will	do	so	by	offering	new	functionality
rather	than	simply	duplicating	the	older	medium.	A	television	set	is	also
larger,	more	expensive,	more	cumbersome,	and	lower	resolution	than	a	book
or	magazine,	but	that	hasn't	limited	its	popularity.	Television	brought	video

entertainment	into	our	homes,	and	it	was	so	compelling	that	television	sets
found	their	place	alongside	books	and	magazines.
Ultimately,	incremental	improvements	in	computer	and	screen	technology
will	give	us	a	lightweight,	universal	electronic	book,	or	"e-book,"	which	will
approximate	today's	paper	book.	Inside	a	case	roughly	the	same	size	and
weight	as	today's	hardcover	or	paperback	book,	you'll	have	a	display	that	can
show	high-resolution	text,	pictures,	and	video.	You'll	be	able	to	flip	pages
with	your	finger	or	use	voice	commands	to	search	for	the	passages	you	want.
Any	document	on	the	network	will	be	accessible	from	such	a	device.
The	real	point	of	electronic	documents	is	not	simply	that	we	will	read	them	on
hardware	devices.	Going	from	paper	book	to	e-book	is	just	the	final	stage	of	a
process	already	well	under	way.	The	exciting	aspect	of	digital	documentation
is	the	redefinition	of	the	document	itself.
This	will	cause	dramatic	repercussions.	We	will	have	to	rethink	not	only	what
is	meant	by	the	term	"document,"	but	also	by	"author,"	"publisher,"	"office,"
"classroom,"	and	"textbook."
Today,	if	two	companies	are	negotiating	a	contract,	the	first	draft	is	probably
typed	into	a	computer,	then	printed	on	paper.	Chances	are	it	is	then	faxed	to
the	other	party,	who	edits,	amends,	and	alters	it	by	writing	on	the	paper	or	by
reentering	the	changed	document	into	another	computer,	from	which	it	is
printed.	He	then	faxes	it	back;	the	changes	are	incorporated;	a	new	paper
document	is	printed	and	faxed	back	again;	and	the	editing	process	is	repeated.
During	this	transaction	it	is	hard	to	tell	who	made	which	changes.
Coordinating	all	the	alterations	and	transmittals	introduces	a	lot	of	overhead.
Electronic	documents	can	simplify	this	process	by	allowing	a	version	of	the
contract	to	be	passed	back	and	forth	with	corrections	and	annotations	and
indications	who	made	them	and	when	printed	alongside	the	original	text.
Within	a	few	years	the	digital	document,	complete	with	authenticatable	digital
signatures,	will	be	the	original,	and	paper	printouts	will	be	secondary.	Already
many	businesses	are	advancing	beyond	paper	and	fax	machines	and
exchanging	editable	documents,	computer	to	computer,	through	electronic
mail.	This	book	would	have	been	much	harder	to	write	without	e-mail.
Readers	whose	opinions	I	was	soliciting	were	sent	drafts	electronically,	and	it
was	helpful	to	be	able	to	look	at	the	suggested	revisions	and	see	who	had
made	them	and	when.
By	the	end	of	the	decade	a	significant	percentage	of	documents,	even	in
offices,	won't	even	be	fully	printable	on	paper.	They	will	be	like	a	movie	or	a

song	is	today.	You	will	still	be	able	to	print	a	two-dimensional	view	of	its
content,	but	it	will	be	like	reading	a	musical	score	instead	of	experiencing	an
audio	recording.
Some	documents	are	so	superior	in	digital	form	that	the	paper	version	is
rarely	used.	Boeing	decided	to	design	its	new	777	jetliner	using	a	gigantic
electronic	document	to	hold	all	the	engineering	information.	To	coordinate
collaboration	among	the	design	teams,	manufacturing	groups	and	outside
contractors	during	development	of	previous	airplanes,	Boeing	had	used
blueprints	and	constructed	an	expensive	full-scale	mock-up	of	the	airplane.
The	mock-up	had	been	necessary	to	make	sure	that	parts	of	the	airplane,
designed	by	different	engineers,	actually	fit	together	properly.	During
development	of	the	777,	Boeing	did	away	with	blueprints	and	the	mock-up
and	from	the	start	used	an	electronic	document	that	contained	digital	3-D
models	of	all	the	parts	and	how	they	fit	together.	Engineers	at	computer
terminals	were	able	to	look	at	the	design	and	see	different	views	of	the
content.	They	could	track	the	progress	in	any	area,	search	for	interesting	test
results,	annotate	with	cost	information,	and	change	any	part	of	the	design	in
ways	that	would	be	impossible	on	paper.	Each	person,	working	with	the	same
data,	was	able	to	look	for	what	specifically	concerned	him.	Every	change
could	be	shared,	and	everyone	could	see	who	made	any	change,	when	it	was
made,	and	why.	Boeing	was	able	to	save	hundreds	of	thousands	of	pieces	of
paper	and	many	person-years	of	drafting	and	copying	by	using	digital
documents.
Digital	documents	can	also	be	faster	to	work	with	than	paper.	You	can
transmit	information	instantly	and	retrieve	it	almost	as	quickly.	Those	using
digital	documents	are	already	discovering	how	much	sim======================================================== will	connect	to	the	wireless	part	of	the	highway,	a	switch	will
connect	that	to	the	wired	part,	and	then	to	the	computer/server	in	your	home
or	office	and	bring	you	the	information	you	asked	for.
There	will	also	be	local,	less	expensive	kinds	of	wireless	networks	available
inside	businesses	and	most	homes.	These	networks	will	allow	you	to	connect
to	the	highway	or	your	own	computer	system	without	paying	time	charges	so
long	as	you	are	within	a	certain	range.	Local	wireless	networks	will	use
technology	different	from	the	one	used	by	the	wide-area	wireless	networks.
However,	portable	information	devices	will	automatically	select	the	least
expensive	network	they	are	able	to	connect	to,	so	the	user	won't	be	aware	of
the	technological	differences.	The	indoor	wireless	networks	will	allow	wallet
PCs	to	be	used	in	place	of	remote	controls.
Wireless	service	poses	obvious	concerns	about	privacy	and	security,	because
radio	signals	can	easily	be	intercepted.	Even	wired	networks	can	be	tapped.
The	highway	software	will	have	to	encrypt	transmission	to	avoid
eavesdropping.
Governments	have	long	understood	the	importance	of	keeping	information
private,	for	both	economic	and	military	reasons.	The	need	to	make	personal,
commercial,	military,	or	diplomatic	messages	secure	(or	to	break	into	them)
has	attracted	powerful	intellects	through	the	generations.	It	is	very	satisfying
to	break	an	encoded	message.	Charles	Babbage,	who	made	dramatic	advances
in	the	art	of	code	breaking	in	the	mid-1800s,	wrote:	"Deciphering	is,	in	my
opinion,	one	of	the	most	fascinating	of	arts,	and	I	fear	I	have	wasted	upon	it
more	time	than	it	deserves."	I	discovered	its	fascination	as	a	kid	when,	like
kids	everywhere,	a	bunch	of	us	played	with	simple	ciphers.	We	would	encode
messages	by	substituting	one	letter	of	the	alphabet	for	another.	If	a	friend	sent
me	a	cipher	that	began	"ULFW	NZXX"	it	would	be	fairly	easy	to	guess	that
this	represented	"DEAR	BILL,"	and	that	U	stood	for	D,	and	L	for	E,	and	so
forth.	With	those	seven	letters	it	wasn't	hard	to	unravel	the	rest	of	the	cipher
fairly	quickly.

Past	wars	have	been	won	or	lost	because	the	most	powerful	governments	on
earth	didn't	have	the	cryptological	power	any	interested	junior	high	school
student	with	a	personal	computer	can	harness	today.	Soon	any	child	old
enough	to	use	a	computer	will	be	able	to	transmit	encoded	messages	that	no
government	on	earth	will	find	easy	to	decipher.	This	is	one	of	the	profound
implications	of	the	spread	of	fantastic	computing	power.
When	you	send	a	message	across	the	information	highway	it	will	be	"signed"
by	your	computer	or	other	information	appliance	with	a	digital	signature	that
only	you	are	capable	of	applying,	and	it	will	be	encrypted	so	that	only	the
intended	recipient	will	be	able	to	decipher	it.	You'll	send	a	message,	which
could	be	information	of	any	kind,	including	voice,	video,	or	digital	money.
The	recipient	will	be	able	to	be	almost	positive	that	the	message	is	really	from
you,	that	it	was	sent	at	exactly	the	indicated	time,	that	it	has	not	been
tampered	with	in	the	slightest,	and	that	others	cannot	decipher	it.
The	mechanism	that	will	make	this	possible	is	based	on	mathematical
principles,	including	what	are	called	"one-way	functions"	and	"public-key
encryption."	These	are	quite	advanced	concepts,	so	I'm	only	going	to	touch	on
them.	Keep	in	mind	that	regardless	of	how	complicated	the	system	is
technically,	it	will	be	extremely	easy	for	you	to	use.	You'll	just	tell	your
information	appliance	what	you	want	it	to	do	and	it	will	seem	to	happen
effortlessly.
A	one-way	function	is	something	that	is	much	easier	to	do	than	undo.
Breaking	a	pane	of	glass	is	a	one-way	function,	but	not	one	useful	for
encoding.	The	sort	of	one-way	function	required	for	cryptography	is	one	that
is	easy	to	undo	if	you	know	an	extra	piece	of	information	and	very	difficult	to
undo	without	that	information.	There	are	a	number	of	such	one-way	functions
in	mathematics.	One	involves	prime	numbers.	Kids	learn	about	prime
numbers	in	school.	A	prime	number	cannot	be	divided	evenly	by	any	number
except	1	and	itself.	Among	the	first	dozen	numbers,	the	primes	are	2,	3,	5,	7,
and	11.	The	numbers	4,	6,	8,	and	10	are	not	prime	because	2	divides	into	each
of	them	evenly.	The	number	9	is	not	prime	because	3	divides	into	it	evenly.
There	are	an	infinite	number	of	prime	numbers,	and	there	is	no	known	pattern
to	them	except	that	they	are	prime.	When	you	multiply	two	prime	numbers
together,	you	get	a	number	that	can	be	divided	evenly	only	by	those	same	two
primes.	For	example,	only	5	and	7	can	be	divided	evenly	into	35.	Finding	the
primes	is	called	"factoring"	the	number.
It	is	easy	to	multiply	the	prime	numbers	11,927	and	20,903	and	get	the
number	249,310,081,	but	it	is	much	harder	to	recover	from	the	product,

249,310,081,	the	two	prime	numbers	that	are	its	factors.	This	one-way
function,	the	difficulty	of	factoring	numbers,	underlies	an	ingenious	kind	of
cipher:	the	most	sophisticated	encryption	system	in	use	today.	It	takes	a	long
time	for	even	the	largest	computers	to	factor	a	really	large	product	back	into
its	constituent	primes.	A	coding	system	based	on	factoring	uses	two	different
decoding	keys,	one	to	encipher	a	message	and	a	different	but	related	one	to
decipher.	With	only	the	enciphering	key,	it's	easy	to	encode	a	message,	but
deciphering	it	within	any	practical	period	of	time	is	nearly	impossible.
Deciphering	requires	a	separate	key,	available	only	to	the	intended	recipient
of	the	message—or,	rather,	to	the	recipient's	computer.	The	enciphering	key	is
based	on	the	product	of	two	huge	prime	numbers,	whereas	the	deciphering
key	is	based	on	the	primes	themselves.	A	computer	can	generate	a	new	pair	of
unique	keys	in	a	flash,	because	it	is	easy	for	a	computer	to	generate	two	large
prime	numbers	and	multiply	them	together.	The	enciphering	key	thus	created
can	be	made	public	without	appreciable	risk,	because	of	the	difficulty	even
another	computer	would	have	factoring	it	to	obtain	the	deciphering	key.
The	practical	application	of	this	encryption	will	be	at	the	center	of	the
information	highway's	security	system.	The	world	will	become	quite	reliant
on	this	network,	so	it	is	important	that	security	be	handled	competently.	You
can	think	of	the	information	highway	as	a	postal	network	where	everyone	has
a	mailbox	that	is	impervious	to	tampering	and	has	an	unbreakable	lock.	Each
mailbox	has	a	slot	that	lets	anyone	slide	information	in,	but	only	the	owner	of
a	mailbox	has	the	key	to	get	information	out.	(Some	governments	may	insist
that	each	mailbox	have	a	second	door	with	a	separate	key	that	the	government
keeps,	but	we'll	ignore	that	political	consideration	for	now	and	concentrate	on
the	security	that	software	will	provide.)
Each	user's	computer	or	other	information	appliance	will	use	prime	numbers
to	generate	an	enciphering	key,	which	will	be	listed	publicly,	and	a
corresponding	deciphering	key,	which	only	the	user	will	know.	This	is	how	it
will	work	in	practice:	I	have	information	I	want	to	send	you.	My	information
appliance/computer	system	looks	up	your	public	key	and	uses	it	to	encrypt	the
information	before	sending	it.	No	one	can	read	the	message,	even	though	your
key	is	public	knowledge,	because	your	public	key	does	not	contain	the
information	needed	for	decryption.	You	receive	the	message	and	your
computer	decrypts	it	with	a	private	key	that	corresponds	to	your	public	key.
You	want	to	answer.	Your	computer	looks	up	my	public	key	and	uses	it	to
encrypt	your	reply.	No	one	else	can	read	the	message,	even	though	it	was
encrypted	with	a	key	that	is	totally	public.	Only	I	can	read	it	because	only	I
have	the	private	deciphering	key.	This	is	very	practical,	because	no	one	has	to

trade	keys	in	advance.
How	big	do	the	prime	numbers	and	their	products	have	to	be	to	ensure	an
effective	one-way	function?.
The	concept	of	public-key	encryption	was	invented	by	Whitfield	Diffie	and
Martin	Hellman	in	1977.	Another	set	of	computer	scientists,	Ron	Rivest,	Adi
Shamir,	and	Leonard	Adelman,	soon	came	up	with	the	notion	of	using	prime
factorization	as	part	of	what	is	now	known	as	the	RSA	cryptosystem,	after	the
initials	of	their	last	names.	They	projected	that	it	would	take	millions	of	years
to	factor	a	130-digit	number	that	was	the	product	of	two	primes,	regardless	of
how	much	computing	power	was	brought	to	bear.	To	prove	the	point,	they
challenged	the	world	to	find	the	two	factors	in	this	129-digit	number,	known
to	people	in	the	field	as	RSA	129:
114,381,625,757,888,867,669,235,779,976,146,612,010,218,296,
721,242,362,562,561,842,935,706,935,245,733,897,830,597,123,563,958,705,058,989,075,147,599,29.0,026,879,543,541
They	were	sure	that	a	message	they	had	encrypted	using	the	number	as	the
public	key	would	be	totally	secure	forever.	But	they	hadn't	anticipated	either
the	full	effects	of	Moore's	Law,	as	discussed	in	chapter	2,	which	has	made
computers	much	more	powerful,	or	the	success	of	the	personal	computer,
which	has	dramatically	increased	the	number	of	computers	and	computer
users	in	the	world.	In	1993	a	group	of	more	than	600	academics	and	hobbyists
from	around	the	world	began	an	assault	on	the	129-digit	number,	using	the
Internet	to	coordinate	the	work	of	various	computers.	In	less	than	a	year	they
factored	the	number	into	two	primes,	one	64	digits	long	and	the	other	65.	The
primes	are	as	follows:
3,490,529,510,847,650,949,147,849,619,903,898,133,417,764,638,
493,387,843,990,820,577
and
32,769,132,993,266,709,549,961,988,190,834,461,413,177,642,
967,992,942,539,798,288,533
And	the	encoded	message	says:	"The	magic	words	are	squeamish	and
ossifrage."
One	lesson	that	came	out	of	this	challenge	is	that	a	129-digit	public	key	is	not
long	enough	if	the	information	being	encrypted	is	really	important	and
sensitive.	Another	is	that	no	one	should	get	too	cocksure	about	the	security	of

encryption.
Increasing	the	key	just	a	few	digits	makes	it	much	more	difficult	to	crack.
Mathematicians	today	believe	that	a	250-digit-long	pr======================================================== means	to	be
"educated"	will	be	transformed,	perhaps	almost	beyond	recognition.	Your
sense	of	identity,	of	who	you	are	and	where	you	belong,	may	open	up
considerably.	In	short,	just	about	everything	will	be	done	differently.	I	can
hardly	wait	for	this	tomorrow,	and	I'm	doing	what	I	can	to	help	make	it

happen.
You	aren't	sure	you	believe	this?	Or	want	to	believe	it?	Perhaps	you'll	decline
to	participate.	People	commonly	make	this	vow	when	some	new	technology
threatens	to	change	what	they're	familiar	and	comfortable	with.	At	first,	the
bicycle	was	a	silly	contraption;	the	automobile,	a	noisy	intruder;	the	pocket
calculator,	a	threat	to	the	study	of	mathematics;	and	the	radio,	the	end	of
literacy.
But	then	something	happens.	Over	time,	these	machines	find	a	place	in	our
everyday	lives	because	they	not	only	offer	convenience	and	save	labor,	they
can	also	inspire	us	to	new	creative	heights.	We	warm	to	them.	They	assume	a
trusted	place	beside	our	other	tools.	A	new	generation	grows	up	with	them,
changing	and	humanizing	them.	In	short,	playing	with	them.
The	telephone	was	a	major	advance	in	two-way	communication.	But	at	first,
even	it	was	denounced	as	nothing	more	than	a	nuisance.	People	were	made
uncomfortable	and	awkward	by	this	mechanical	invader	in	their	homes.
Eventually,	though,	men	and	women	realized	they	were	not	just	getting	a	new
machine,	they	were	learning	a	new	kind	of	communication.	A	chat	on	the
telephone	wasn't	as	long	or	as	formal	as	a	face-to-face	conversation.	There
was	an	unfamiliar	and,	for	many,	an	off-putting	efficiency	to	it.	Before	the
phone,	any	good	talk	entailed	a	visit	and	probably	a	meal,	and	one	could
expect	to	spend	a	full	afternoon	or	evening.	Once	most	businesses	and
households	had	telephones,	users	created	ways	to	take	advantage	of	the
unique	characteristics	of	this	means	of	communicating.	As	it	flourished,	its
own	special	expressions,	tricks,	etiquette,	and	culture	developed.	Alexander
Graham	Bell	certainly	wouldn't	have	anticipated	the	silly	executive	game	of
"Have	My	Secretary	Get	Him	Onto	the	Line	Before	Me."	As	I	write,	a	newer
form	of	communication—electronic	mail,	or	e-mail—is	undergoing	the	same
sort	of	process:	establishing	its	own	rules	and	habits.
"Little	by	little,	the	machine	will	become	a	part	of	humanity,"	the	French
aviator	and	author	Antoine	de	Saint-Exupéry	wrote	in	his	1939	memoir,	Wind,
Sand,	and	Stars.	He	was	writing	about	the	way	people	tend	to	react	to	new
technology	and	using	the	slow	embrace	of	the	railroad	in	the	nineteenth
century	as	an	example.	He	described	the	way	the	smoke-belching,
demonically	loud	engines	of	the	primitive	locomotives	were	decried	at	first	as
iron	monsters.	Then	as	more	tracks	were	laid,	towns	built	train	stations.
Goods	and	services	flowed.	Interesting	new	jobs	became	available.	A	culture
grew	up	around	this	novel	form	of	transportation,	and	disdain	became
acceptance,	even	approval.	What	had	once	been	the	iron	monster	became	the

mighty	bearer	of	life's	best	products.	Again,	the	change	in	our	perception	was
reflected	in	the	language	we	used.	We	began	calling	it	"the	iron	horse."	"What
is	it	today	for	the	villager	except	a	humble	friend	who	calls	every	evening	at
six?"	Saint-Exupéry	asked.
The	only	other	single	shift	that	has	had	as	great	an	effect	on	the	history	of
communication	took	place	in	about	1450,	when	Johann	Gutenberg,	a
goldsmith	from	Mainz,	Germany,	invented	movable	type	and	introduced	the
first	printing	press	to	Europe	(China	and	Korea	already	had	presses).	That
event	changed	Western	culture	forever.	It	took	Gutenberg	two	years	to
compose	the	type	for	his	first	Bible,	but	once	that	was	done,	he	could	print
multiple	copies.	Before	Gutenberg,	all	books	were	copied	by	hand.	Monks,
who	usually	did	the	copying,	seldom	managed	more	than	one	text	a	year.
Gutenberg's	press	was	a	high-speed	laser	printer	by	comparison.
The	printing	press	did	more	than	just	give	the	West	a	faster	way	to	reproduce
a	book.	Until	that	time,	despite	the	passing	generations,	life	had	been
communal	and	nearly	unchanging.	Most	people	knew	only	about	what	they
had	seen	themselves	or	been	told.	Few	strayed	far	from	their	villages,	in	part
because	without	reliable	maps	it	was	often	nearly	impossible	to	find	the	way
home.	As	James	Burke,	a	favorite	author	of	mine,	put	it:	"In	this	world	all
experience	was	personal:	horizons	were	small,	the	community	was	inward-
looking.	What	existed	in	the	outside	world	was	a	matter	of	hearsay."
The	printed	word	changed	all	that.	It	was	the	first	mass	medium—the	first
time	that	knowledge,	opinions,	and	experiences	could	be	passed	on	in	a
portable,	durable,	and	available	form.	As	the	written	word	extended	the
population's	reach	far	beyond	a	village,	people	began	to	care	about	what	was
happening	elsewhere.	Printing	shops	quickly	sprang	up	in	commercial	cities
and	became	centers	of	intellectual	exchange.	Literacy	became	an	important
skill	that	revolutionized	education	and	altered	social	structures.
Before	Gutenberg,	there	were	only	about	30,000	books	on	the	entire	continent
of	Europe,	nearly	all	Bibles	or	biblical	commentary.	By	1500,	there	were
more	than	9	million,	on	all	sorts	of	topics.	Handbills	and	other	printed	matter
affected	politics,	religion,	science,	and	literature.	For	the	first	time,	those
outside	the	canonical	elite	had	access	to	written	information.
The	information	highway	will	transform	our	culture	as	dramatically	as
Gutenberg's	press	did	the	Middle	Ages.
Personal	computers	have	already	altered	work	habits,	but	they	haven't	really
changed	our	lives	much	yet.	When	tomorrow's	powerful	information

machines	are	connected	on	the	highway,	people,	machines,	entertainment,	and
information	services	will	all	be	accessible.	You	will	be	able	to	stay	in	touch
with	anyone,	anywhere,	who	wants	to	stay	in	touch	with	you;	to	browse
through	any	of	thousands	of	libraries,	day	or	night.	Your	misplaced	or	stolen
camera	will	send	you	a	message	telling	you	exactly	where	it	is,	even	if	it's	in	a
different	city.	You'll	be	able	to	answer	your	apartment	intercom	from	your
office,	or	answer	any	mail	from	your	home.	Information	that	today	is	difficult
to	retrieve	will	be	easy	to	find:
Is	your	bus	running	on	time?
Are	there	any	accidents	right	now	on	the	route	you	usually	take
to	the	office?
Does	anyone	want	to	trade	his	or	her	Thursday	theater	tickets	for
your	Wednesday	tickets?
What	is	your	child's	school-attendance	record?
What's	a,	good	recipe	for	halibut?
Which	store,	anywhere,	can	deliver	by	tomorrow	morning	for	the	lowest
price	a	wristwatch	that	takes	your	pulse?
What	would	someone	pay	for	my	old	Mustang	convertible?
How	is	the	hole	in	a	needle	manufactured?
Are	your	shirts	ready	yet	at	the	laundry?
What's	the	cheapest	way	to	subscribe	to	The	Wall	Street	Journal?
What	are	the	symptoms	of	a	heart	attack?
Was	there	any	interesting	testimony	at	the	county	courthouse
today?
Do	fish	see	in	color?
What	does	the	Champs-Elysées	look	like	right	now?

Where	were	you	at	9:02	P.M.	last	Thursday?
Let's	say	you're	thinking	about	trying	a	new	restaurant	and	want	to	see	its
menu,	wine	list,	and	specials	of	the	day.	Maybe	you're	wondering	what	your
favorite	food	reviewer	said	about	it.	You	may	also	want	to	know	what
sanitation	score	the	health	department	gave	the	place.	If	you're	leery	of	the
restaurant's	neighborhood,	perhaps	you'll	want	to	see	a	safety	rating	based	on
police	reports.	Still	interested	in	going?	You'll	want	reservations,	a	map,	and
driving	instructions	based	on	current	traffic	conditions.	Take	the	instructions
in	printed	form	or	have	them	read	to	you—and	updated—as	you	drive.
All	of	this	information	will	be	readily	accessible	and	completely	personal,
because	you'll	be	able	to	explore	whatever	parts	of	it	interest	you	in	whatever
ways	and	for	however	long	you	want.	You'll	watch	a	program	when	it's
convenient	for	you,	instead	of	when	a	broadcaster	chooses	to	air	it.	You'll
shop,	order	food,	contact	fellow	hobbyists,	or	publish	information	for	others
to	use	when	and	as	you	want	to.	Your	nightly	newscast	will	start	at	a	time	you
determine	and	last	exactly	as	long	as	you	want	it	to.	It	will	cover	subjects
selected	by	you	or	by	a	service	that	knows	your	interests.	You'll	be	able	to	ask
for	reports	from	Tokyo	or	Boston	or	Seattle,	request	more	detail	on	a	news
item,	or	inquire	whether	your	favorite	columnist	has	commented	on	an	event.
And	if	you	prefer,	your	news	will	be	delivered	to	you	on	paper.
Change	of	this	magnitude	makes	people	nervous.	Every	day,	all	over	the
world,	people	are	asking	about	the	implications	of	the	network,	often	with
terrible	apprehension.	What	will	happen	to	our	jobs?	Will	people	withdraw
from	the	physical	world	and	live	vicariously	through	their	computers?	Will
the	gulf	between	the	haves	and	have-nots	widen	irreparably?	Will	a	computer
be	able	to	help	the	disenfranchised	in	East	St.	Louis	or	the	starving	in
Ethiopia?	There	are	some	major	challenges	that	will	come	with	the	network
and	the	changes	it	will	bring.	In	chapter	12,	I	talk	at	length	about	the	many
legitimate	concerns	I	hear	expressed	again	and	again.
I've	thought	about	the	difficulties	and	find	that,	on	balance,	I'm	confident	and
optimistic.	Partly	this	is	just	the	way	I	am,	and	partly	it's	because	I'm
enthusiastic	about	what	my	generation,	which	came	of	age	the	same	time	the
computer	did,	will	be	able	to	do.	We'll	be	giving	people	tools	to	use	to	reach
out	in	new	ways.	I'm	someone	who	believes	that	because	progress	will	come
no	matter	what,	we	need	to	make	the	best	of	it.	I'm	still	thrilled	by	the	feeling
that	I'm	squinting	into	the	future	and	catching	that	first	revealing	hint	of
revolutionary	possibilities.	I	feel	incredibly	lucky	that	I	am	getting	the	chance
to	play	a	part	in	the	beginning	of	an	epochal	change	for	a	second	time.

I	first	experienced	this	particular	euphoria	as	a	teenager	when	I	understood
how	inexpensive	and	powerful	computers	would	become.	The	computer	we
played	tic-tac-toe	on	in	1968	and	most	computers	at	that	time	were
mainframes:	temp======================================================== ical	records
before	determining	whether	it	chooses	to	insure	our	mortality.	These
companies	may	also	want	to	know	if	we	indulge	in	any	dangerous	pastimes,
such	as	hang	gliding,	smoking,	or	stock	car	racing.	Should	an	insurer's
computer	be	allowed	to	examine	the	information	highway	for	records	of	our
purchases	to	see	if	there	are	any	that	might	indicate	risky	behavior	on	our
part?	Should	a	prospective	employer's	computer	be	allowed	to	examine	our
communications	or	entertainment	records	to	develop	a	psychological	profile?
How	much	information	should	a	federal,	state,	or	city	agency	be	allowed	to
see?	What	should	a	potential	landlord	be	able	to	learn	about	you?	What
information	should	a	potential	spouse	have	access	to?	We	will	need	to	define
both	the	legal	and	practical	limits	of	privacy.
These	privacy	fears	revolve	around	the	possibility	that	someone	else	is
keeping	track	of	information	about	you.	But	the	highway	will	also	make	it
possible	for	an	individual	to	keep	track	of	his	or	her	own	whereabouts—to
lead	what	we	might	call	"a	documented	life"
Your	wallet	PC	will	be	able	to	keep	audio,	time,	location,	and	eventually	even
video	records	of	everything	that	happens	to	you.	It	will	be	able	to	record
every	word	you	say	and	every	word	said	to	you,	as	well	as	body	temperature,

blood	pressure,	barometric	pressure,	and	a	variety	of	other	data	about	you	and
your	surroundings.	It	will	be	able	to	track	your	interactions	with	the	highway
—all	of	the	commands	you	issue,	the	messages	you	send,	and	the	people	you
call	or	who	call	you.	The	resulting	record	will	be	the	ultimate	diary	and
autobiography,	if	you	want	one.	If	nothing	else,	you	would	know	exactly
when	and	where	you	took	a	photograph	when	you	organize	your	family's
digital	photo	album.
The	technology	required	is	not	difficult.	It	should	soon	be	possible	to
compress	the	human	voice	down	to	a	few	thousand	bits	of	digital	information
per	second,	which	means	that	an	hour	of	conversation	will	be	converted	into
about	1	megabyte	of	digital	data.	Small	tapes	used	for	backing	up	computer
hard	disks	already	store	10	gigabytes	or	more	of	data—enough	to	record
about	10,000	hours	of	compressed	audio.	Tapes	for	new	generations	of	digital
VCRs	will	hold	more	than	100	gigabytes,	which	means	that	a	single	tape
costing	a	few	dollars	could	hold	recordings	of	all	the	conversations	an
individual	has	over	the	course	of	a	decade	or	possibly	even	a	lifetime—
depending	on	how	talkative	he	is.	These	numbers	are	based	only	on	today's
capacities—in	the	future	storage	will	be	much	cheaper.	Audio	is	easy,	but
within	a	couple	of	years	a	full	video	recording	will	be	possible	as	well.
I	find	the	prospect	of	documented	lives	a	little	chilling,	but	some	people	will
warm	to	the	idea.	One	reason	for	documenting	a	life	will	be	defensive.	We
can	think	of	the	wallet	PC	as	an	alibi	machine,	because	encrypted	digital
signatures	will	guarantee	an	unforgeable	alibi	against	false	accusations.	If
someone	ever	accused	you	of	something,	you	could	retort:	"Hey,	buddy,	I
have	a	documented	life.	These	bits	are	stored	away.	I	can	play	back	anything
I've	ever	said.	So	don't	play	games	with	me"	On	the	other	hand,	if	you	were
guilty	of	something,	there	would	be	a	record	of	it.	There	would	also	be	a
record	of	any	tampering.	Richard	Nixon's	taping	of	conversations	in	the
White	House—and	then	the	suspicions	that	he	had	attempted	to	alter	those
tapes—contributed	to	his	undoing.	He	chose	to	have	a	documented	political
life	and	lived	to	regret	it.
The	Rodney	King	case	showed	the	evidentiary	power	of	videotape	and	its
limits.	Before	long	every	police	car,	or	individual	policeman,	may	be
equipped	with	a	digital	video	camera,	with	nonforgeable	time	and	location
stamps.	The	public	may	insist	that	the	police	record	themselves	in	the	course
of	their	work.	And	the	police	could	be	all	for	it,	to	guard	against	claims	of
brutality	or	abuse	on	one	hand	and	as	an	aid	in	gathering	better	evidence	on
the	other.	Some	police	forces	are	already	videorecording	all	arrests.	This	sort
of	record	won't	affect	just	the	police.	Medical	malpractice	insurance	might	be

cheaper,	or	only	available,	for	doctors	who	record	surgical	procedures	or	even
office	visits.	Bus,	taxi,	and	trucking	companies	have	an	obvious	interest	in	the
performance	of	their	drivers.	Some	transportation	companies	have	already
installed	equipment	to	record	mileage	and	average	speed.	I	can	imagine
proposals	that	every	automobile,	including	yours	and	mine,	be	outfitted	not
only	with	a	recorder	but	also	with	a	transmitter	that	identifies	the	car	and	its
location—a	future	license	plate.	After	all,	airplanes	have	"black	box"
recorders	today,	and	once	the	cost	drops,	there	is	no	reason	they	shouldn't	also
be	in	our	cars.	If	a	car	was	reported	stolen,	its	location	would	be	known
immediately.	After	a	hit-and-run	accident	or	a	drive-by	shooting,	a	judge
could	authorize	a	query:	"What	vehicles	were	in	the	following	two-block	area
during	this	thirty-minute	period?"	The	black	box	could	record	your	speed	and
location,	which	would	allow	for	the	perfect	enforcement	of	speeding	laws.	I
would	vote	against	that.
In	a	world	that	is	increasingly	instrumented,	we	could	reach	the	point	where
cameras	record	most	of	what	goes	on	in	public.	Video	cameras	in	public
places	are	already	relatively	commonplace.	They	perch,	often	concealed,
around	banks,	airports,	automatic-teller	machines,	hospitals,	freeways,	stores,
and	hotel	and	office-building	lobbies	and	elevators.
The	prospect	of	so	many	cameras,	always	watching,	might	have	distressed	us
fifty	years	ago,	as	it	did	George	Orwell.	But	today	they	are	unremarkable.
There	are	neighborhoods	in	the	United	States	and	Europe	where	citizens	are
welcoming	these	cameras	above	streets	and	parking	lots.	In	Monaco,	street
crime	has	been	virtually	eliminated	because	hundreds	of	video	cameras	have
been	placed	around	the	tiny	principality.	Monaco,	however,	is	small	enough	in
area,	370	acres	(150	hectares),	that	a	few	hundred	cameras	can	pretty	much
cover	it	all.	Many	parents	would	welcome	cameras	around	schoolyards	to
discourage	or	help	apprehend	drug	dealers,	child	molesters,	and	even
playground	bullies.	Every	city	streetlight	represents	a	substantial	investment
by	a	community	in	public	safety.	In	a	few	years	it	will	require	only	a
relatively	modest	additional	sum	to	add	and	operate	cameras	with	connections
to	the	information	highway.	Within	a	decade,	computers	will	be	able	to	scan
video	records	very	inexpensively	looking	for	a	particular	person	or	activity.	I
can	easily	imagine	proposals	that	virtually	every	pole	supporting	a	streetlight
should	also	have	one	or	more	cameras.	The	images	from	these	cameras	might
be	accessed	only	in	the	event	of	a	crime,	and	even	then	possibly	only	under
court	order.	Some	people	might	argue	that	every	image	from	every	camera
should	be	available	for	viewing	by	everyone	at	any	time.	This	raises	serious
privacy	questions	in	my	mind,	but	advocates	might	argue	that	it's	appropriate
if	the	cameras	are	only	in	public	places.

Almost	everyone	is	willing	to	accept	some	restrictions	in	exchange	for	a	sense
of	security.	From	a	historical	perspective,	people	living	in	Western
democracies	already	enjoy	a	degree	of	privacy	and	personal	freedom
unprecedented	in	all	of	human	history.	If	ubiquitous	cameras	tied	into	the
information	highway	should	prove	to	reduce	serious	crime	dramatically	in	test
communities,	a	real	debate	would	begin	over	whether	people	fear	surveillance
more	or	less	than	they	fear	crime.	It	is	difficult	to	imagine	a	government-
sanctioned	experiment	along	these	lines	in	the	United	States	because	of	the
privacy	issues	it	raises	and	the	likelihood	of	constitutional	challenges.
However,	opinion	can	change.	It	might	take	only	a	few	more	incidents	like
the	bombing	in	Oklahoma	City	within	the	borders	of	the	United	States	for
attitudes	toward	strong	privacy	protection	to	shift.	What	today	seems	like
digital	Big	Brother	might	one	day	become	the	norm	if	the	alternative	is	being
left	to	the	mercy	of	terrorists	and	criminals.	I	am	not	advocating	either
position—technology	will	enable	society	to	make	a	political	decision.
At	the	same	time	technology	is	making	it	easier	to	create	video	records,	it	is
also	making	it	possible	to	keep	all	your	personal	documents	and	messages
totally	private.	Encryption-technology	software,	which	anyone	can	download
from	the	Internet,	can	transform	a	PC	into	a	virtually	unbreakable	code
machine.	As	the	highway	is	deployed,	security	services	will	be	applied	to	all
forms	of	digital	information—phone	calls,	files,	databases,	you	name	it.	As
long	as	you	protect	the	password,	the	information	stored	on	your	computer
can	be	held	under	the	strongest	lock	and	key	that	has	ever	existed.	This	allows
for	the	greatest	degree	of	information	privacy	any	individual	has	ever	had.
Many	in	government	are	opposed	to	this	encryption	capability,	because	it
reduces	their	ability	to	gather	information.	Unfortunately	for	them,	the
technology	can't	be	stopped.	The	National	Security	Agency	is	a	part	of	the
U.S.	government	defense	and	intelligence	community	that	protects	this
country's	secret	communications	and	decrypts	foreign	communications	to
gather	intelligence	data.	The	NSA	does	not	want	software	containing
advanced	encryption	capabilities	to	be	sent	outside	the	United	States.
However,	this	software	is	already	available	throughout	the	world,	and	any
computer	can	run	it.	No	policy	decision	will	be	able	to	restore	the	tapping
capabilities	governments	had	in	the	past.
Today's	legislation	that	prevents	the	export	of	software	with	good	encryption
capability	could	harm	U.S.	software	and	hardware	companies.	The
restrictions	give	foreign	companies	an	advantage	over	U.S.	competitors.
American	companies	almost	unanimously	agree	that	the	current	encryption
export	restrictions	don't	work.

Each	media	advance	has	had	a	substantial	effect	on	how	people	and
governments	interact.	The	printing	press	and,	later,	mass-circulation
newspapers	changed	the	nature	o======================================================== logy.	As	she	scrolls	through	the	document,	the
two	of	you	would	discuss	your	needs.	Then,	if	she	was	particularly	adept,	you
might	even	watch	her	do	the	editing.	However,	if	you	wanted	a	hand	in
editing	the	document	instead	of	just	watching	it	run	on	your	lawyer's
computer,	you	could	join	in	and	work	together.	You	would	be	able	not	only	to
talk	to	each	other	but	also	to	see	the	same	image	on	your	computer	screens.

You	won't	need	to	have	the	same	software.	The	application	just	has	to	run	on
one	end	of	the	connection,	the	lawyer's	end	in	this	case.	On	your	end,	you
would	need	only	an	appropriate	modem	and	DSVD	software.
Another	important	use	of	voice/data	connections	will	be	to	improve	product
support.	Microsoft	has	thousands	of	employees	whose	job	is	to	answer
product-support	questions	about	Microsoft	software.	In	fact,	we	have	as	many
product-support	people	answering	questions	about	our	software	as	we	have
engineers	building	it.	This	is	wonderful,	because	we	log	all	that	feedback	and
use	it	to	improve	our	products.	We	get	lots	of	these	questions	by	e-mail,	but
most	of	our	customers	still	telephone	us.	These	phone	conversations	are
inefficient.	A	customer	calls	in	to	say	his	particular	computer	is	configured	in
a	specific	way	and	is	giving	a	certain	error	message.	The	product-support
specialist	listens	to	this	description,	and	then	suggests	something,	which	it
takes	the	caller	a	few	minutes	to	do.	Then	the	conversation	resumes.	The
average	call	takes	fifteen	minutes,	and	some	take	an	hour.	But	once	everyone
is	using	DSVD,	the	product-support	specialist	will	be	able	to	see	what's	on	the
caller's	computer	screen	(with	the	caller's	explicit	permission,	of	course)	and
examine	the	caller's	computer	directly	rather	than	having	to	rely	on	the	caller
to	explain	what	he	is	seeing.	This	will	have	to	be	done	carefully,	to	ensure	that
no	one's	privacy	is	invaded.	The	process	will	reduce	the	length	of	the	average
call	by	30	or	40	percent,	which	will	make	customers	a	lot	happier	and	will	cut
costs	and	product	prices.
The	picture	transmitted	during	a	DSVD	(or	ISDN)	telephone	connection
won't	necessarily	have	to	be	of	a	document.	One	or	both	people	participating
will	also	be	able	to	transmit	still	images	of	themselves.	If	you	are	calling	in	to
buy	a	product,	you	might	expect	the	company's	service	representative	to	be
there,	smiling.	But	you,	as	the	customer,	might	choose	to	transmit	only	your
voice.	You	can	select	images	of	yourself	dressed	appropriately	for	the
occasion,	so	it	won't	matter	what	you	are	actually	wearing.	Or	you	might
decide	to	have	available	several	pictures	of	yourself,	one	smiling,	one
laughing,	one	contemplative,	and	maybe	one	that	is	angry.	During	the	course
of	the	conversation,	you	could	change	the	image	to	suit	your	mood	or	the
point	you	were	making.
Electronic	mail	and	shared	screens	will	eliminate	the	need	for	many	meetings.
Presentation	meetings,	called	primarily	so	participants	can	listen	and	learn,
can	be	replaced	with	e-mail	messages	with	spreadsheets	and	other	exhibits
enclosed	as	attachments.	When	face-to-face	meetings	do	take	place,	they	will
be	more	efficient	because	participants	will	already	have	exchanged
background	information	by	e-mail.

It	will	also	be	easier	to	schedule	meetings	because	software	will	handle	it.	For
example,	if	you	want	to	sit	down	face-to-face	with	your	lawyer,	your
scheduling	program	and	hers	will	be	able	to	communicate	across	the	network
—even	the	phone	network—and	pick	a	date	and	time	that	you	both	have	free.
Then	the	appointment	would	just	show	up	on	your	respective	electronic
calendars.
This	will	also	be	an	efficient	way	to	schedule	restaurant	or	theater
reservations,	but	it	raises	an	interesting	issue.	Let's	say	a	restaurant	isn't
getting	much	business,	or	tickets	to	a	show	aren't	selling	well,	or	your	lawyer
doesn't	want	you	to	know	that	you're	her	only	client.	Such	companies	and
individuals	might	instruct	their	scheduling	programs	just	to	respond	to
meeting	requests.	Your	scheduling	program	wouldn't	be	able	to	ask	your
lawyer's	program	to	list	all	the	times	she	is	free.	However,	if	it	asked	for	a
specific	two-hour	block,	the	response	would	be:	"Yes,	we	can	schedule	you
for	Tuesday	at	eleven	o'clock."
Clients	will	expect	their	lawyers,	dentists,	accountants,	and	other
professionals	to	be	able	to	schedule	appointments	and	exchange	documents
electronically.	You	might	have	a	quick	follow-up	question	for	your	doctor—
for	instance,	whether	a	generic	version	of	a	drug	is	acceptable.	It	is	hard	to
interrupt	a	doctor,	but	you'll	expect	to	be	able	to	trade	e-mail	with	all	of	the
professionals	you	work	with.	We're	going	to	see	competition	based	on	how
effectively	one	professional	group	has	adopted	these	communications	tools
and	how	much	more	accessible	and	efficient	this	makes	them.	I'm	sure	we'll
then	begin	seeing	ads	in	which	a	firm	will	tout	how	much	more	advanced	it
has	become	in	the	use	of	PC	communications.
When	the	information	highway	is	available,	people	won't	be	limited	to	audio
and	still	images,	because	the	highway	will	also	transmit	high-quality	video.
The	meetings	they	schedule	will	more	and	more	often	be	conducted
electronically,	using	shared-screen	videoconferencing.	Each	electronic
participant,	wherever	he	or	she	is,	will	look	at	a	different	physical	screen:	a
video	white	board,	a	television	set,	or	a	PC,	but	each	screen	will	show	much
the	same	image.	Part	of	the	screen	might	show	someone's	face,	while	another
part	might	display	a	document.	If	anyone	modifies	the	document,	the	change
will	appear	almost	immediately	on	all	the	screens.	Geographically	distant
collaborators	will	be	able	to	work	together	in	rich	ways.	This	is	synchronous
or	real-time	sharing,	which	means	that	the	computer	screens	will	keep	up	with
the	people	using	them.
If	a	group	were	to	meet	electronically	to	collaborate	on	a	press	release,	each

member	would	be	able	to	use	his	or	her	PC	or	notebook	computer	to	move
paragraphs	around	and	drop	in	a	photograph	or	a	video.	The	rest	of	the	group
would	be	able	to	look	at	the	result	on	their	individual	screens	and	see	each
contributor's	work	as	it	is	actually	happening.
We're	already	accustomed	to	watching	video	meetings.	Anyone	who	tunes	in
to	television	news	shows,	such	as	Nightline,	which	feature	long-distance
debates,	is	seeing	a	videoconference.	The	host	and	guests	may	be	separated
by	continents,	yet	they	engage	in	give-and-take	as	if	they	were	in	the	same
room,	and	to	viewers	it	almost	appears	that	they	are.
Today,	in	order	to	videoconference,	it	is	necessary	to	go	to	a	specially
equipped	facility	with	special	phone	lines.	Microsoft	has	at	least	one
dedicated	videoconference	room	in	each	of	its	sales	offices	around	the	world.
They're	used	quite	a	bit,	but	the	setting	is	fairly	formal.	These	facilities	have
saved	us	lots	of	traveling.	Employees	in	other	offices	"sit	in"	on	staff
meetings,	and	customers	and	vendors	have	"visited"	us	without	traveling	to
our	headquarters	outside	Seattle.	Such	meetings	will	become	very	popular
because	they	save	time	and	money	and	are	often	more	productive	than	audio-
only	phone	conferences	or	even	face-to-face	meetings,	because	people	seem
to	be	more	attentive	if	they	know	they	are	on-camera.
I've	noticed	that	it	does	take	some	getting	used	to,	though.	If	one	person	is	on
a	videoconference	screen,	he	or	she	tends	to	get	much	more	attention	than
others	in	the	meeting.	I	first	noticed	this	when	a	bunch	of	us	in	Seattle	were
videoconferencing	with	Steve	Ballmer,	who	was	in	Europe.	It	was	as	if	we
were	all	glued	to	The	Steve	Ballmer	Show.	If	Steve	took	off	his	shoes,	we'd
all	look	at	each	other's	reactions.	When	the	meeting	was	over	I	could	have
told	you	all	about	Steve's	new	haircut	but	I	might	not	have	been	able	to	name
the	other	people	who'd	been	in	the
room	with	me.	I	think	this	distortion	will	go	away	as	videoconferences
become	commonplace.
It's	currently	fairly	expensive	to	set	up	a	videoconference	room—it	costs	at
least	$40,000.	However,	desktop	systems	that	attach	to	PCs	are	coming,	and
they	will	reduce	the	cost—and	the	formality—dramatically.	Our	facilities	are
generally	connected	with	ISDN	lines	operating	at	384,000	bits	per	second,
which	provide	reasonable	picture	and	sound	quality	for	about	$20	to	$35	an
hour	for	connections	within	the	United	States	and	about	$250	to	$300	an	hour
for	an	international	connection.
The	cost	of	videoconferencing,	like	that	of	almost	every	other	computer-

driven	service,	is	going	to	drop	as	technology	and	communications	costs	do.
Small	video	devices	using	cameras	attached	to	personal	computers	or
television	sets	will	allow	us	to	meet	readily	across	the	information	highway
with	much	higher	quality	pictures	and	sound	for	lower	prices.	As	ISDN
connected	to	PCs	becomes	popular,	videoconferences	will	be	as	standard	a
business	procedure	as	using	a	copier	to	duplicate	a	document	for	distribution
is	now.
Some	people	worry	that,	by	eliminating	the	subtlety	of	human	dynamics	in	a
meeting,	videoconferences	and	shared	screens	will	give	corporate	gatherings
all	the	spontaneity	of	a	congressional	photo	opportunity.	How	will	people
whisper,	roll	their	eyes	at	a	tedious	speaker,	or	pass	notes?	Actually,
clandestine	communication	will	be	simpler	at	a	video	meeting	because	the
network	will	facilitate	individual	communications	on	the	side.	Meetings	have
always	had	unwritten	rules,	but	when	the	network	is	mediating
videoconferences,	some	rules	will	have	to	become	explicit.	Will	people	be
able	to	signal,	publicly	or	privately,	individually	or	collectively,	that	they	are
bored?	To	what	degree	should	a	participant	be	allowed	to	block	his	or	her
video	or	audio	from	others?	Should	private	side	conversations,	one	PC	to
another,	be	permitted?	Over	time,	as	we	use	these	facilities,	new	rules	of
meeting	etiquette	will	emerge.
Home	videoconferences	will	naturally	be	somewhat	different.	If	the
conference	has	only	two	participants,	it	will	amount	to	a	video	phone	call.
That	will	be	great	for	saying	hello	to	y======================================================== o	ballet
slippers.	Of	course	you	will	still	ask	people	you	know	for	recommendations,
but	efficiently,	by	electronic	mail.
If	you're	thinking	of	doing	business	with	a	company	or	buying	a	product,
you'll	be	able	to	check	what	others	say	about	it.	If	you	want	to	buy	a
refrigerator,	you	will	look	for	the	electronic	bulletin	boards	containing	formal
and	informal	reviews	of	refrigerators	and	their	manufacturers	and	retailers.
You'll	get	into	the	habit	of	checking	these	bulletin	boards	before	you	make
any	significant	purchase.	When	you	have	a	compliment	or	complaint	about	a
record	club,	a	doctor,	or	even	a	computer	chip,	it	will	be	easy	to	find	the	place
on	the	network	where	that	company	or	product	is	discussed	and	add	your
opinion.	Ultimately,	companies	that	don't	serve	their	customers	well	will	see
their	reputations	and	their	sales	decline,	while	those	that	do	a	great	job	will

attract	sizable	followings	through	this	new	form	of	word	of	"mouth."
But	the	various	endorsements	and	especially	the	negative	comments	will	have
to	be	examined	carefully.	They	may	be	motivated	more	by	fanaticism	than	a
genuine	desire	to	share	pertinent	information.
Let's	say	a	company	is	selling	an	air	conditioner	that	99.9	percent	of	its
customers	are	very	happy	with.	One	angry	consumer	in	the	remaining	0.1
percent	can	post	horrible	insults	about	a	brand	of	air	conditioner,	the	company
that	manufactures	it,	and	individuals	in	the	company,	and	keep	sending	the
messages	over	and	over	and	over.	The	effect	could	be	compared	to	sitting	in	a
meeting	where	everyone	has	a	volume	control	that	could	be	set	from	0	to
1,000,	and	the	normal	level	of	conversation	is,	say,	3.	Then	a	few	people
decide	to	crank	their	volume	up	to	1,000	and	start	shouting.	This	means	that	if
I	happen	to	look	in	on	the	bulletin	board	because	I'm	buying	an	air
conditioner,	my	visit	may	be	a	waste	of	time	because	all	I	find	there	is	the
shouting.	It	is	unfair	to	me	and	to	the	company	selling	the	air	conditioners.
Already,	a	network	etiquette,	or	"netiquette,"	is	evolving.	As	the	information
highway	becomes	society's	town	square,	we	will	come	to	expect	it	to	conform
to	our	culture's	mores.	There	are	vast	cultural	differences	around	the	world,	so
the	highway	will	be	divided	into	different	parts,	some	dedicated	to	various
cultures,	and	some	specified	for	global	usage.	So	far,	a	frontier	mentality	has
prevailed,	and	participants	in	electronic	forums	have	been	known	to	lapse	into
behavior	that	is	antisocial	and	even	illegal.	Illegal	copies	of	copyrighted
intellectual	property,	including	articles,	books,	and	software	applications,	are
distributed	freely.	Get-rich-quick	scams	pop	up	here	and	there.	Pornography
flourishes	within	the	easy	reach	of	children.	Single-minded	voices	rant,
sometimes	almost	incessantly,	about	products,	companies,	and	people	they
have	come	to	dislike.	Forum	participants	get	horrible	insults	hurled	at	them
because	of	some	comment	they	have	made.	The	ease	with	which	an
individual,	any	individual,	can	share	his	opinions	with	the	members	of	a	huge
electronic	community	is	unprecedented.	And	the	ones	who	are	yelling	are
able,	because	the	electronic	community	is	so	efficient,	to	take	a	piece	of	hate
mail	and	post	it	on	twenty	bulletin	boards.	I've	seen	bulletin	boards	collapse
into	foolishness	after	people	start	getting	shrill.	Other	participants	in	the
discussion	don't	know	what	to	do.	Some	people	yell	back;	a	few	try	to	say
rational	things.	But	the	shrill	comments	continue,	and	that	destroys	the	sense
of	community.
The	Internet,	true	to	its	roots	as	an	academic	cooperative,	has	relied	on	peer
pressure	for	regulation.	For	example,	if	someone	in	a	discussion	group	posts

an	extraneous	comment	or,	worse,	tries	to	sell	something	in	an	electronic
forum	that	is	seen	by	others	as	a	noncommercial	setting,	the	would-be
diverger	or	merchant	may	get	a	withering	barrage	of	insults.	The	enforcement
so	far	has	been	mostly	by	self-appointed	censors
who	"flame"	those	they	believe	have	crossed	the	line	into	antisocial	behavior.
The	commercial	on-line	services	employ	volunteers	and	professional
moderators	to	monitor	conduct	on	their	bulletin	boards.	Forums	that	have
moderators	can	filter	out	some	antisocial	behavior	by	refusing	to	allow	insults
or	copyrighted	information	to	remain	on	a	system's	servers.	Most	Internet
forums	remain	unmoderated,	however.	Anything	goes,	and	because	people
can	post	messages	and	information	anonymously,	little	accountability	exists.
We	need	a	more	sophisticated	process	to	gather	consensus	opinions	without
depending	on	the	Attorney	General's	Consumer	Complaints	Division	to	act	as
a	filter.	We	will	have	to	find	some	way	to	force	people	to	turn	their	volume
down	so	the	highway	doesn't	become	an	amplifier	for	libel	or	slander	or	an
outlet	for	venting	irritation.
Many	providers	of	Internet	access	are	beginning	to	restrict	entry	to	forums
containing	sexually	explicit	material,	and	there	has	been	a	crackdown	on	the
illegal	traffic	of	copyrighted	materials.	Some	universities	are	getting	students
and	staff	to	remove	objectionable	postings.	This	rubs	some	the	wrong	way,
because	they	see	cyberspace	as	a	place	where	anything	goes.	The	commercial
services	have	had	similar	problems.	There	have	been	complaints	about
restriction	of	free	speech.	And	parents	were	outraged	when	their	family
account	was	closed	after	their	eleven-year-old	made	an	objectionable
comment	to	a	moderator.	Companies	will	create	special	communities	on	the
Internet	and	will	"compete"	by	having	rules	about	how	they	are	going	to	deal
with	these	issues.
Politicians	are	already	wrestling	with	the	question	of	when	an	on-line	service
should	be	treated	as	a	common	carrier	and	when	it	should	be	treated	as	a
publisher.	Telephone	companies	are	legally	considered	common	carriers.
They	transport	messages	without	assuming	any	responsibility	for	them.	If	an
obscene	caller	bothers	you,	the	telephone	company	will	cooperate	with	the
police,	but	nobody	thinks	it	is	the	phone	company's	fault	that	some	creep	is
calling	you	and	talking	dirty.	Magazines	and	newspapers,	on	the	other	hand,
are	publishers.	They	are	legally	responsible	for	their	content	and	can	be	sued
for	libel.	They	also	have	a	strong	interest	in	maintaining	their	reputation	and
editorial	integrity	because	that	is	an	important	part	of	their	business.	Any
responsible	newspaper	checks	very	carefully	before	making	a	previously

unpublished	allegation	about	someone—in	part	because	it	doesn't	want	a	libel
suit,	but	also	because	inaccuracy	would	hurt	its	reputation.
On-line	services	function	simultaneously	as	common	carriers	and	publishers,
which	is	where	the	problem	lies.	When	they	act	as	publishers,	and	offer
content	they	have	acquired,	authored,	or	edited,	it	makes	sense	that	the	rules
of	libel	and	the	self-governing	incentive	of	editorial	reputation	would	apply.
But	we	also	expect	them	to	deliver	our	e-mail	like	a	common	carrier	without
examining	or	taking	responsibility	for	its	contents.	Likewise,	chat	lines,
bulletin	boards,	and	forums	that	encourage	users	to	interact	without	editorial
supervision	are	a	new	means	of	communication,	and	shouldn't	be	treated	the
same	way	as	material	published	on	the	service.	A	New	York	judge,	however,
recently	cleared	the	way	for	a	libel	lawsuit	by	ruling	that	the	on-line	service
involved	was	a	publisher	of	information,	not	just	a	distributor.	Perhaps	by	the
time	you	read	this	things	will	have	been	clarified.	The	stakes	in	the	resolution
of	this	issue	are	high.	If	network	providers	are	treated	entirely	as	publishers,
they	will	have	to	monitor	and	preapprove	the	content	of	all	information	they
transmit.	This	could	create	an	unwelcome	atmosphere	of	censorship	and
curtail	spontaneous	exchange,	so	important	in	the	electronic	world.
Ideally,	the	industry	will	develop	some	standards	so	that	when	you	go	into	a
bulletin	board	or	article,	you	get	an	indication	of	whether	or	not	some
"publisher"	has	looked	it	over,	edited	it,	and	stands	behind	its	content.	The
question	will	be	what	standards	and	who	will	oversee	them?	A	bulletin	board
for	lesbians	should	not	be	forced	to	accept	antilesbian	comments,	nor	should	a
bulletin	board	about	some	product	be	overwhelmed	by	messages	from	a
competitor.	It	would	be	a	shame	to	have	to	keep	children	away	from	all
bulletin	boards,	but	it	would	also	be	unrealistic,	and	possibly	an	abridgment
of	free	expression,	to	force	all	bulletin	boards	to	undergo	review	by	someone
willing	to	accept	liability	for	everything	they	contain.	What	we	will	most
likely	end	up	with	is	a	series	of	categories,	like	the	ratings	given	movies,	that
will	indicate	whether	shrill	voices	have	been	controlled	and	whether	an
"editor"	has	deleted	messages	he	thought	were	out	of	line	with	the	policies	of
the	group	involved.
The	bulletin	boards	I've	been	discussing	are	the	free,	public	ones,	but	there
will	also	be	places	where	professional	information	and	advice	will	be	offered
for	a	fee.	You	might	wonder	why	you	would	need	an	expert	when	so	much
information	will	be	available.	For	the	same	reasons	you	might	need	one	now.
All	sorts	of	consumer	data	can	be	had	now.	Consumer	Reports	offers
objective	evaluations	of	a	lot	of	products,	but	the	reviews	are	aimed	at	a	broad
audience—they	don't	necessarily	discuss	your	particular	requirements.	If	you

can't	find	exactly	the	advice	you	need	on	the	highway,	you	will	be	able	to	hire
a	knowledgeable	sales	consultant,	for	five	minutes	or	an	afternoon,	via
videoconference.	She	will	help	you	choose	products,	which	your	computer
will	then	buy	for	you	from	the	cheapest	reliable	source.
I	expect	the	traditional	binding	together	of	advice	and	sales	to	be	much	less
prevalent,	because	although	the	advice	appears	free	to	the	customer,	it	is	paid
for	by	the	stores	and	services	that	offer	it.	This	cost	then	gets	added	on	to	the
price	of	the	goods.	Stores	that	are	charging	more	because	they	offer	advice
will	have	increasing	difficulty	competing	with	the	discounters	who	will
operate	on	the	information	highway.	The======================================================== around.	Another	time,	when	the	team
thought	they	had	created	a	program	that	worked,	they	came	proudly	to
demonstrate	their	achievement	to	me.	It	didn't	work	at	the	demonstration.
Everyone	on	the	project	happened	to	be	right-handed,	and	the	computer,
which	was	programmed	to	look	at	the	strokes	in	the	writing,	couldn't	interpret
the	very	different	ones	in	my	left-handed	penmanship.	It	turned	out	that
getting	a	computer	to	recognize	handwriting	is	as	difficult	as	getting	one	to
recognize	speech.	But	I	remain	optimistic	that	as	computer	performance
increases	we'll	have	computers	able	to	do	this	too.
Whether	you	give	the	command	by	voice,	in	writing,	or	by	pointing,	the
selections	you're	going	to	want	to	make	will	involve	more	complicated
choices	than	just	which	movie	to	watch,	and	you'll	want	to	be	able	to	make
them	easily.	Users	won't	stand	for	being	confused	or	frustrated	or	for	having
their	time	wasted.	The	highway's	software	platform	will	have	to	make	it
almost	infallibly	easy	to	find	information,	even	if	users	don't	know	what
they're	looking	for.	There	will	be	lots	of	information.	The	highway	will	have
access	to	everything	in	hundreds	of	libraries	and	to	all	types	of	merchandise.
One	of	the	worries	most	often	expressed	about	the	highway	concerns
"information	overload."	It	is	usually	voiced	by	someone	who	imagines,	rather
aptly,	that	the	fiber-optic	cables	of	the	information	highway	will	be	like
enormous	pipes	spewing	out	large	quantities	of	information.
Information	overload	is	not	unique	to	the	highway,	and	it	needn't	be	a
problem.	We	already	cope	with	astonishing	amounts	of	information	by	relying
on	an	extensive	infrastructure	that	has	evolved	to	help	us	be	selective—
everything	from	library	catalogs	to	movie	reviews	to	the	Yellow	Pages	to
recommendations	from	friends.	When	people	worry	about	the	information-
overload	problem,	ask	them	to	consider	how	they	choose	what	to	read.	When
we	visit	a	bookstore	or	a	library	we	don't	worry	about	reading	every	volume.
We	get	by	without	reading	everything	because	there	are	navigational	aids	that
point	to	information	of	interest	and	help	us	find	the	print	material	we	want.
These	pointers	include	the	corner	newsstand,	the	Dewey	decimal	system	in
libraries,	and	book	reviews	in	the	local	newspaper.
On	the	information	highway,	technology	and	editorial	services	will	combine
to	offer	a	number	of	ways	to	help	us	find	information.	The	ideal	navigation
system	will	be	powerful,	expose	seemingly	limitless	information,	and	yet
remain	very	easy	to	use.	Software	will	offer	queries,	filters,	spatial	navigation,
hyperlinks,	and	agents	as	the	primary	selection	techniques.

One	way	to	understand	the	different	selection	methods	is	to	think	of	them
metaphorically.	Imagine	specific	information—a	collection	of	facts,	a
breaking	news	story,	a	list	of	movies—all	placed	in	an	imaginary	warehouse.
A	query	does	a	search	through	every	item	in	the	warehouse	to	see	if	it	meets
some	criterion	you	have	established.	A	filter	is	a	check	on	everything	new	that
comes	into	the	warehouse	to	see	if	it	matches	that	criterion.	Spatial	navigation
is	a	way	you	can	walk	around	inside	the	warehouse	checking	on	inventory	by
location.	Perhaps	the	most	intriguing	approach,	and	the	one	that	promises	to
be	the	easiest	of	all	to	use,	will	be	to	enlist	the	aid	of	a	personal	agent	who
will	represent	you	on	the	highway.	The	agent	will	actually	be	software,	but	it
will	have	a	personality	you'll	be	able	to	talk	to	in	one	form	or	another.	This
will	be	like	delegating	an	assistant	to	look	at	the	inventory	for	you.
Here's	how	the	different	systems	will	work.	A	query,	as	its	name	indicates,	is
a	question.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	a	wide	range	of	questions	and	get	complete
answers.	If	you	can't	recall	the	name	of	a	movie	but	you	remember	that	it
starred	Spencer	Tracy	and	Katharine	Hepburn	and	that	there	is	a	scene	in
which	he's	asking	a	lot	of	questions	and	she's	shivering,	then	you	could	type
in	a	query	that	asks	for	all	movies	that	match:"Spencer	Tracy,"	"Katharine
Hepburn,"	"cold,"	and	"questions"	In	reply,	a	server	on	the	highway	would	list
the	1957	romantic	comedy	Desk	Set,	in	which	Tracy	quizzes	a	shivering
Hepburn	on	a	rooftop	terrace	in	the	middle	of	winter.	You	could	watch	the
scene,	watch	the	whole	film,	read	the	script,	examine	reviews	of	the	movie,
and	read	any	comments	that	Tracy	or	Hepburn	might	have	made	publicly
about	the	scene.	If	a	dubbed	or	subtitled	print	had	been	made	for	release
outside	English-speaking	countries,	you	could	watch	the	foreign	versions.
They	might	be	stored	on	servers	in	various	countries	but	would	be	instantly
available	to	you.
The	system	will	accommodate	straightforward	queries	such	as	"Show	me	all
the	articles	that	ran	worldwide	about	the	first	test-tube	baby,"	or	"List	all	the
stores	that	carry	two	or	more	kinds	of	dog	food	and	will	deliver	a	case	within
sixty	minutes	to	my	home	address,"	or	"Which	of	my	relatives	have	I	been	out
of	touch	with	for	more	than	three	months?"	It	will	also	be	able	to	deliver
answers	to	much	more	complex	queries.	You	might	ask,	"Which	major	city
has	the	greatest	percentage	of	the	people	who	watch	rock	videos	and	regularly
read	about	international	trade?"	Generally,	queries	won't	require	much
response	time,	because	most	of	the	questions	are	likely	to	have	been	asked
before	and	the	answers	will	already	have	been	computed	and	stored.
You'll	also	be	able	to	set	up	"filters,"	which	are	really	just	standing	queries.
Filters	will	work	around	the	clock,	watching	for	new	information	that	matches

an	interest	of	yours,	filtering	out	everything	else.	You	will	be	able	to	program
a	filter	to	gather	information	on	your	particular	interests,	such	as	news	about
local	sports	teams	or	particular	scientific	discoveries.	If	the	most	important
thing	to	you	is	the	weather,	your	filter	will	put	that	at	the	top	of	your
personalized	newspaper.	Some	filters	will	be	created	automatically	by	your
computer,	based	on	its	information	about	your	background	and	areas	of
interest.	Such	a	filter	might	alert	me	to	an	important	event	regarding	a	person
or	institution	from	my	past:	"Meteorite	crashes	into	Lakeside	School."	You
will	also	be	able	to	create	an	explicit	filter.	That	will	be	an	on-going	request
for	something	particular,	such	as	"Wanted:	1990	Nissan	Maxima	for	parts"	or
"Tell	me	about	anybody	selling	memorabilia	from	the	last	World	Cup"	or	"Is
anyone	around	here	looking	for	someone	to	bicycle	with	on	Sunday
afternoons,	rain	or	shine?"	The	filter	will	keep	looking	until	you	call	off	the
search.	If	a	filter	finds	a	potential	Sunday	bicycling	companion,	for	instance,
it	will	automatically	check	on	any	other	information	the	person	might	have
published	on	the	network.	It	will	try	to	answer	the	question	"What's	he
like?"—which	is	the	first	question	you'd	be	likely	to	ask	about	a	potential	new
friend.
Spatial	navigation	will	be	modeled	on	the	way	we	locate	information	today.
When	we	want	to	find	out	about	some	subject	now,	it's	natural	to	go	to	a
labeled	section	of	a	library	or	bookstore.	Newspapers	have	sports,	real	estate,
and	business	sections	where	people	"go"	for	certain	kinds	of	news.	In	most
newspapers,	weather	reports	appear	in	the	same	general	location	day	after
day.
Spatial	navigation,	which	is	already	being	used	in	some	software	products,
will	let	you	go	where	the	information	is	by	enabling	you	to	interact	with	a
visual	model	of	a	real	or	make-believe	world.	You	can	think	of	such	a	model
as	a	map—an	illustrated,	three-dimensional	table	of	contents.	Spatial
navigation	will	be	particularly	important	for	interacting	with	televisions	and
small,	portable	PCs,	which	are	unlikely	to	have	conventional	keyboards.	To
do	some	banking,	you	might	go	to	a	drawing	of	a	main	street,	then	point,
using	a	mouse	or	a	remote	control	or	even	your	finger,	at	the	drawing	of	a
bank.	You	will	point	to	a	courthouse	to	find	out	which	cases	are	being	heard
by	which	judges	or	what	the	backlog	is.	You	will	point	to	the	ferry	terminal	to
learn	the	schedule	and	whether	the	boats	are	running	on	time.	If	you	are
considering	visiting	a	hotel,	you	will	be	able	to	find	out	when	rooms	are
available	and	look	at	a	floor	plan,	and	if	the	hotel	has	a	video	camera
connected	to	the	highway,	you	might	be	able	to	look	at	its	lobby	and
restaurant	and	see	how	crowded	it	is	at	the	moment.

You'll	be	able	to	jump	into	the	map	so	you	can	navigate	down	a	street	or
through	the	rooms	of	a	building.	You'll	be	able	to	zoom	in	and	out	and	pan
around	to	different	locations	very	easily.	Let's	say	you	want	to	buy	a	lawn
mower.	If	the	screen	shows	the	inside	of	a	house,	you	might	move	out	the
back	door,	where	you	might	see	landmarks,	including	a	garage.	A	click	on	the
garage	will	take	you	inside	it,	where	you	might	see	tools,	including	a	lawn
mower.	A	click	on	the	lawn	mower	will	take	you	to	categories	of	relevant
information,	including	advertisements,	reviews,	user	manuals,	and	sales
showrooms	in	cyberspace.	It	will	be	simple	to	do	some	quick	comparison
shopping,	taking	advantage	of	any	amount	of	information	you	want.	When
you	click	on	the	picture	of	the	garage	and	seem	to	move	inside	it,	behind-the-
scenes	information	relating	to	the	objects	"inside"	the	garage	will	be	fed	to
your	screen	from	servers	spread	over	thousands	of	miles	on	the	highway.
When	you	point	at	an	object	on	the	screen	to	bring	up	information	about	the
object,	you	are	employing	a	form	of	"hyperlinking."	Hyperlinks	let	users	leap
from	informational	place	to	informational	place	instantly,	just	as	spaceships	in
science	fiction	jump	from	geographic	place	to	geographic	place	through
"hyperspace."	Hyperlinks	on	the	information	highway	will	let	you	find
answers	to	your	questions	when	they	occur	to	you	and	you're	interested.	Let's
say	you're	watching	the	news	and	you	see	someone	you	don't	recognize
walking	with	the	British	prime	minister.	You	want	to	know	who	she	is.	Using
your	television's	remote	control,	you	will	point	at	the	person.	That	action	will
bring	up	a	biography	and	a	lis======================================================== ked	through	a	wall	of	it	70	miles	thick,	you'd	be	able	to	see	a	candle
burning	on	the	other	side.	Binary	signals,	in	the	form	of	modulated	light,
carry	for	long	distances	through	these	optic	fibers.	A	signal	doesn't	move	any
faster	through	fiber-optic	cable	than	it	does	in	copper	wire;	both	go	at	the
speed	of	light.	The	enormous	advantage	fiber-optic	cable	has	over	wire	is	the
bandwidth	it	can	carry.	Bandwidth	is	a	measure	of	the	number	of	bits	that	can
be	moved	through	a	circuit	in	a	second.	This	really	is	like	a	highway.	An
eight-lane	interstate	has	more	room	for	vehicles	than	a	narrow	dirt	road.	The
greater	the	bandwidth,	the	more	lanes	available—thus,	that	many	more	cars,
or	bits	of	information,	can	pass	in	a	second.	Cables	with	limited	bandwidth,
used	for	text	or	voice	transmissions,	are	called	narrow-band	circuit.	Cables
with	more	capacity,	which	carry	images	and	limited	animation,	are	"midband
capable."	Those	with	a	high	bandwidth,	which	can	carry	multiple	video	and
audio	signals,	are	said	to	have	broadband	capacity.
The	information	highway	will	use	compression,	but	there	will	still	have	to	be
a	great	deal	of	bandwidth.	One	of	the	main	reasons	we	don't	already	have	a
working	highway	is	that	there	isn't	sufficient	bandwidth	in	today's
communications	networks	for	all	the	new	applications.	And	there	won't	be
until	fiber-optic	cable	is	brought	into	enough	neighborhoods.

Fiber-optic	cable	is	an	example	of	technology	that	goes	beyond	what	Babbage
or	even	Eckert	and	Mauchly	could	have	predicted.	So	is	the	speed	at	which
the	performance	and	capacity	of	chips	have	improved.
In	1965,	Gordon	Moore,	who	later	cofounded	Intel	with	Bob	Noyce,
predicted	that	the	capacity	of	a	computer	chip	would	double	every	year.	He
said	this	on	the	basis	of	having	examined	the	price/performance	ratio	of
computer	chips	over	the	previous	three	years	and	projecting	it	forward.	In
truth,	Moore	didn't	believe	that	this	rate	of	improvement	would	last	long.	But
ten	years	later,	his	forecast	proved	true,	and	he	then	predicted	the	capacity
would	double	every	two	years.	To	this	day	his	predictions	have	held	up,	and
the	average—a	doubling	every	eighteen	months—is	referred	to	among
engineers	as	Moore's	Law.
No	experience	in	our	everyday	life	prepares	us	for	the	implications	of	a
number	that	doubles	a	great	number	of	times—exponential	improvements.
One	way	to	understand	it	is	with	a	fable.
King	Shirham	of	India	was	so	pleased	when	one	of	his	ministers	invented	the
game	of	chess	that	he	asked	the	man	to	name	any	reward.
"Your	Majesty,"	said	the	minister,	"I	ask	that	you	give	me	one	grain	of	wheat
for	the	first	square	of	the	chessboard,	two	grains	for	the	second	square,	four
grains	for	the	third,	and	so	on,	doubling	the	number	of	grains	each	time	until
all	sixty-four	squares	are	accounted	for."	The	king	was	moved	by	the	modesty
of	the	request	and	called	for	a	bag	of	wheat.
The	king	asked	that	the	promised	grains	be	counted	out	onto	the	chessboard.
On	the	first	square	of	the	first	row	was	placed	one	small	grain.	On	the	second
square	were	two	specks	of	wheat.	On	the	third	square	there	were	4,	then	8,	16,
32,	64,	128.	By	square	eight	at	the	end	of	the	first	row,	King	Shirham's	supply
master	had	counted	out	a	total	of	255	grains.

Intel	microprocessors	have	doubled	in	transister	count	approximately	every
eighteen	months,	in	accordance	with	Moore's	Law.
The	king	probably	registered	no	concern.	Maybe	a	little	more	wheat	was	on
the	board	than	he	had	expected,	but	nothing	surprising	had	happened.
Assuming	it	would	take	one	second	to	count	each	grain,	the	counting	so	far
had	taken	only	about	four	minutes.	If	one	row	was	done	in	four	minutes,	try	to
guess	how	long	it	would	take	to	count	out	the	wheat	for	all	sixty-four	squares
of	the	board.	Four	hours?	Four	days?	Four	years?
By	the	time	the	second	row	was	complete,	the	supply	master	had	worked	for
about	eighteen	hours	just	counting	out	65,535	grains.	By	the	end	of	the	third
of	the	eight	rows,	it	took	194	days	to	count	the	16.8	million	grains	for	the
twenty-fourth	square.	And	there	were	still	forty	empty	squares	to	go.
It	is	safe	to	say	that	the	king	broke	his	promise	to	the	minister.	The	final
square	would	have	gotten	18,446,744,073,709,551,615	grains	of	wheat	on	the
board,	and	required	584	billion	years	of	counting.	Current	estimates	of	the	age
of	the	earth	are	around	4.5	billion	years.	According	to	most	versions	of	the
legend,	King	Shirham	realized	at	some	point	in	the	counting	that	he	had	been
tricked	and	had	his	clever	minister	beheaded.
Exponential	growth,	even	when	explained,	seems	like	a	trick.
Moore's	Law	is	likely	to	hold	for	another	twenty	years.	If	it	does,	a
computation	that	now	takes	a	day	will	be	more	than	10,000	times	faster,	and
thus	take	fewer	than	ten	seconds.

Laboratories	are	already	operating	"ballistic"	transistors	that	have	switching
times	on	the	order	of	a	femtosecond.	That	is	1/1,000,000,000,000,000	of	a
second,	which	is	about	10	million	times	faster	than	the	transistors	in	today's
microprocessors.	The	trick	is	to	reduce	the	size	of	the	chip	circuitry	and	the
current	flow	so	that	moving	electrons	don't	bump	into	anything,	including
each	other.	The	next	stage	is	the	"single-electron	transistor,"	in	which	a	single
bit	of	information	is	represented	by	a	lone	electron.	This	will	be	the	ultimate
in	low-power	computing,	at	least	according	to	our	current	understanding	of
physics.	In	order	to	make	use	of	the	incredible	speed	advantages	at	the
molecular	level,	computers	will	have	to	be	very	small,	even	microscopic.	We
already	understand	the	science	that	would	allow	us	to	build	these	superfast
computers.	What	we	need	is	an	engineering	breakthrough,	and	these	are	often
quick	in	coming.
By	the	time	we	have	the	speed,	storing	all	those	bits	won't	be	a	problem.	In
the	spring	of	1983,	IBM	released	its	PC/XT,	the	company's	first	personal
computer	with	an	interior	hard	disk.	The	disk	served	as	a	built-in	storage
device	and	held	10	megabytes,	or	"megs,"	of	information,	about	10	million
characters	or	80	million	bits.	Existing	customers	who	wanted	to	add	these	10
megs	to	their	original	computers	could,	for	a	price.	IBM	offered	a	$3,000	kit,
complete	with	separate	power	supply,	to	expand	the	computer's	storage.	That's
$300	per	megabyte.	Today,	thanks	to	the	exponential	growth	described	by
Moore's	Law,	personal-computer	hard	drives	that	can	hold	1.2	gigabytes—1.2
billion	characters	of	information—are	priced	at	$250.	That's	21	cents	per
megabyte!	And	we	look	toward	an	exotic	improvement	called	a	holographic
memory,	which	can	hold	terabytes	of	characters	in	less	than	a	cubic	inch	of
volume.	With	such	capability,	a	holographic	memory	the	size	of	your	fist
could	hold	the	contents	of	the	Library	of	Congress.
As	communications	technology	goes	digital,	it	becomes	subject	to	the	same
exponential	improvements	that	have	made	today's	$2,000	laptop	computer
more	powerful	than	a	$10	million	IBM	mainframe	computer	of	twenty	years
ago.
At	some	point	not	far	in	the	future,	a	single	wire	running	into	each	home	will
be	able	to	deliver	all	of	a	household's	digital	data.	The	wire	will	either	be
fiber,	which	is	what	long-distance	telephone	calls	are	carried	on	now,	or
coaxial	cable,	which	currently	brings	us	cable	television	signals.	If	the	bits	are
interpreted	as	voice	calls,	the	phone	will	ring.	If	there	are	video	images,	they
will	show	up	on	the	television	set.	If	they	are	on-line	news	services,	they	will
arrive	as	written	text	and	pictures	on	a	computer	screen.

That	single	wire	bringing	the	network	will	certainly	carry	much	more	than
phone	calls,	movies,	news.	But	we	can	no	more	imagine	what	the	information
highway	will	carry	in	twenty-five	years	than	a	Stone	Age	man	using	a	crude
knife	could	have	envisioned	Ghiberti's	Baptistery	doors	in	Florence.	Only
when	the	highway	arrives	will	all	its	possibilities	be	understood.	However,	the
last	twenty	years	of	experience	with	digital	breakthroughs	allow	us	to
understand	some	of	the	key	principles	and	possibilities	for	the	future.

3
LESSONS	FROM	THE
COMPUTER	INDUSTRY
Success	is	a	lousy	teacher.	It	seduces	smart	people	into	thinking	they	can't
lose.	And	it's	an	unreliable	guide	to	the	future.	What	seems	the	perfect
business	plan	or	latest	technology	today	may	soon	be	as	out-of-date	as	the
eight-track	tape	player,	the	vacuum-tube	television,	or	the	mainframe
computer.	I've	watched	it	happen.	Careful	observation	of	many	companies
over	a	long	period	of	time	can	teach	you	principles	that	will	help	with
strategies	for	the	years	ahead.
Companies	investing	in	the	highway	will	try	to	avoid	repeating	the	mistakes
made	in	the	computer	industry	over	the	past	twenty	years.	I	think	most	of
these	mistakes	can	be	understood	by	looking	at	a	few	critical	factors.	Among
them	are	negative	and	positive	spirals,	the	necessity	of	initiating	rather	than
following	trends,	the	importance	of	software	as	opposed	to	hardware,	and	the
role	of	compatibility	and	the	positive	feedback	it	can	generate.
You	can't	count	on	conventional	wisdom.	That	only	makes	sense	in
conventional	markets.	For	the	last	three	decades	the	market	for	computer
hardware	and	software	has	definitely	been	unconventional.	Large	established
companies	that	one	day	had	hundreds	of	millions	of	dollars	in	sales	and	lots
of	satisfied	customers	had	disappeared	in	a	short	time.	New	companies,	such
as	Apple,	Compaq,	Lotus,	Oracle,	Sun,	and	Microsoft,	appeared	to	go	from
nothing	to	a	billion	dollars	of	revenue	in	a	flash.	These	successes	were	driven,
in	part,	by	what	I	call	the	"positive	spiral"
When	you	have	a	hot	product,	investors	pay	attention	to	you	and	are	willing
to	put	their	money	into	your	company.	Smart	kids	think,	Hey,	everybody's
talking	about	this	company.	I'd	like	to	work	there.	When	one	smart	person
comes	to	a	company,	soon	another	does,	because	talented	people	like	to	work
with	each	other.	This	creates	a	sense	of	excitement.	Potential	partners	and
customers	pay	more	attention,	and	the	spiral	continues,	making	the	next
success	easi======================================================== the	costs
of	switching	equipment	and	fiber	are	coming	down	every	year.
This	means	the	companies	are	faced	with	the	sort	of	decision	that	has
confronted	almost	everyone	who	has	contemplated	buying	a	PC.	Do	you	wait
for	prices	to	come	down	and	performance	to	improve,	or	do	you	bite	the
bullet	and	start	getting	use	out	of	the	equipment	sooner?	The	dilemma	will	be
acute	for	some	network	companies.	They	will	have	to	move	very	fast	and
upgrade	constantly.	A	company	will	get	bargain	prices	if	it	waits	long	enough
before	making	investments	in	cabling	and	switches,	but	it	may	never	recover
the	market	share	it	will	have	lost	to	less	cautious	competitors.

Phone	companies,	despite	their	enviable	revenues,	could	be	strapped	for	the
cash	required	to	fund	the	expensive	upgrade	of	the	new	network,	because
regulatory	rate	commissions	may	not	permit	them	to	raise	telephone	rates	or
even	to	use	profits	from	current	service	to	cross-subsidize	this	new	kind	of
business.	Shareholders,	accustomed	to	attractive	dividends	from	the	RBOCs,
might	balk	at	a	diversion	of	profits	to	build	the	information	highway.	For
more	than	a	hundred	years	telephony	has	been	quietly	making	its	profits	as	a
regulated	monopoly.	Suddenly	the	RBOCs	must	become	growth	companies,
which	is	about	as	radical	as	turning	a	tractor	into	a	sports	car.	It	can	be	done
(just	ask	the	folks	at	the	Lamborghini	Company,	which	makes	both),	but	it's
hard	to	do.
The	opportunity	to	provide	ISDN	to	PC	users	will	provide	new	revenues	to
phone	companies	that	want	to	bring	the	price	levels	down	to	establish	a	mass
market.	I	expect	ISDN	adoption	to	get	off	to	a	faster	start	than	PC	cable
modes.	Phone	companies	are	doing	some	clever	work	to	find	out	how	to	use
their	twisted-pair	connections	for	at	least	the	last	few	hundred	feet	to	the
home	and	still	deliver	broadband	data	rates.	Phone	and	cable	companies	can
both	succeed	as	demand	for	new	services	increases	their	revenue
opportunities.
The	ambitions	of	cable	and	phone	companies	go	well	beyond	simply
providing	a	pipe	for	bits.	Imagine	you	are	running	a	bit-delivery	company.
Once	you	own	a	network	in	a	given	area	and	have	hooked	up	most	of	the
homes,	how	can	you	make	more	money?	By	getting	customers	to	consume
more	bits,	but	there	are	only	twenty-four	hours	in	a	day	for	people	to	watch
TV	or	sit	at	their	PCs.	If	you	can't	ship	more	bits,	an	alternative	is	to	have	a
financial	interest	in	the	bits	being	shipped.	Many	see	the	highway	as	a	sort	of
economic	food	chain,	with	the	delivery	and	distribution	of	bits	at	the	bottom,
and	various	types	of	applications,	services,	and	content	layered	on	top.
Companies	in	the	bit-distribution	business	are	attracted	to	the	idea	of	moving
themselves	up	the	food	chain—profiting	from	owning	the	bits	rather	than
from	just	delivering	them.	This	is	why	cable	companies,	regional	telephone
companies,	and	consumer-electronics	manufacturers	are	rushing	to	work	with
Hollywood	studios,	television	and	cable	broadcasters,	and	other	content
businesses.
Some	companies	are	investing	because	they	are	afraid	not	to.	For	a	long	time
distribution	has	been	pretty	lucrative,	largely	because	of	the	monopolies
granted	by	the	government.	As	these	monopolies	disappear	and	competition
begins,	bit	distribution	might	become	less	profitable.	Companies	that	hope	to
participate	in	the	creation	of	the	applications	and	services	and	enter	the

content	business	through	investment	and/or	influence	want	to	move	now,
while	the	opportunities	are	open.	Some	of	these	companies	may	choose	to
give	away	or	subsidize	the	set-top	box	that	connects	up	the	television	set.	Part
of	their	strategy	could	be	to	offer,	for	a	single	monthly	fee,	the	connectivity	to
the	highway,	the	set-top	box,	and	a	package	of	programming,	applications,
and	services	to	go	with	it.	Cable	TV	systems	work	this	way,	and	telephone
companies	in	the	United	States	used	to,	before	deregulation.
Network	operators	that	include	the	set-top	box	as	part	of	the	standard	service
fee	will	attract	customers	who	might	hesitate	to	spend	several	hundred	dollars
to	buy	one.	As	I	explained,	in	the	early	years	there	is	a	real	danger	that	the
box	will	quickly	become	obsolete,	so	why	buy	one?	Although	supplying	the
boxes	will	increase	the	up-front	capital	required	by	the	network	operator,	the
outlay	will	be	worth	it	if	it	helps	create	a	critical	mass	of	users.	But
government	regulators	worry	that	allowing	the	network	operators	to	have
control	of	the	boxes	will	put	them	in	a	position	to	capitalize	on	their
privileged	position.	A	network	operator	that	owns	the	boxes	could	also	seek	to
exert	control	over	what	software,	applications,	and	services	run	on	those
boxes.	There	could	be	limited	choices	for	studios	that	wanted	to	sell	their
movies.	Whether	or	not	to	allow	various	services	equal	access	to	the	wires
and	boxes	is	one	of	the	tough	issues	deregulation	is	going	to	have	to	address.
One	argument	for	equal	access	is	that	if	multiple	services	can	use	the	same
wire,	the	government	can	avoid	setting	standards	for	those	services	and	their
interoperability.
Retailers	would	like	the	opportunity	to	sell	you	the	set-top	boxes.	After	all,
they	already	sell	the	TV	sets	and	PCs,	so	why	not	the	set-top	box	too?
Consumer-electronics	companies	want	to	compete	to	manufacture
the	boxes.	They	want	to	be	able	to	offer	many	models—fancy,	expensive	ones
for	gadget	buffs	and	simple	ones	for	other	folks.	If	the	network	company
supplies	the	boxes,	there	is	no	profit	for	the	retailers.	The	cellular	telephone
industry	solved	this	competition	with	a	partial	subsidy:	You	acquire	your
cellular	phone	from	any	retailer,	but	the	price	is	partially	underwritten	by	the
cellular	company	that	you	commit	to	buy	service	from.
Cable	and	phone	industries	will	be	the	primary,	but	not	the	only,	competitors
to	provide	the	network.	Railroad	companies	in	Japan,	for	example,	recognize
that	the	rights-of-way	they	have	for	their	tracks	would	be	ideal	for	long	fiber-
optic	cable	runs.	Electric,	gas,	and	water	utilities	in	many	countries	point	out
that	they,	too,	run	lines	into	homes	and	businesses.	Some	of	them	have	argued
that	the	energy	savings	from	computerized	management	of	home	heating

alone	might	defray	much	of	the	cost	of	stringing	fiber-optic	cables	because
energy	demand	would	be	lowered,	which	reduces	the	need	for	expensive	new
generating	plants.	In	France	most	of	the	cable	TV	connections	are	owned	by
two	big	water	companies.	But	outside	France,	at	least,	conventional	utility
companies	seem	less	obvious	candidates	for	building	highway	connections.
You	may	wonder	why	I	haven't	mentioned	direct-broadcast	satellites	and
other	technologies	as	mainstream	competitors	of	the	telephone	and	cable
companies.	As	I	said	earlier,	current	satellite	technology	is	a	good	interim
step.	It	delivers	a	great	broadcast	video	signal,	but	there	would	have	to	be	a
major	technological	breakthrough	before	it	could	provide	a	unique	video
bandwidth	feed	to	every	television	set	and	PC.	For	the	United	States	market	it
would	have	to	go	from	today's	300-channel-per-satellite	system	to	a	300,000-
channel	system,	even	assuming	fewer	than	1	percent	of	the	displays	needed	a
unique	feed	simultaneously.
Because	these	satellites	also	have	a	problem	delivering	data	from	the	home
back	into	the	network	(the	back	channel)	to	provide	true	interactivity,
applications	such	as	videoconferencing	aren't	possible.	A	partial	solution	is	to
use	the	phone	for	the	back	channel.	Direct-broadcast	satellites	such	as	the
Hughes	Electronics'	DIRECTV	system	use	your	regular	home	telephone	line
to	submit	back	to	their	billing	center	a	record	of	any	pay-per-view	programs
you	have	chosen.	With	a	special	add-in	circuit,	direct-broadcast	satellites	can
send	data	to	PCs	as	well	as	to	television	sets.	Data	broadcasting	is	a	valuable
interim	conduit	for	some	applications.
Teledesic,	a	company	that	my	friend,	cellular	telephone	pioneer	Craig
McCaw,	and	I	have	invested	in,	is	working	on	overcoming	the	limits	of
satellite	technology	by	using	a	large	number	of	low-orbit	satellites.	The	scope
of	the	proposed	system	is	quite	ambitious.	It	involves	nearly	1,000	satellites
orbiting	fifty	times	closer	to	Earth	than	traditional	geo-stationary	satellites.
Being	closer	to	Earth	means	these	satellites	require	2,500	times	less	power
and	have	increased	two-way	channel	resources.	This	solves	the	back-channel
problem.	Also,	the	significant	transmission	delay	associated	with	satellites	is
also	overcome.	Over	long	distances	these	low-orbit	satellites	can	provide
transmission	speeds	comparable	to	those	available	on	fiber.	Teledesic	has
regulatory,	technical,	and	financial	challenges	and	it	will	be	several	years
before	we'll	know	whether	the	company	can	overcome	them.	If	it	can,
Teledesic	or	other	systems	like	it	may	be	the	first,	the	cheapest,	or	indeed	the
only	way	to	bring	the	highway	to	many	parts	of	Earth.	Most	of	the	population
of	Asia	and	Africa,	for	example,	is	unlikely	to	have	local	access	to	fiber
connections	within	the	next	twenty	years.

Another	rapidly	advancing	technology	is	ground-based	wireless
communication.	Television	signals,	which	have	been	broadcast	over	the	air
using	wireless	VHF	and	UHF,	will	be	carried	primarily	on	fiber.	The	purpose
of	this	change	is	to	enable	everyone	to	have	a	personal	video	feed	and
interact.	Meanwhile,	voice	and	other	low-data-rate	connections	are	moving
from	the	wired	infrastructure	to	wireless	transmission	in	order	to	support
increased	mobility.	The	ideal	system	would	allow	for	the	sort	of	personalized
high-quality	video	and	mobility	I	talked	about	having	with	a	wallet	PC.	So
far,	that	combination	cannot	be	supported	by	any	of	today's	technologies,
because	wireless	systems	can't	provide	the	bandwidth	for	individual	video
feeds	that	a	fiber	network	can.
Early	on,	competitors	will	race	to	supply	the	first	interactive	services	to
communities,	but	once	all	of	the	attractive	territories	are	served	by	one
company	or	another,	rivals	will	begin	head-to-head	competition	by	entering
mar======================================================== and	so	can't	carry	many	bits
per	second.	"Modems"	(shorthand	for	modulator-demodulators)	are	the
devices	that	connect	phone	lines	to	PCs.	Modems,	by	converting	to	0s	and	1s
into	different	tones,	allow	computers	to	connect	over	phone	lines.	In	the	early
days	of	the	IBM	PC,	modems	typically	carried	data	at	the	rate	of	300	or	1,200
bits	per	seconds	(also	known	as	300	or	1,200	"baud").	Most	of	the	data
transmitted	through	phone	lines	at	these	speeds	was	text,	because	transmitting
pictures	was	painfully	slow	when	so	little	information	could	be	transferred
each	second.	Faster	modems	have	gotten	much	more	affordable.	Today,	many
modems	that	connect	PCs	to	other	computers	via	the	phone	system	can	send
and	receive	14,400	(14.4K)	or	28,800	(28.8K)	bits	per	second.	From	a
practical	standpoint,	this	is	still	insufficient	bandwidth	for	many	kinds	of
transmissions.	A	page	of	text	is	sent	in	a	second,	but	a	complete,	screen-sized
photograph,	even	if	compressed,	requires	perhaps	ten	seconds	at	these	baud
rates.	It	takes	minutes	to	send	a	color	photograph	with	enough	resolution	for	it
to	be	made	into	a	slide.	Motion	video	would	take	so	much	time	to	transmit	it
just	isn't	practical	at	these	speeds.
Already,	anyone	can	send	anyone	else	a	message	on	the	Internet	for	business,

education,	or	just	the	fun	of	it.	Students	around	the	world	can	send	messages
to	one	another.	Shut-ins	can	carry	on	animated	conversations	with	friends
they	might	never	get	out	to	meet.	Correspondents	who	might	be
uncomfortable	talking	to	each	other	in	person	have	forged	bonds	across	a
network.	The	information	highway	will	add	video,	which	unfortunately	will
do	away	with	the	social,	racial,	gender,	and	species	blindness	that	text-only
exchanges	permit.
The	Internet	and	other	information	services	carried	on	telephone	networks
suggest	some	aspects	of	how	the	information	highway	will	operate.	When	I
send	you	a	message,	it	is	transmitted	by	phone	line	from	my	computer	to	the
server	that	has	my	"mailbox,"	and	from	there	it	passes	directly	or	indirectly	to
whichever	server	stores	your	mailbox.	When	you	connect	to	your	server,	via
the	telephone	network	or	a	corporate	computer	network,	you	are	able	to
retrieve	("download")	the	contents	of	your	mailbox,	including	my	message.
That's	how	electronic	mail	works.	You	can	type	a	message	once	and	send	it	to
one	person	or	twenty-five,	or	post	it	on	what	is	called	a	"bulletin	board."
Like	its	namesake,	an	electronic	bulletin	board	is	where	messages	are	left	for
anyone	to	read.	Public	conversations	result,	as	people	respond	to	messages.
These	exchanges	are	usually	asynchronous.	Bulletin	boards	typically	are
organized	by	topics	to	serve	specific	communities	of	interest.	This	makes
them	effective	ways	to	reach	targeted	groups.	Commercial	services	offer
bulletin	boards	for	pilots,	journalists,	teachers,	and	much	smaller
communities.	On	the	Internet,	where	the	often	unedited	and	unmoderated
bulletin	boards	are	called	"usenet	newsgroups,"	there	are	thousands	of
communities	devoted	to	topics	as	narrow	as	caffeine,	Ronald	Reagan,	and
neckties.	You	can	download	all	the	messages	on	a	topic,	or	just	recent
messages,	or	all	messages	from	a	certain	person,	or	those	that	respond	to	a

particular	other	message,	or	that	contain	a	specific	word	in	their	subject	line,
and	so	forth.
In	addition	to	electronic	mail	and	file	exchange,	the	Internet	supports	"Web
browsing,"	one	of	its	most	popular	applications.	The	"World	Wide	Web"
(abbreviated	as	the	Web	or	WWW)	refers	to	those	servers	connected	to	the
Internet	that	offer	graphical	pages	of	information.	When	you	connect	to	one
of	those	servers,	a	screen	of	information	with	a	number	of	hyperlinks	appears.
When	you	activate	a	hyperlink	by	clicking	on	it	with	your	mouse,	you	are
taken	to	another	page	containing	additional	information	and	other	hyperlinks.
That	page	may	be	stored	on	the	same	server	or	any	other	server	on	the
Internet.
1995:	U.S.	Library	of	Congress	home	page	on	the	World	Wide	Web,	showing
hyperlinks
The	main	page	for	a	company	or	an	individual	is	called	the	"home"	page.	If
you	create	one,	you	register	its	electronic	address,	then	Internet	users	can	find
you	by	typing	in	the	address.	In	advertisements	today	we	are	starting	to	see
home	page	citations	as	part	of	the	address	information.	The	software	to	set	up
a	Web	server	is	very	cheap	and	available	for	almost	all	computers.	The
software	to	browse	the	Web	is	also	available	for	all	machines,	generally	for
free.	You	can	Web	browse	using	the	CD	that	comes	with	this	book.	In	the
future,	operating	systems	will	integrate	Internet	browsing.
The	ease	with	which	companies	and	individuals	can	publish	information	on
the	Internet	is	changing	the	whole	idea	of	what	it	means	to	"publish."	The
Internet	has,	on	its	own,	established	itself	as	a	place	to	publish	content.	It	has
enough	users	so	that	it	is	benefiting	from	positive	feedback:	the	more
subscribers	it	gets,	the	more	content	it	gets,	and	the	more	content	it	gets,	the
more	subscribers	it	gets.
The	Internet's	unique	position	arises	from	a	number	of	elements.	The	TCP/IP

protocols	that	define	its	transport	level	support	distributed	computing	and	also
scale	incredibly	well.	The	protocols	that	define	Web	browsing	are	extremely
simple	and	have	allowed	servers	to	handle	immense	amounts	of	traffic
reasonably	well.	Many	of	the	predictions	about	interactive	books	and
hyperlinks—made	decades	ago	by	pioneers	like	Ted	Nelson—are	coming	true
on	the	Web.
Today's	Internet	is	not	the	information	highway	I	imagine,	although	you	can
think	of	it	as	the	beginning	of	the	highway.	An	analogy	is	the	Oregon	Trail.
Between	1841	and	the	early	1860s,	more	than	300,000	hardy	souls	rode
wagon	trains	out	of	Independence,	Missouri,	for	a	dangerous	2,000-mile
journey	across	the	wilderness	to	the	Oregon	Territories	or	the	gold	fields	of
California.	An	estimated	20,000	succumbed	to	marauders,	cholera,	starvation,
or	exposure.	Their	route	was	named	the	Oregon	Trail.	You	could	easily	say
the	Oregon	Trail	was	the	start	of	today's	highway	system.	It	crossed	many
boundaries	and	provided	two-way	traffic	to	travelers	in	wheeled	vehicles.	The
modern	path	of	Interstate	84	and	several	other	highways	follows	the	Oregon
Trail	for	much	of	its	length.	However,	many	conclusions	drawn	from
descriptions	of	the	Oregon	Trail	would	be	misleading	if	applied	to	the	future
system.	Cholera	and	starvation	aren't	a	problem	on	Interstate	84.	Tailgating
and	drunk	drivers	weren't	much	of	a	hazard	for	the	wagon	trains.
The	trail	blazed	by	the	Internet	will	direct	many	elements	of	the	highway.	The
Internet	is	a	wonderful,	critical	development	and	a	very	clear	element	of	the
final	system,	but	it	will	change	significantly	in	the	years	ahead.	The	current
Internet	lacks	security	and	needs	a	billing	system.	Much	of	the	Internet
culture	will	seem	as	quaint	to	future	users	of	the	information	highway	as
stories	of	wagon	trains	and	pioneers	on	the	Oregon	Trail	do	to	us	today.
In	fact,	the	Internet	of	today	is	not	the	Internet	of	even	a	short	time	ago.	The
pace	of	its	evolution	is	so	rapid	that	a	description	of	the	Internet	as	it	existed	a
year	or	even	six	months	ago	might	be	seriously	out-of-date.	This	adds	to	the
confusion.	It	is	very	hard	to	stay	up-to-date	with	something	so	dynamic.
Many	companies,	including	Microsoft,	are	working	together	to	define
standards	in	order	to	extend	the	Internet	and	overcome	its	limitations.
Because	the	Internet	originated	as	a	computer-science	proiect	rather	than	a
communications	utility,	it	has	always	been	a	magnet	for	hackers—
programmers	who	turn	their	talents	toward	mischief	or	malice	by	breaking
into	the	computer	systems	of	others.
On	November	2,	1988,	thousands	of	computers	connected	to	the	network

began	to	slow	down.	Many	eventually	ground	to	a	temporary	halt.	No	data
were	destroyed,	but	millions	of	dollars	of	computing	time	were	lost	as
computer	system	administrators	fought	to	regain	control	of	their	machines.
Much	of	the	public	may	have	heard	of	the	Internet	for	the	first	time	when	this
story	was	widely	covered.	The	cause	turned	out	to	be	a	mischievous	computer
program,	called	a	"worm,"	that	was	spreading	from	one	computer	to	another
on	the	network,	replicating	as	it	went.	(It	was	designated	a	worm	rather	than	a
virus	because	it	didn't	infect	other	programs.)	It	used	an	unnoticed	"back
door"	in	the	systems'	software	to	access	directly	the	memory	of	the	computers
it	was	attacking.	There	it	hid	itself	and	passed	around	misleading	information
that	made	it	harder	to	detect	and	counteract.	Within	a	few	days	The	New	York
Times	identified	the	hacker	as	Robert	Morris,	Jr.,	a	twenty-three-year-old
graduate	student	at	Cornell	University.	Morris	later	testified	that	he	had
designed	and	then	unleashed	the	worm	to	see	how	many	computers	it	would
reach,	but	a	mistake	in	his	programming	caused	the	worm	to	replicate	far
faster	than	he	had	expected.	Morris	was	convicted	of	violating	the	1986
Computer	Fraud	and	Abuse	Act,	a	federal	offense.	He	was	sentenced	to	three
years	of	probation,	a	fine	of	$10,000,	and	400	hours	of	community	service.
There	have	been	occasional	breakdowns	and	security	problems,	but	not	many,
and	the	Internet	has	become	a	reasonably	reliable	communications	channel
for	millions	of	people.	It	provides	worldwide	connections	between	servers,
facilitating	the	exchange	of	electronic	mail,	bulletin	board	items,	and	other
data.	The	exchanges	range	from	short	messages	of	a	few	dozen	characters	to
multimillion-byte	transfers	of	photographs,	software,	and	other	kinds	of	data.
It	costs	no	more	to	request	data	from	a	server	that	is	a	mile	away	than	from
one	that	is	thousands	of	miles	distant.
Already	the	Internet's	pricing	model	has	changed	the	notion	that
communication	has	to	be	paid	for	by	time	and	distance.	The	same	thing
happened	with	computing.	If	you	couldn't	afford	a	big	computer	you	used	to
pay	for	computer	time	by	the	hour.	PCs	changed	that.
Because	the	Internet	is	inexpensive	to	use,	people	assume	it	is	government
funded.	Th======================================================== of	money	and	help	the	environment	by
reducing	peak	loads.

Not	all	our	experiments	in	the	guest	cottage	have	been	successful.	For
example,	I	had	installed	speakers	that	descended	from	the	ceiling	when
needed.	The	speaker	enclosures	were	to	be	suspended	away	from	walls,	in	an
optimal	acoustical	position.	But	after	trying	this	out	in	the	cottage,	it
reminded	me	too	much	of	James	Bond	gadgets,	so	in	the	main	house	we've
settled	for	concealed	speakers.
A	house	that	tries	to	guess	what	you	want	has	to	be	right	often	enough	that
you	don't	get	annoyed	by	miscalculations.	I	went	to	a	party	at	a	house	that	had
a	computerized	home-control	system.	The	lights	were	set	to	go	out	at	ten-
thirty,	which	is	when	the	owner	usually	went	to	bed.	At	ten-thirty	the	party
was	still	going	on,	but	sure	enough,	the	lights	went	out.	The	host	was	away
for	what	seemed	like	a	long	time	trying	to	get	them	back	on.	Some	office
buildings	use	motion	detectors	to	control	the	lighting	in	each	room.	If	there
hasn't	been	any	major	activity	for	a	few	minutes,	the	lights	go	off.	People	who
sit	nearly	motionless	at	their	desks	learn	to	wave	their	arms	periodically.
It	isn't	that	hard	to	turn	lights	on	and	off	yourself.	Light	switches	are
extremely	reliable	and	very	easy	to	use,	so	you	run	a	risk	whenever	you	start
replacing	them	with	computer-controlled	devices.	You	have	to	install	systems
that	work	an	incredibly	high	percentage	of	the	time,	because	your	payoff	in
convenience	can	be	eliminated	by	any	lack	of	reliability	or	sensitivity.	I'm
hoping	the	house	systems	will	be	able	to	set	the	lights	automatically	at	the
right	levels.	But,	just	in	case,	every	room	also	has	wall	switches	that	can	be
used	to	override	the	computer's	lighting	decisions.
If	you	regularly	ask	for	light	to	be	unusually	bright	or	dim,	the	house	will
assume	that's	how	you	want	it	most	of	the	time.	In	fact,	the	house	will
remember	everything	it	learns	about	your	preferences.	If	in	the	past	you've
asked	to	see	paintings	by	Henri	Matisse	or	photographs	by	Chris	Johns	of
National	Geographic,	you	may	find	other	works	of	theirs	displayed	on	the
walls	of	rooms	you	enter.	If	you	listened	to	Mozart	horn	concertos	the	last
time	you	visited,	you	might	find	them	on	again	when	you	come	back.	If	you
don't	take	telephone	calls	during	dinner,	the	phone	won't	ring	if	the	call	is	for
you.	We'll	also	be	able	to	"tell"	the	house	what	a	guest	likes.	Paul	Allen	is	a
Jimi	Hendrix	fan	and	a	head-banging	guitar	lick	will	greet	him	whenever	he
visits.
The	house	will	be	instrumented	so	it	records	statistics	on	the	operations	of	all
systems,	and	we'll	be	able	to	analyze	that	information	to	tune	the	systems.
When	we	are	all	on	the	information	highway,	the	same	sort	of	instrumentation

will	be	used	to	count	and	keep	track	of	all	sorts	of	things,	and	the	tallies	will
be	published	for	anyone	who	cares	to	pay	attention.	We	see	precursors	of	this
tabulation	today.	The	Internet	already	carries	information	about	local	traffic
patterns,	which	is	great	for	deciding	on	alternate	commuting	routes.
Television	news	programs	often	show	traffic	as	seen	by	cameras	in
helicopters	and	use	the	same	helicopters	to	estimate	freeway	speeds	during
rush	hours.
A	trivial	but	amusing	example	is	taking	place	today	thanks	to	student
programmers	on	several	college	campuses.	They	have	instrumented	a	soft-
drink	vending	machine	by	connecting	the	hardware	to	the	machine's	empty-
indicator	light,	and	the	machine	publishes	information	constantly	on	the
Internet.	It's	a	bit	of	frivolous	engineering,	but	each	week	hundreds	of	people
from	all	over	the	world	check	whether	there's	any	7UP	or	Diet	Coke	left	in	a
vending	machine	at	Carnegie	Mellon	University.
The	information	highway	may	still	report	on	vending	machines,	as	well	as
showing	us	live	video	from	many	public	places,	up-to-the-second	lottery
numbers	and	sports	betting	odds,	current	mortgage	rates,	or	inventory
numbers	for	certain	kinds	of	products.	I	expect	that	we	will	be	able	to	call	up
live	pictures	from	various	places	around	the	city	and	ask	for	overlays	to	show
spaces	for	rent	with	a	list	of	the	prices	and	the	dates	they	are	available.	Counts
of	crime	reports,	campaign	contributions	by	area,	and	almost	any	other	kind
of	public	or	potentially	public	information	will	be	ours	for	the	asking.
I	will	be	the	first	home	user	for	one	of	the	most	unusual	electronic	features	in
my	house.	The	product	is	a	database	of	more	than	a	million	still	images,
including	photographs	and	reproductions	of	paintings.	If	you're	a	guest,	you'll
be	able	to	call	up	portraits	of	presidents,	pictures	of	sunsets,	airplanes,	skiing
in	the	Andes,	a	rare	French	stamp,	the	Beatles	in	1965,	or	reproductions	of
High	Renaissance	paintings,	on	screens	throughout	the	house.
A	few	years	ago	I	started	a	small	company,	now	called	Corbis,	in	order	to
build	a	unique	and	comprehensive	digital	archive	of	images	of	all	types.
Corbis	is	a	digital	stock	agency	for	a	large	variety	of	visual	material—ranging
from	history,	science,	and	technology	to	natural	history,	world	cultures,	and
fine	arts.	It	converts	these	images	into	digital	form	using	high-quality
scanners.	The	images	are	stored	at	high	resolution	in	a	database	that	has	been
indexed	in	inventive	ways	that	will	make	it	easy	for	someone	to	find	exactly
the	right	image.	These	digital	images	will	be	available	to	commercial	users
such	as	magazine	and	book	publishers	as	well	as	to	individual	browsers.
Royalties	are	paid	to	the	image	owners.	Corbis	is	working	with	museums	and

libraries,	as	well	as	a	large	number	of	individual	photographers,	agencies,	and
other	archives.
I	believe	quality	images	will	be	in	great	demand	on	the	highway.	This	vision
that	the	public	will	find	image-browsing	worthwhile	is	obviously	totally
unproven.	I	think	the	right	interface	will	make	it	appealing	to	a	lot	of	people.
If	you	can't	decide	what	you	feel	like	seeing,	you	will	be	able	to	scan
randomly	and	the	database	will	show	you	various	images	until	something
interests	you.	Then	you'll	be	able	to	explore	related	pictures	in	depth.	I'm
looking	forward	to	being	able	to	scan	and	to	asking	for	"sailboats"	or
"volcanoes"	or	"famous	scientists"
Although	some	of	the	images	will	be	of	artworks,	that	doesn't	mean	I	believe
that	reproductions	are	as	good	as	the	originals.	There's	nothing	like	seeing	the
real	work.	I	believe	that	easy-to-browse	image	databases	will	get	more	people
interested	in	both	graphic	and	photographic	art.
In	the	course	of	my	business	travels,	I've	been	able	to	spend	some	time	in
museums	seeing	the	originals	of	some	great	art.	The	most	interesting	piece	of
"art"	I	own	is	a	scientific	notebook,	kept	by	Leonardo	da	Vinci	in	the	early
1500s.	I've	admired	Leonardo	since	I	was	young	because	he	was	a	genius	in
so	many	fields	and	so	far	ahead	of	his	time.	Even	though	what	I	own	is	a
notebook	of	writings	and	drawings,	rather	than	a	painting,	no	reproduction
could	do	it	full	justice.
Art,	like	most	things,	is	more	enjoyable	when	you	know	something	about	it.
You	can	walk	for	hours	through	the	Louvre,	admiring	paintings	that	are	at
best	vaguely	familiar,	but	the	experience	becomes	much	more	interesting
when	there	is	someone	knowledgeable	walking	with	you.	The	multi-media
document	can	play	the	role	of	guide,	at	home	or	in	a	museum.	It	can	let	you
hear	part	of	a	lecture	on	a	work	given	by	the	preeminent	scholar	on	the
subject.	It	can	refer	you	to	other	works	by	the	same	artist	or	from	the	same
period.	You	can	even	zoom	in	for	a	closer	look.	If	multi-media	reproductions
make	art	more	approachable,	those	who	see	the	reproduction	will	want	to	see
originals.	Exposure	to	the	reproductions	is	likely	to	increase	rather	than
diminish	reverence	for	real	art	and	encourage	more	people	to	get	out	to
museums	and	galleries.
A	decade	from	now,	access	to	the	millions	of	images	and	all	the	other
entertainment	opportunities	I've	described	will	be	available	in	many	homes
and	will	certainly	be	more	impressive	than	those	I'll	have	when	I	move	into
my	house	in	late	1996.	My	house	will	just	be	getting	some	of	the	services	a

little	sooner.
I	enjoy	experimenting,	and	I	know	some	of	my	concepts	for	the	house	will
work	out	better	than	others.	Maybe	I'll	decide	to	conceal	the	monitors	behind
conventional	wall	art	or	throw	the	electronic	pins	into	the	trash.	Or	maybe	I'll
grow	accustomed	to	the	systems	in	the	house,	or	even	fond	of	them,	and
wonder	how	I	got	along	without	them.	That's	my	hope.

11
RACE	FOR
THE	GOLD
It	seems	as	though	every	week	some	company	or	consortium	announces	it	has
won	the	race	to	build	the	information	highway.	Incessant	hoopla	about
megamergers	and	bold	investments	has	created	a	gold	rush	atmosphere—
people	and	companies	pressing	headlong	toward	an	opportunity,	hoping	to
cross	a	finish	line	or	stake	a	claim	they	believe	will	assure	them	of	success.
Investors	seem	enchanted	with	highway-related	stock	offerings.	Media
coverage	of	the	race	is	unprecedented,	especially	considering	that	both	the
technology	and	the	demand	are	unproven.	This	is	quite	different	from	the
early,	unchronicled	days	of	the	personal-computer	industry.	Today's	frenzy
can	be	intoxicating,	especially	for	those	who	hope	to	be	contenders,	but	the
truth	is	that	in	this	race	everyone	is	barely	at	the	starting	line.
When	it	finally	is	run,	there	will	be	many	winners,	some	unexpected.	One
result	of	the	California	gold	rush	was	the	rapid	economic	development	of	the
West.	In	1848,	only	400	settlers	were	drawn	to	California.	Most	were	engaged
in	agriculture.	Within	one	year	the	gold	rush	had	attracted	25,000	settlers.	A
decade	later,	manufacturing	was	a	much	bigger	part	of	California's	economy
than	gold	production,	and	the	state's	per	capita	wealth	was	the	nation's
highest.
Over	time,	big	money	will	be	made	with	the	right	investment	strategies.	There
are	large	numbers	of	very	different	sorts	of	companies	jockeying	for	what
they	perceive	will	be	the	post	position.	And	much	of	their	jockeying	is	being
covered	as	important	news.	In	this	chapter	I'd	like	t======================================================== ange	seems	terse,	keep	in	mind	that	the	average	Microsoft
employee	receives	dozens	of	electronic	messages	a	day.	An	e-mail	message	is
like	a	statement	or	a	question	at	a	meeting—one	thought	or	inquiry	in	an	on-
going	communication.	Microsoft	provides	e-mail	for	business	purposes,	but,
like	the	office	telephone,	it	serves	many	other	purposes,	social	and	personal.
For	example,	hikers	can	reach	all	the	members	of	the	Microsoft	Hiking	Club
to	try	to	find	a	ride	to	the	mountain.	And	certainly	a	few	romances	around
Microsoft	have	benefited	from	e-mail.	When	my	wife,	Melinda,	and	I	were
first	going	out,	we	took	advantage	of	it.	For	some	reason	people	are	less	shy
about	sending	e-mail	than	communicating	on	the	phone	or	in	person.	This	can
be	a	benefit	or	a	problem,	depending	on	the	situation.
I	spend	several	hours	a	day	reading	and	answering	e-mail	to	and	from
employees,	customers,	and	partners	around	the	world.	Anyone	in	the
company	can	send	me	e-mail,	and	because	I	am	the	only	person	who	reads	it,
no	one	has	to	worry	about	protocol	in	a	message	to	me.
I	probably	wouldn't	have	to	spend	so	long	if	my	e-mail	address	weren't
semipublic.	There	is	actually	a	book	called	E-Mail	Addresses	of	the	Rich	&
Famous,	which	includes	my	e-mail	address	as	well	as	ones	for	Rush
Limbaugh	and	Senator	Ted	Kennedy.	When	John	Seabrook	was	writing	an
article	about	me	for	The	New	Yorker	magazine,	he	conducted	his	interview
primarily	on	e-mail.	It	was	a	very	effective	way	to	have	a	dialogue,	and	I
enjoyed	the	piece	when	it	appeared,	but	it	mentioned	my	e-mail	address.	The
result	has	been	an	avalanche	of	mail	ranging	from	students	asking	me,	in
effect,	to	do	their	homework	assignments,	to	people	asking	for	money,	to	mail
from	a	group	interested	in	whales	who	for	some	reason	added	my	e-mail
name	to	their	list.	My	address	is	also	a	target	for	both	rude	and	friendly
messages	from	strangers,	and	provocative	ones	from	the	press	("If	you	don't
answer	this	by	tomorrow	I	will	publish	a	story	about	you	and	that	topless
waitress!").
We	have	special	e-mail	addresses	at	Microsoft	for	job	applications,	product
feedback,	and	other	legitimate	communications.	But	a	lot	of	that	mail	still

comes	to	me	and	I	have	to	reroute	it.	There	are	also	three	e-mail	equivalents
of	chain	letters	that	keep	making	the	rounds.	One	threatens	general	bad	luck	if
it	isn't	forwarded.	Another	specifically	says	the	punishment	will	be	that	your
sex	life	will	suffer.	A	third,	which	has	been	going	around	for	six	years,
contains	a	cookie	recipe	and	a	story	about	a	company's	having	overcharged	a
woman	for	the	recipe,	and	so	she	wants	you	to	distribute	it	for	free.	In	the
various	versions	different	companies	are	named.	Apparently	it	is	the	idea	of
getting	back	at	a	corporation,	any	corporation,	that	has	made	that	one	such	a
perennial	favorite.	This	is	all	mixed	in	with	mail	that	really	should	come	to
me,	often	about	important	issues.	Fortunately,	e-mail	software	is	improving
all	the	time	and	it	now	includes	a	feature	that	lets	me	prioritize	mail	from
senders	I	have	designated.
When	I	travel,	I	connect	my	portable	computer	back	into	Microsoft's
electronic	mail	system	every	night	to	retrieve	new	messages	and	send	off	the
ones	I've	written	over	the	course	of	the	day	to	people	in	the	company.	Most
recipients	will	not	even	be	aware	that	I	am	out	of	the	ofrice.	When	I'm
connected	to	our	corporate	network	from	a	remote	site,	I	can	also	click	on	a
single	icon	to	see	how	sales	are	doing,	to	check	the	status	of	projects,	or	to
access	any	other	management	databases.	It	is	reassuring	to	check	my
electronic	in-box	when	I'm	thousands	of	miles	and	a	dozen	time	zones	away,
because	bad	news	almost	always	comes	through	on	e-mail.	So	if	nothing	bad
is	waiting	there,	I	don't	need	to	worry.
We	now	use	e-mail	in	all	sorts	of	ways	we	hadn't	anticipated.	For	example,	at
the	beginning	of	the	annual	Microsoft	Giving	Campaign,	which	raises	money
for	charity,	employees	receive	an	e-mail	message	encouraging	them	to
participate.	The	e-mail	message	contains	an	electronic	pledge-card	program.
When	the	icon	in	the	message	is	clicked,	the	pledge	card	appears	on	the
employee's	screen	and	he	or	she	can	pledge	a	cash	gift	or	sign	up	for	a	payroll
deduction.	If	the	latter	option	is	chosen,	the	information	is	automatically
entered	into	Microsofts	payroll	database.	From	the	electronic	form	employees
can	direct	their	gift	to	their	local	United	Way	or	to	another	nonprofit
organization.	If	they	want	to,	they	can	choose	to	have	their	donation	go	to	one
or	more	of	the	charities	the	United	Way	supports,	and	can	even	access	a
server	to	obtain	information	about	those	organizations	or	about	volunteering
in	their	community.	From	start	to	finish	it's	completely	electronic.	As	the
leader	of	the	company,	I	can	analyze	summary	information	day	by	day	to	find
out	if	we	are	getting	good	participation	or	if	we	need	to	have	a	few	more
rallies	to	get	out	the	message	about	how	important	we	think	the	giving
campaign	is.

Today,	besides	company-operated,	text-based	e-mail	systems,	the	kind
Microsoft	operates	for	its	own	use,	there	are	commercial	services	such	as
MCI	Mail	and	B.T.	Gold	(operated	by	British	Telecom).	There	are	also
offerings	from	all	of	the	commercial	on-line	systems	such	as	CompuServe,
Prodigy,	and	the	Microsoft	Network.	These	perform	some	of	the	same
functions	that	telegrams	and,	later,	telex	systems	once	did.	Users	connected	to
these	e-mail	systems	can	send	a	message	to	virtually	anyone	who	has	a
standard	Internet	e-mail	address.	Both	private	and	commercial	e-mail	systems
include	"gateways"	that	transfer	messages	sent	by	a	user	of	one	mail	system
to	a	recipient	on	another.	You	can	get	a	message	to	almost	anyone	who	has	a
PC	and	a	modem,	although	for	certain	communications	privacy	is	a	problem
because	transmissions	across	the	Internet	are	not	very	secure.	Some
commercial	services,	such	as	MCI,	will	also	deliver	a	message	by	fax,	telex,
or	traditional	mail	if	the	recipient	doesn't	have	an	electronic	mailbox.
Future	advances	in	electronic	mail	will	streamline	lots	of	activities	we	may
not	even	realize	are	inefficient.	For	example,	think	about	how	you	pay	bills.
More	often	than	not,	a	company	prints	out	a	bill	on	a	piece	of	paper	and	puts
it	in	an	envelope	that	is	physically	carried	to	your	house.	You	open	the	bill,
check	your	records	to	see	if	the	amount	and	details	seem	appropriate,	write	a
check,	and	then	try	to	time	when	you	mail	it	back	so	that	it	arrives	shortly
before	the	due	date.	We're	so	used	to	this	process	we	don't	even	think	about
how	wasteful	it	is.	Let's	say	you	disagree	with	a	bill.	You	call	the	company
up,	wait	on	hold,	and	try	to	get	through	to	the	right	person—who	may	not
really	be	the	right	person	at	all.	In	which	case	you	have	to	wait	for	someone
else	to	call	you	back.
Very	soon	you'll	check	your	PC,	wallet,	or	television	set	the	information
appliance	of	your	choice—for	e-mail,	including	bills.	When	a	bill	comes	in,
the	device	will	show	your	payment	history.	If	you	want	to	inquire	about	the
bill,	you'll	do	it	asynchronously—at	your	convenience—by	sending	e-mail:
"Hey	how	come	this	charge	is	so	high?"
Tens	of	thousands	of	businesses	in	the	United	States	already	exchange
information	via	an	electronic	system	called	Electronic	Document	Interchange,
or	EDI.	It	allows	companies	that	have	contractual	relationships	to	execute
specific	kinds	of	transactions	automatically.	Dealings	are	highly	structured—
reordering	products	or	checking	the	status	of	a	shipment—which	makes
conventional	EDI	unsuitable	for	ad	hoc	communications,	although	many
companies	are	working	to	combine	the	benefits	of	EDI	and	e-mail	into	a
single	system.

The	asynchronicity	of	e-mail	and	EDI	is	one	of	their	advantages,	but	there	is
still	a	place	for	synchronous	communications.	Sometimes	you	want	to	call
someone	up,	talk	directly,	and	get	an	immediate	response	rather	than	leaving	a
message.
Within	a	few	years	there	will	be	hybrid	communications	systems	that
combine	elements	of	synchronous	and	asynchronous	communications.	These
systems	will	use	DSVD	(and	later	ISDN)	telephone	connections	to	permit	the
simultaneous	transfer	of	voice	and	data,	even	before	the	full	information
highway	is	in	place.
It	will	work	this	way:	When	companies	post	information	about	their	products
on	the	Internet,	part	of	that	information	will	include	instructions	for	how	a
customer	can	connect	synchronously	with	a	sales	representative	who	will	be
able	to	answer	questions	through	a	voice-data	connection.	For	example,	if
you're	shopping	for	boots	on	Eddie	Bauer's	home	page	(an	electronic	catalog)
and	you	want	to	know	if	the	boots	you	like	are	appropriate	for	use	in	Florida's
Everglades	or	on	a	glacier,	you'll	be	able	to	click	a	button	to	get	a
representative	to	come	on	the	line	and	talk	to	you.	The	representative	will	see
immediately	that	you	are	looking	at	the	boots	and	will	have	whatever	other
information	about	yourself	you	have	decided	to	make	available,	not	just	your
clothing	and	shoe	sizes,	style	and	color	preferences,	but	your	athletic
interests,	your	past	purchases	from	other	companies,	and	even	your	price
range.	Some	people	will	choose	not	to	make	any	information	about
themselves	available.	Eddie	Bauer's	computer	may	route	your	inquiry	to	the
same	person	you	spoke	to	last	time,	or	it	may	route	you	to	someone	who	has
expertise	in	the	product	displayed	on	your	screen,	in	this	case,	boots.	Without
preamble,	you	will	be	able	to	ask,	"Do	these	boots	work	well	in	swamps	like
the	Everglades?"	or	whatever	your	question	is.	The	representative	doesn't
have	to	be	in	an	office.	He	can	be	anywhere	as	long	as	he	has	access	to	a	PC
and	has	indicated	he	is	available.	If	he	speaks	the	right	language	and	has	the
right	expertise,	he	can	help	out.
Or	if	you	decided	to	change	your	will,	you'd	phone	your	lawyer,	and	she
might	say,	"Let's	take	a	quick	look	at	that."	She	would	then	call	your	will	up
on	her	PC,	and	it	would	appear	on	your	screen	as	well	as	hers	courtesy	of
DSVD,	ISDN,	or	similar	techno======================================================== han	Traf-O-Data:	the	Altair	8800	("Altair"	was	a	destination	in	a	Star	Trek
episode).	It	was	being	sold	for	$397	as	a	kit.	When	it	was	assembled,	it	had	no
keyboard	or	display.	It	had	sixteen	address	switches	to	direct	commands	and
sixteen	lights.	You	could	get	the	little	lights	on	the	front	panel	to	blink,	but
that	was	about	all.	Part	of	the	problem	was	that	the	Altair	8800	lacked
software.	It	couldn't	be	programmed,	which	made	it	more	a	novelty	than	a
tool.
What	the	Altair	did	have	was	an	Intel	8080	microprocessor	chip	as	its	brain.
When	we	saw	that,	panic	set	in.	"Oh	no!	It's	happening	without	us!	People	are
going	to	go	write	real	software	for	this	chip"	I	was	sure	it	would	happen
sooner	rather	than	later,	and	I	wanted	to	be	involved	from	the	beginning.	The
chance	to	get	in	on	the	first	stages	of	the	PC	revolution	seemed	the
opportunity	of	a	lifetime,	and	I	seized	it.
Twenty	years	later	I	feel	the	same	way	about	what's	going	on	now.	Then	I	was
afraid	others	would	have	the	same	vision	we	did;	today	I	know	thousands	do.
The	legacy	of	the	earlier	revolution	is	that	50	million	PCs	are	sold	each	year
worldwide,	and	that	fortunes	have	been	completely	reordered	in	the	computer
industry.	There	have	been	plenty	of	winners	and	losers.	This	time	lots	of
companies	are	rushing	to	get	in	early	while	change	is	taking	place	and	there
are	endless	opportunities.

When	we	look	back	at	the	last	twenty	years	it	is	obvious	that	a	number	of
large	companies	were	so	set	in	their	ways	that	they	did	not	adapt	properly	and
lost	out	as	a	result.	Twenty	years	from	now	we'll	look	back	and	see	the	same
pattern.	I	know	that	as	I	write	this	there's	at	least	one	young	person	out	there
who	will	create	a	major	new	company,	convinced	that	his	or	her	insight	into
the	communications	revolution	is	the	right	one.	Thousands	of	innovative
companies	will	be	founded	to	exploit	the	coming	changes.
In	1975,	when	Paul	and	I	naively	decided	to	start	a	company,	we	were	acting
like	characters	in	all	those	Judy	Garland	and	Mickey	Rooney	movies	who
crowed,	"We'll	put	on	a	show	in	the	barn!"	There	was	no	time	to	waste.	Our
first	project	was	to	create	BASIC	for	the	little	computer.
We	had	to	squeeze	a	lot	of	capability	into	the	computer's	small	memory.	The
typical	Altair	had	about	4,000	characters	of	memory.	Today	most	personal
computers	have	4	or	8	million	characters	of	memory.	Our	task	was	further
complicated	because	we	didn't	actually	own	an	Altair,	and	had	never	even
seen	one.	That	didn't	really	matter	because	what	we	were	really	interested	in
was	the	new	Intel	8080	microprocessor	chip,	and	we'd	never	seen	that,	either.
Undaunted,	Paul	studied	a	manual	for	the	chip,	then	wrote	a	program	that
made	a	big	computer	at	Harvard	mimic	the	little	Altair.	This	was	like	having	a
whole	orchestra	available	and	using	it	to	play	a	simple	duet,	but	it	worked.
Writing	good	software	requires	a	lot	of	concentration,	and	writing	BASIC	for
the	Altair	was	exhausting.	Sometimes	I	rock	back	and	forth	or	pace	when	I'm
thinking,	because	it	helps	me	focus	on	a	single	idea	and	exclude	distractions.	I
did	a	lot	of	rocking	and	pacing	in	my	dorm	room	the	winter	of	1975.	Paul	and
I	didn't	sleep	much	and	lost	track	of	night	and	day.	When	I	did	fall	asleep,	it
was	often	at	my	desk	or	on	the	floor.	Some	days	I	didn't	eat	or	see	anyone.
But	after	five	weeks,	our	BASIC	was	written—and	the	world's	first
microcomputer	software	company	was	born.	In	time	we	named	it
"Microsoft."
We	knew	getting	a	company	started	would	mean	sacrifice.	But	we	also
realized	we	had	to	do	it	then	or	forever	lose	the	opportunity	to	make	it	in
microcomputer	software.	In	the	spring	of	1975,	Paul	quit	his	programming
job	and	I	decided	to	go	on	leave	from	Harvard.
I	talked	it	over	with	my	parents,	both	of	whom	were	pretty	savvy	about
business.	They	saw	how	much	I	wanted	to	try	starting	a	software	company
and	they	were	supportive.	My	plan	was	to	take	time	off,	start	the	company,
and	then	go	back	later	and	finish	college.	I	never	really	made	a	conscious

decision	to	forgo	a	degree.	Technically,	I'm	just	on	a	really	long	leave.	Unlike
some	students,	I	loved	college.	I	thought	it	was	fun	to	sit	around	and	talk	with
so	many	smart	people	my	own	age.	However,	I	felt	the	window	of
opportunity	to	start	a	software	company	might	not	open	again.	So	I	dove	into
the	world	of	business	when	I	was	nineteen	years	old.
From	the	start,	Paul	and	I	funded	everything	ourselves.	Each	of	us	had	saved
some	money.	Paul	had	been	well	paid	at	Honeywell,	and	some	of	the	money	I
had	came	from	late-night	poker	games	in	the	dorm.	Fortunately,	our	company
didn't	require	massive	funding.
People	often	ask	me	to	explain	Microsoft's	success.	They	want	to	know	the
secret	of	getting	from	a	two-man,	shoestring	operation	to	a	company	with
17,000	employees	and	more	than	$6	billion	a	year	in	sales.	Of	course,	there	is
no	simple	answer,	and	luck	played	a	role,	but	I	think	the	most	important
element	was	our	original	vision.
We	glimpsed	what	lay	beyond	that	Intel	8080	chip,	and	then	acted	on	it.	We
asked,	"What	if	computing	were	nearly	free?"	We	believed	there	would	be
computers	everywhere	because	of	cheap	computing	power	and	great	new
software	that	would	take	advantage	of	it.	We	set	up	shop	betting	on	the	former
and	producing	the	latter	when	no	one	else	was.	Our	initial	insight	made
everything	else	a	bit	easier.	We	were	in	the	right	place	at	the	right	time.	We
got	there	first	and	our	early	success	gave	us	the	chance	to	hire	many	smart
people.	We	built	a	worldwide	sales	force	and	used	the	revenue	it	generated	to
fund	new	products.	From	the	beginning	we	set	off	down	a	road	that	was
headed	in	the	right	direction.
Now	there	is	a	new	horizon,	and	the	relevant	question	is,	"What	if
communicating	were	almost	free?"	The	idea	of	interconnecting	all	homes	and
offices	to	a	high-speed	network	has	ignited	this	nation's	imagination	as
nothing	has	since	the	space	program.	And	not	just	this	nation's—imaginations
around	the	world	have	caught	fire.	Thousands	of	companies	are	committed	to
the	same	vision,	so	individual	focus,	understanding	of	the	intermediate	steps,
and	execution	will	determine	their	relative	successes.
I	spend	a	good	deal	of	time	thinking	about	business	because	I	enjoy	my	work
so	much.	Today,	a	lot	of	my	thoughts	are	about	the	highway.	Twenty	years
ago,	when	I	was	thinking	about	the	future	of	microchip	personal	computers,	I
couldn't	be	certain	where	they	were	leading	me	either.	I	kept	to	my	course,
however,	and	had	confidence	we	were	moving	in	the	right	direction	to	be
where	we	wanted	to	be	when	everything	became	clear.	There's	a	lot	more	at

stake	now,	but	I	feel	that	same	way	again.	It's	nerve-wracking,	but
exhilarating	too.
All	sorts	of	individuals	and	companies	are	betting	their	futures	on	building	the
elements	that	will	make	the	information	highway	a	reality.	At	Microsoft,
we're	working	hard	to	figure	out	how	to	evolve	from	where	we	are	today	to
the	point	where	we	can	unleash	the	full	potential	of	the	new	advances	in
technology.	These	are	exciting	times,	not	only	for	the	companies	involved	but
for	everyone	who	will	realize	the	benefits	of	this	revolution.

2
THE	BEGINNING	OF
THE	INFORMATION	AGE
The	first	time	I	heard	the	term	"Information	Age"	I	was	tantalized.	I	knew
about	the	Iron	Age	and	the	Bronze	Age,	periods	of	history	named	for	the	new
materials	men	used	to	make	their	tools	and	weapons.	Those	were	specific
eras.	Then	I	read	academics	predicting	that	countries	will	be	fighting	over	the
control	of	information,	not	natural	resources.	This	sounded	intriguing	too,	but
what	did	they	mean	by	information?
The	claim	that	information	would	define	the	future	reminded	me	of	the
famous	party	scene	in	the	1967	movie	The	Graduate.	A	businessman
buttonholes	Benjamin,	the	college	graduate	played	by	Dustin	Hoffman,	and
offers	him	a	single	word	of	unsolicited	career	advice:	"Plastics."	I	wondered
whether,	if	the	scene	had	been	written	a	few	decades	later,	the	businessman's
advice	would	have	been:	"One	word,	Benjamin.	'Information.'	"
I	imagined	nonsensical	conversations	around	a	future	office	watercooler:
"How	much	information	do	you	have?"	"Switzerland	is	a	great	country
because	of	all	the	information	they	have	there!"	"I	hear	the	Information	Price
Index	is	going	up!"
It	sounds	nonsensical	because	information	isn't	as	tangible	or	measurable	as
the	materials	that	defined	previous	ages,	but	information	has	become
increasingly	important	to	us.	The	information	revolution	is	just	beginning.
The	cost	of	communications	will	drop	as	precipitously	as	the	cost	of
computing	already	has.	When	it	gets	low	enough	and	is	combined	with	other
advances	in	technology,	"information	highway"	will	no	longer	be	just	a	phrase
for	eager	executives	and	excited	politicians.	It	will	be	as	real	and	as	far-
reaching	as	"electricity."	To	understand	why	information	is	going	to	be	so
central,	it's	important	to	know	how	technology	is	changing	the	ways	we
handle	information.
The	majority	of	this	chapter	is	devoted	to	such	an	explanation.	The	material
that	follows	is	to	give	less-informed	readers	without	a	background	in
computer	principles	and	history	sufficient	information	to	enjoy	the	rest	of	the
material	in	the	book.	If	you	understand	how	digital	computers	work,	you

probably	already	know	the	material	cold,	so	feel	free	to	skip	to	chapter	3.
The	most	fundamental	difference	we'll	see	in	future	information	is	that	almost
all	of	it	will	be	digital.	Whole	printed	libraries	are	already	being	scanned	and
stored	as	electronic	data	on	disks	and	CD-ROMs.	Newspapers	and	magazines
are	now	often	completely	composed	in	electronic	form	and	printed	on	paper
as	a	convenience	for	distribution.	The	electronic	information	is	stored
permanently—or	for	as	long	as	anyone	wants	it—in	computer	databases:
giant	banks	of	journalistic	data	accessible	through	on-line	services.
Photographs,	films,	and	videos	are	all	being	converted	into	digital
information.	Every	year,	better	methods	are	being	devised	to	quantify
information	and	distil======================================================== the	costs
of	switching	equipment	and	fiber	are	coming	down	every	year.
This	means	the	companies	are	faced	with	the	sort	of	decision	that	has
confronted	almost	everyone	who	has	contemplated	buying	a	PC.	Do	you	wait
for	prices	to	come	down	and	performance	to	improve,	or	do	you	bite	the
bullet	and	start	getting	use	out	of	the	equipment	sooner?	The	dilemma	will	be
acute	for	some	network	companies.	They	will	have	to	move	very	fast	and
upgrade	constantly.	A	company	will	get	bargain	prices	if	it	waits	long	enough
before	making	investments	in	cabling	and	switches,	but	it	may	never	recover
the	market	share	it	will	have	lost	to	less	cautious	competitors.

Phone	companies,	despite	their	enviable	revenues,	could	be	strapped	for	the
cash	required	to	fund	the	expensive	upgrade	of	the	new	network,	because
regulatory	rate	commissions	may	not	permit	them	to	raise	telephone	rates	or
even	to	use	profits	from	current	service	to	cross-subsidize	this	new	kind	of
business.	Shareholders,	accustomed	to	attractive	dividends	from	the	RBOCs,
might	balk	at	a	diversion	of	profits	to	build	the	information	highway.	For
more	than	a	hundred	years	telephony	has	been	quietly	making	its	profits	as	a
regulated	monopoly.	Suddenly	the	RBOCs	must	become	growth	companies,
which	is	about	as	radical	as	turning	a	tractor	into	a	sports	car.	It	can	be	done
(just	ask	the	folks	at	the	Lamborghini	Company,	which	makes	both),	but	it's
hard	to	do.
The	opportunity	to	provide	ISDN	to	PC	users	will	provide	new	revenues	to
phone	companies	that	want	to	bring	the	price	levels	down	to	establish	a	mass
market.	I	expect	ISDN	adoption	to	get	off	to	a	faster	start	than	PC	cable
modes.	Phone	companies	are	doing	some	clever	work	to	find	out	how	to	use
their	twisted-pair	connections	for	at	least	the	last	few	hundred	feet	to	the
home	and	still	deliver	broadband	data	rates.	Phone	and	cable	companies	can
both	succeed	as	demand	for	new	services	increases	their	revenue
opportunities.
The	ambitions	of	cable	and	phone	companies	go	well	beyond	simply
providing	a	pipe	for	bits.	Imagine	you	are	running	a	bit-delivery	company.
Once	you	own	a	network	in	a	given	area	and	have	hooked	up	most	of	the
homes,	how	can	you	make	more	money?	By	getting	customers	to	consume
more	bits,	but	there	are	only	twenty-four	hours	in	a	day	for	people	to	watch
TV	or	sit	at	their	PCs.	If	you	can't	ship	more	bits,	an	alternative	is	to	have	a
financial	interest	in	the	bits	being	shipped.	Many	see	the	highway	as	a	sort	of
economic	food	chain,	with	the	delivery	and	distribution	of	bits	at	the	bottom,
and	various	types	of	applications,	services,	and	content	layered	on	top.
Companies	in	the	bit-distribution	business	are	attracted	to	the	idea	of	moving
themselves	up	the	food	chain—profiting	from	owning	the	bits	rather	than
from	just	delivering	them.	This	is	why	cable	companies,	regional	telephone
companies,	and	consumer-electronics	manufacturers	are	rushing	to	work	with
Hollywood	studios,	television	and	cable	broadcasters,	and	other	content
businesses.
Some	companies	are	investing	because	they	are	afraid	not	to.	For	a	long	time
distribution	has	been	pretty	lucrative,	largely	because	of	the	monopolies
granted	by	the	government.	As	these	monopolies	disappear	and	competition
begins,	bit	distribution	might	become	less	profitable.	Companies	that	hope	to
participate	in	the	creation	of	the	applications	and	services	and	enter	the

content	business	through	investment	and/or	influence	want	to	move	now,
while	the	opportunities	are	open.	Some	of	these	companies	may	choose	to
give	away	or	subsidize	the	set-top	box	that	connects	up	the	television	set.	Part
of	their	strategy	could	be	to	offer,	for	a	single	monthly	fee,	the	connectivity	to
the	highway,	the	set-top	box,	and	a	package	of	programming,	applications,
and	services	to	go	with	it.	Cable	TV	systems	work	this	way,	and	telephone
companies	in	the	United	States	used	to,	before	deregulation.
Network	operators	that	include	the	set-top	box	as	part	of	the	standard	service
fee	will	attract	customers	who	might	hesitate	to	spend	several	hundred	dollars
to	buy	one.	As	I	explained,	in	the	early	years	there	is	a	real	danger	that	the
box	will	quickly	become	obsolete,	so	why	buy	one?	Although	supplying	the
boxes	will	increase	the	up-front	capital	required	by	the	network	operator,	the
outlay	will	be	worth	it	if	it	helps	create	a	critical	mass	of	users.	But
government	regulators	worry	that	allowing	the	network	operators	to	have
control	of	the	boxes	will	put	them	in	a	position	to	capitalize	on	their
privileged	position.	A	network	operator	that	owns	the	boxes	could	also	seek	to
exert	control	over	what	software,	applications,	and	services	run	on	those
boxes.	There	could	be	limited	choices	for	studios	that	wanted	to	sell	their
movies.	Whether	or	not	to	allow	various	services	equal	access	to	the	wires
and	boxes	is	one	of	the	tough	issues	deregulation	is	going	to	have	to	address.
One	argument	for	equal	access	is	that	if	multiple	services	can	use	the	same
wire,	the	government	can	avoid	setting	standards	for	those	services	and	their
interoperability.
Retailers	would	like	the	opportunity	to	sell	you	the	set-top	boxes.	After	all,
they	already	sell	the	TV	sets	and	PCs,	so	why	not	the	set-top	box	too?
Consumer-electronics	companies	want	to	compete	to	manufacture
the	boxes.	They	want	to	be	able	to	offer	many	models—fancy,	expensive	ones
for	gadget	buffs	and	simple	ones	for	other	folks.	If	the	network	company
supplies	the	boxes,	there	is	no	profit	for	the	retailers.	The	cellular	telephone
industry	solved	this	competition	with	a	partial	subsidy:	You	acquire	your
cellular	phone	from	any	retailer,	but	the	price	is	partially	underwritten	by	the
cellular	company	that	you	commit	to	buy	service	from.
Cable	and	phone	industries	will	be	the	primary,	but	not	the	only,	competitors
to	provide	the	network.	Railroad	companies	in	Japan,	for	example,	recognize
that	the	rights-of-way	they	have	for	their	tracks	would	be	ideal	for	long	fiber-
optic	cable	runs.	Electric,	gas,	and	water	utilities	in	many	countries	point	out
that	they,	too,	run	lines	into	homes	and	businesses.	Some	of	them	have	argued
that	the	energy	savings	from	computerized	management	of	home	heating

alone	might	defray	much	of	the	cost	of	stringing	fiber-optic	cables	because
energy	demand	would	be	lowered,	which	reduces	the	need	for	expensive	new
generating	plants.	In	France	most	of	the	cable	TV	connections	are	owned	by
two	big	water	companies.	But	outside	France,	at	least,	conventional	utility
companies	seem	less	obvious	candidates	for	building	highway	connections.
You	may	wonder	why	I	haven't	mentioned	direct-broadcast	satellites	and
other	technologies	as	mainstream	competitors	of	the	telephone	and	cable
companies.	As	I	said	earlier,	current	satellite	technology	is	a	good	interim
step.	It	delivers	a	great	broadcast	video	signal,	but	there	would	have	to	be	a
major	technological	breakthrough	before	it	could	provide	a	unique	video
bandwidth	feed	to	every	television	set	and	PC.	For	the	United	States	market	it
would	have	to	go	from	today's	300-channel-per-satellite	system	to	a	300,000-
channel	system,	even	assuming	fewer	than	1	percent	of	the	displays	needed	a
unique	feed	simultaneously.
Because	these	satellites	also	have	a	problem	delivering	data	from	the	home
back	into	the	network	(the	back	channel)	to	provide	true	interactivity,
applications	such	as	videoconferencing	aren't	possible.	A	partial	solution	is	to
use	the	phone	for	the	back	channel.	Direct-broadcast	satellites	such	as	the
Hughes	Electronics'	DIRECTV	system	use	your	regular	home	telephone	line
to	submit	back	to	their	billing	center	a	record	of	any	pay-per-view	programs
you	have	chosen.	With	a	special	add-in	circuit,	direct-broadcast	satellites	can
send	data	to	PCs	as	well	as	to	television	sets.	Data	broadcasting	is	a	valuable
interim	conduit	for	some	applications.
Teledesic,	a	company	that	my	friend,	cellular	telephone	pioneer	Craig
McCaw,	and	I	have	invested	in,	is	working	on	overcoming	the	limits	of
satellite	technology	by	using	a	large	number	of	low-orbit	satellites.	The	scope
of	the	proposed	system	is	quite	ambitious.	It	involves	nearly	1,000	satellites
orbiting	fifty	times	closer	to	Earth	than	traditional	geo-stationary	satellites.
Being	closer	to	Earth	means	these	satellites	require	2,500	times	less	power
and	have	increased	two-way	channel	resources.	This	solves	the	back-channel
problem.	Also,	the	significant	transmission	delay	associated	with	satellites	is
also	overcome.	Over	long	distances	these	low-orbit	satellites	can	provide
transmission	speeds	comparable	to	those	available	on	fiber.	Teledesic	has
regulatory,	technical,	and	financial	challenges	and	it	will	be	several	years
before	we'll	know	whether	the	company	can	overcome	them.	If	it	can,
Teledesic	or	other	systems	like	it	may	be	the	first,	the	cheapest,	or	indeed	the
only	way	to	bring	the	highway	to	many	parts	of	Earth.	Most	of	the	population
of	Asia	and	Africa,	for	example,	is	unlikely	to	have	local	access	to	fiber
connections	within	the	next	twenty	years.

Another	rapidly	advancing	technology	is	ground-based	wireless
communication.	Television	signals,	which	have	been	broadcast	over	the	air
using	wireless	VHF	and	UHF,	will	be	carried	primarily	on	fiber.	The	purpose
of	this	change	is	to	enable	everyone	to	have	a	personal	video	feed	and
interact.	Meanwhile,	voice	and	other	low-data-rate	connections	are	moving
from	the	wired	infrastructure	to	wireless	transmission	in	order	to	support
increased	mobility.	The	ideal	system	would	allow	for	the	sort	of	personalized
high-quality	video	and	mobility	I	talked	about	having	with	a	wallet	PC.	So
far,	that	combination	cannot	be	supported	by	any	of	today's	technologies,
because	wireless	systems	can't	provide	the	bandwidth	for	individual	video
feeds	that	a	fiber	network	can.
Early	on,	competitors	will	race	to	supply	the	first	interactive	services	to
communities,	but	once	all	of	the	attractive	territories	are	served	by	one
company	or	another,	rivals	will	begin	head-to-head	competition	by	entering
mar======================================================== around.	Another	time,	when	the	team
thought	they	had	created	a	program	that	worked,	they	came	proudly	to
demonstrate	their	achievement	to	me.	It	didn't	work	at	the	demonstration.
Everyone	on	the	project	happened	to	be	right-handed,	and	the	computer,
which	was	programmed	to	look	at	the	strokes	in	the	writing,	couldn't	interpret
the	very	different	ones	in	my	left-handed	penmanship.	It	turned	out	that
getting	a	computer	to	recognize	handwriting	is	as	difficult	as	getting	one	to
recognize	speech.	But	I	remain	optimistic	that	as	computer	performance
increases	we'll	have	computers	able	to	do	this	too.
Whether	you	give	the	command	by	voice,	in	writing,	or	by	pointing,	the
selections	you're	going	to	want	to	make	will	involve	more	complicated
choices	than	just	which	movie	to	watch,	and	you'll	want	to	be	able	to	make
them	easily.	Users	won't	stand	for	being	confused	or	frustrated	or	for	having
their	time	wasted.	The	highway's	software	platform	will	have	to	make	it
almost	infallibly	easy	to	find	information,	even	if	users	don't	know	what
they're	looking	for.	There	will	be	lots	of	information.	The	highway	will	have
access	to	everything	in	hundreds	of	libraries	and	to	all	types	of	merchandise.
One	of	the	worries	most	often	expressed	about	the	highway	concerns
"information	overload."	It	is	usually	voiced	by	someone	who	imagines,	rather
aptly,	that	the	fiber-optic	cables	of	the	information	highway	will	be	like
enormous	pipes	spewing	out	large	quantities	of	information.
Information	overload	is	not	unique	to	the	highway,	and	it	needn't	be	a
problem.	We	already	cope	with	astonishing	amounts	of	information	by	relying
on	an	extensive	infrastructure	that	has	evolved	to	help	us	be	selective—
everything	from	library	catalogs	to	movie	reviews	to	the	Yellow	Pages	to
recommendations	from	friends.	When	people	worry	about	the	information-
overload	problem,	ask	them	to	consider	how	they	choose	what	to	read.	When
we	visit	a	bookstore	or	a	library	we	don't	worry	about	reading	every	volume.
We	get	by	without	reading	everything	because	there	are	navigational	aids	that
point	to	information	of	interest	and	help	us	find	the	print	material	we	want.
These	pointers	include	the	corner	newsstand,	the	Dewey	decimal	system	in
libraries,	and	book	reviews	in	the	local	newspaper.
On	the	information	highway,	technology	and	editorial	services	will	combine
to	offer	a	number	of	ways	to	help	us	find	information.	The	ideal	navigation
system	will	be	powerful,	expose	seemingly	limitless	information,	and	yet
remain	very	easy	to	use.	Software	will	offer	queries,	filters,	spatial	navigation,
hyperlinks,	and	agents	as	the	primary	selection	techniques.

One	way	to	understand	the	different	selection	methods	is	to	think	of	them
metaphorically.	Imagine	specific	information—a	collection	of	facts,	a
breaking	news	story,	a	list	of	movies—all	placed	in	an	imaginary	warehouse.
A	query	does	a	search	through	every	item	in	the	warehouse	to	see	if	it	meets
some	criterion	you	have	established.	A	filter	is	a	check	on	everything	new	that
comes	into	the	warehouse	to	see	if	it	matches	that	criterion.	Spatial	navigation
is	a	way	you	can	walk	around	inside	the	warehouse	checking	on	inventory	by
location.	Perhaps	the	most	intriguing	approach,	and	the	one	that	promises	to
be	the	easiest	of	all	to	use,	will	be	to	enlist	the	aid	of	a	personal	agent	who
will	represent	you	on	the	highway.	The	agent	will	actually	be	software,	but	it
will	have	a	personality	you'll	be	able	to	talk	to	in	one	form	or	another.	This
will	be	like	delegating	an	assistant	to	look	at	the	inventory	for	you.
Here's	how	the	different	systems	will	work.	A	query,	as	its	name	indicates,	is
a	question.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	a	wide	range	of	questions	and	get	complete
answers.	If	you	can't	recall	the	name	of	a	movie	but	you	remember	that	it
starred	Spencer	Tracy	and	Katharine	Hepburn	and	that	there	is	a	scene	in
which	he's	asking	a	lot	of	questions	and	she's	shivering,	then	you	could	type
in	a	query	that	asks	for	all	movies	that	match:"Spencer	Tracy,"	"Katharine
Hepburn,"	"cold,"	and	"questions"	In	reply,	a	server	on	the	highway	would	list
the	1957	romantic	comedy	Desk	Set,	in	which	Tracy	quizzes	a	shivering
Hepburn	on	a	rooftop	terrace	in	the	middle	of	winter.	You	could	watch	the
scene,	watch	the	whole	film,	read	the	script,	examine	reviews	of	the	movie,
and	read	any	comments	that	Tracy	or	Hepburn	might	have	made	publicly
about	the	scene.	If	a	dubbed	or	subtitled	print	had	been	made	for	release
outside	English-speaking	countries,	you	could	watch	the	foreign	versions.
They	might	be	stored	on	servers	in	various	countries	but	would	be	instantly
available	to	you.
The	system	will	accommodate	straightforward	queries	such	as	"Show	me	all
the	articles	that	ran	worldwide	about	the	first	test-tube	baby,"	or	"List	all	the
stores	that	carry	two	or	more	kinds	of	dog	food	and	will	deliver	a	case	within
sixty	minutes	to	my	home	address,"	or	"Which	of	my	relatives	have	I	been	out
of	touch	with	for	more	than	three	months?"	It	will	also	be	able	to	deliver
answers	to	much	more	complex	queries.	You	might	ask,	"Which	major	city
has	the	greatest	percentage	of	the	people	who	watch	rock	videos	and	regularly
read	about	international	trade?"	Generally,	queries	won't	require	much
response	time,	because	most	of	the	questions	are	likely	to	have	been	asked
before	and	the	answers	will	already	have	been	computed	and	stored.
You'll	also	be	able	to	set	up	"filters,"	which	are	really	just	standing	queries.
Filters	will	work	around	the	clock,	watching	for	new	information	that	matches

an	interest	of	yours,	filtering	out	everything	else.	You	will	be	able	to	program
a	filter	to	gather	information	on	your	particular	interests,	such	as	news	about
local	sports	teams	or	particular	scientific	discoveries.	If	the	most	important
thing	to	you	is	the	weather,	your	filter	will	put	that	at	the	top	of	your
personalized	newspaper.	Some	filters	will	be	created	automatically	by	your
computer,	based	on	its	information	about	your	background	and	areas	of
interest.	Such	a	filter	might	alert	me	to	an	important	event	regarding	a	person
or	institution	from	my	past:	"Meteorite	crashes	into	Lakeside	School."	You
will	also	be	able	to	create	an	explicit	filter.	That	will	be	an	on-going	request
for	something	particular,	such	as	"Wanted:	1990	Nissan	Maxima	for	parts"	or
"Tell	me	about	anybody	selling	memorabilia	from	the	last	World	Cup"	or	"Is
anyone	around	here	looking	for	someone	to	bicycle	with	on	Sunday
afternoons,	rain	or	shine?"	The	filter	will	keep	looking	until	you	call	off	the
search.	If	a	filter	finds	a	potential	Sunday	bicycling	companion,	for	instance,
it	will	automatically	check	on	any	other	information	the	person	might	have
published	on	the	network.	It	will	try	to	answer	the	question	"What's	he
like?"—which	is	the	first	question	you'd	be	likely	to	ask	about	a	potential	new
friend.
Spatial	navigation	will	be	modeled	on	the	way	we	locate	information	today.
When	we	want	to	find	out	about	some	subject	now,	it's	natural	to	go	to	a
labeled	section	of	a	library	or	bookstore.	Newspapers	have	sports,	real	estate,
and	business	sections	where	people	"go"	for	certain	kinds	of	news.	In	most
newspapers,	weather	reports	appear	in	the	same	general	location	day	after
day.
Spatial	navigation,	which	is	already	being	used	in	some	software	products,
will	let	you	go	where	the	information	is	by	enabling	you	to	interact	with	a
visual	model	of	a	real	or	make-believe	world.	You	can	think	of	such	a	model
as	a	map—an	illustrated,	three-dimensional	table	of	contents.	Spatial
navigation	will	be	particularly	important	for	interacting	with	televisions	and
small,	portable	PCs,	which	are	unlikely	to	have	conventional	keyboards.	To
do	some	banking,	you	might	go	to	a	drawing	of	a	main	street,	then	point,
using	a	mouse	or	a	remote	control	or	even	your	finger,	at	the	drawing	of	a
bank.	You	will	point	to	a	courthouse	to	find	out	which	cases	are	being	heard
by	which	judges	or	what	the	backlog	is.	You	will	point	to	the	ferry	terminal	to
learn	the	schedule	and	whether	the	boats	are	running	on	time.	If	you	are
considering	visiting	a	hotel,	you	will	be	able	to	find	out	when	rooms	are
available	and	look	at	a	floor	plan,	and	if	the	hotel	has	a	video	camera
connected	to	the	highway,	you	might	be	able	to	look	at	its	lobby	and
restaurant	and	see	how	crowded	it	is	at	the	moment.

You'll	be	able	to	jump	into	the	map	so	you	can	navigate	down	a	street	or
through	the	rooms	of	a	building.	You'll	be	able	to	zoom	in	and	out	and	pan
around	to	different	locations	very	easily.	Let's	say	you	want	to	buy	a	lawn
mower.	If	the	screen	shows	the	inside	of	a	house,	you	might	move	out	the
back	door,	where	you	might	see	landmarks,	including	a	garage.	A	click	on	the
garage	will	take	you	inside	it,	where	you	might	see	tools,	including	a	lawn
mower.	A	click	on	the	lawn	mower	will	take	you	to	categories	of	relevant
information,	including	advertisements,	reviews,	user	manuals,	and	sales
showrooms	in	cyberspace.	It	will	be	simple	to	do	some	quick	comparison
shopping,	taking	advantage	of	any	amount	of	information	you	want.	When
you	click	on	the	picture	of	the	garage	and	seem	to	move	inside	it,	behind-the-
scenes	information	relating	to	the	objects	"inside"	the	garage	will	be	fed	to
your	screen	from	servers	spread	over	thousands	of	miles	on	the	highway.
When	you	point	at	an	object	on	the	screen	to	bring	up	information	about	the
object,	you	are	employing	a	form	of	"hyperlinking."	Hyperlinks	let	users	leap
from	informational	place	to	informational	place	instantly,	just	as	spaceships	in
science	fiction	jump	from	geographic	place	to	geographic	place	through
"hyperspace."	Hyperlinks	on	the	information	highway	will	let	you	find
answers	to	your	questions	when	they	occur	to	you	and	you're	interested.	Let's
say	you're	watching	the	news	and	you	see	someone	you	don't	recognize
walking	with	the	British	prime	minister.	You	want	to	know	who	she	is.	Using
your	television's	remote	control,	you	will	point	at	the	person.	That	action	will
bring	up	a	biography	and	a	lis======================================================== oduct	of	two	primes
would	take	millions	of	years	to	factor	with	any	foreseeable	amount	of	future
computing	power.	But	who	really	knows.	This	uncertainty—and	the	unlikely
but	conceivable	possibility	that	someone	could	come	up	with	an	easy	way	of
factoring	big	numbers—means	that	a	software	platform	for	the	information
highway	will	have	to	be	designed	in	such	a	way	that	its	encryption	scheme
can	be	changed	readily.
One	thing	we	don't	have	to	worry	about	is	running	out	of	prime	numbers,	or
the	prospect	of	two	computers'	accidentally	using	the	same	numbers	as	keys.
There	are	far	more	prime	numbers	of	appropriate	length	than	there	are	atoms
in	the	universe,	so	the	chance	of	an	accidental	duplication	is	vanishingly
small.
Key	encryption	allows	more	than	just	privacy.	It	can	also	assure	the
authenticity	of	a	document	because	a	private	key	can	be	used	to	encode	a
message	that	only	the	public	key	can	decode.	It	works	like	this:	If	I	have
information	I	want	to	sign	before	sending	it	to	you,	my	computer	uses	my
private	key	to	encipher	it.	Now	the	message	can	be	read	only	if	my	public	key
—which	you	and	everyone	else	knows—is	used	to	decipher	it.	This	message
is	verifiably	from	me,	because	no	one	else	has	the	private	key	that	could	have
encrypted	it	in	this	way.
My	computer	takes	this	enciphered	message	and	enciphers	it	again,	this	time
using	your	public	key.	Then	it	sends	this	double-coded	message	to	you	across
the	information	highway.
Your	computer	receives	the	message	and	uses	your	private	key	to	decipher	it.
This	removes	the	second	level	of	encoding	but	leaves	the	level	I	applied	with
my	private	key.	Then	your	computer	uses	my	public	key	to	decipher	the
message	again.	Because	it	really	is	from	me,	the	message	deciphers	correctly
and	you	know	it	is	authentic.	If	even	one	bit	of	information	was	changed,	the
message	would	not	decode	properly	and	the	tampering	or	communications
error	would	be	apparent.	This	extraordinary	security	will	enable	you	to
transact	business	with	strangers	or	even	people	you	distrust,	because	you'll	be
able	to	be	sure	that	digital	money	is	valid	and	signatures	and	documents	are
provably	authentic.
Security	can	be	increased	further	by	having	time	stamps	incorporated	into
encrypted	messages.	If	anyone	tries	to	tinker	with	the	time	that	a	document

supposedly	was	written	or	sent,	the	tinkering	will	be	detectable.	This	will
rehabilitate	the	evidentiary	value	of	photographs	and	videos,	which	has	been
under	assault	because	digital	retouching	has	become	so	easy	to	do.
My	description	of	public-key	encryption	oversimplifies	the	technical	details
of	the	system.	For	one	thing,	because	it	is	relatively	slow,	it	will	not	be	the
only	form	of	encipherment	used	on	the	highway.	But	public-key	encryption
will	be	the	way	that	documents	are	signed,	authenticity	is	established,	and	the
keys	to	other	kinds	of	encryption	are	distributed	securely.
The	major	benefit	of	the	PC	revolution	has	been	the	way	it	has	empowered
people.	The	highway's	low-cost	communications	will	empower	in	an	even
more	fundamental	way.	The	beneficiaries	won't	just	be	technology-oriented
individuals.	As	more	and	more	computers	are	connected	to	high-bandwidth
networks,	and	as	software	platforms	provide	a	foundation	for	great
applications,	everyone	will	have	access	to	most	of	the	world's	information.

6
THE	CONTENT
REVOLUTION
For	more	than	500	years,	the	bulk	of	human	knowledge	and	information	has
been	stored	as	paper	documents.	You've	got	one	in	your	hands	right	now
(unless	you're	reading	this	from	the	CD-ROM	or	a	future	on-line	edition).
Paper	will	be	with	us	indefinitely,	but	its	importance	as	a	means	of	finding,
preserving,	and	distributing	information	is	already	diminishing.
When	you	think	of	a	"document"	you	probably	visualize	pieces	of	paper	with
something	printed	on	them,	but	that	is	a	narrow	definition.	A	document	can	be
any	body	of	information.	A	newspaper	article	is	a	document,	but	the	broadest
definition	also	includes	a	television	show,	a	song,	or	an	interactive	video
game.	Because	all	information	can	be	stored	in	a	digital	form,	documents	will
be	easy	to	find,	store,	and	send	on	the	highway.	Paper	is	harder	to	transmit
and	very	limiting	if	the	contents	are	more	than	text	with	drawings	and	images.
Future	digitally	stored	documents	will	include	pictures,	audio,	programming
instructions	for	interactivity,	and	animation,	or	a	combination	of	these	and
other	elements.
On	the	information	highway,	rich	electronic	documents	will	be	able	to	do
things	no	piece	of	paper	can.	The	highway's	powerful	database	technology
will	allow	them	to	be	indexed	and	retrieved	using	interactive	exploration.	It
will	be	extremely	cheap	and	easy	to	distribute	them.	In	short,	these	new
digital	documents	will	replace	many	printed	paper	ones	because	they	will	be
able	to	help	us	in	new	ways.
But	not	for	quite	some	time.	The	paper-based	book,	magazine,	or	newspaper
still	has	a	lot	of	advantages	over	its	digital	counterpart.	To	read	a	digital
document	you	need	an	information	appliance	such	as	a	personal	computer.	A
book	is	small,	lightweight,	high-resolution,	and	inexpensive	compared	to	the
cost	of	a	computer.	For	at	least	a	decade	it	won't	be	as	convenient	to	read	a
long,	sequential	document	on	a	computer	screen	as	on	paper.	The	first	digital
documents	to	achieve	widespread	use	will	do	so	by	offering	new	functionality
rather	than	simply	duplicating	the	older	medium.	A	television	set	is	also
larger,	more	expensive,	more	cumbersome,	and	lower	resolution	than	a	book
or	magazine,	but	that	hasn't	limited	its	popularity.	Television	brought	video

entertainment	into	our	homes,	and	it	was	so	compelling	that	television	sets
found	their	place	alongside	books	and	magazines.
Ultimately,	incremental	improvements	in	computer	and	screen	technology
will	give	us	a	lightweight,	universal	electronic	book,	or	"e-book,"	which	will
approximate	today's	paper	book.	Inside	a	case	roughly	the	same	size	and
weight	as	today's	hardcover	or	paperback	book,	you'll	have	a	display	that	can
show	high-resolution	text,	pictures,	and	video.	You'll	be	able	to	flip	pages
with	your	finger	or	use	voice	commands	to	search	for	the	passages	you	want.
Any	document	on	the	network	will	be	accessible	from	such	a	device.
The	real	point	of	electronic	documents	is	not	simply	that	we	will	read	them	on
hardware	devices.	Going	from	paper	book	to	e-book	is	just	the	final	stage	of	a
process	already	well	under	way.	The	exciting	aspect	of	digital	documentation
is	the	redefinition	of	the	document	itself.
This	will	cause	dramatic	repercussions.	We	will	have	to	rethink	not	only	what
is	meant	by	the	term	"document,"	but	also	by	"author,"	"publisher,"	"office,"
"classroom,"	and	"textbook."
Today,	if	two	companies	are	negotiating	a	contract,	the	first	draft	is	probably
typed	into	a	computer,	then	printed	on	paper.	Chances	are	it	is	then	faxed	to
the	other	party,	who	edits,	amends,	and	alters	it	by	writing	on	the	paper	or	by
reentering	the	changed	document	into	another	computer,	from	which	it	is
printed.	He	then	faxes	it	back;	the	changes	are	incorporated;	a	new	paper
document	is	printed	and	faxed	back	again;	and	the	editing	process	is	repeated.
During	this	transaction	it	is	hard	to	tell	who	made	which	changes.
Coordinating	all	the	alterations	and	transmittals	introduces	a	lot	of	overhead.
Electronic	documents	can	simplify	this	process	by	allowing	a	version	of	the
contract	to	be	passed	back	and	forth	with	corrections	and	annotations	and
indications	who	made	them	and	when	printed	alongside	the	original	text.
Within	a	few	years	the	digital	document,	complete	with	authenticatable	digital
signatures,	will	be	the	original,	and	paper	printouts	will	be	secondary.	Already
many	businesses	are	advancing	beyond	paper	and	fax	machines	and
exchanging	editable	documents,	computer	to	computer,	through	electronic
mail.	This	book	would	have	been	much	harder	to	write	without	e-mail.
Readers	whose	opinions	I	was	soliciting	were	sent	drafts	electronically,	and	it
was	helpful	to	be	able	to	look	at	the	suggested	revisions	and	see	who	had
made	them	and	when.
By	the	end	of	the	decade	a	significant	percentage	of	documents,	even	in
offices,	won't	even	be	fully	printable	on	paper.	They	will	be	like	a	movie	or	a

song	is	today.	You	will	still	be	able	to	print	a	two-dimensional	view	of	its
content,	but	it	will	be	like	reading	a	musical	score	instead	of	experiencing	an
audio	recording.
Some	documents	are	so	superior	in	digital	form	that	the	paper	version	is
rarely	used.	Boeing	decided	to	design	its	new	777	jetliner	using	a	gigantic
electronic	document	to	hold	all	the	engineering	information.	To	coordinate
collaboration	among	the	design	teams,	manufacturing	groups	and	outside
contractors	during	development	of	previous	airplanes,	Boeing	had	used
blueprints	and	constructed	an	expensive	full-scale	mock-up	of	the	airplane.
The	mock-up	had	been	necessary	to	make	sure	that	parts	of	the	airplane,
designed	by	different	engineers,	actually	fit	together	properly.	During
development	of	the	777,	Boeing	did	away	with	blueprints	and	the	mock-up
and	from	the	start	used	an	electronic	document	that	contained	digital	3-D
models	of	all	the	parts	and	how	they	fit	together.	Engineers	at	computer
terminals	were	able	to	look	at	the	design	and	see	different	views	of	the
content.	They	could	track	the	progress	in	any	area,	search	for	interesting	test
results,	annotate	with	cost	information,	and	change	any	part	of	the	design	in
ways	that	would	be	impossible	on	paper.	Each	person,	working	with	the	same
data,	was	able	to	look	for	what	specifically	concerned	him.	Every	change
could	be	shared,	and	everyone	could	see	who	made	any	change,	when	it	was
made,	and	why.	Boeing	was	able	to	save	hundreds	of	thousands	of	pieces	of
paper	and	many	person-years	of	drafting	and	copying	by	using	digital
documents.
Digital	documents	can	also	be	faster	to	work	with	than	paper.	You	can
transmit	information	instantly	and	retrieve	it	almost	as	quickly.	Those	using
digital	documents	are	already	discovering	how	much	sim======================================================== l	it	into	quadrillions	of	atomistic	packets	of	data.	Once
digital	information	is	stored,	anyone	with	access	and	a	personal	computer	can
instantaneously	recall,	compare,	and	refashion	it.	What	characterizes	this
period	in	history	is	the	completely	new	ways	in	which	information	can	be
changed	and	manipulated,	and	the	increasing	speeds	at	which	we	can	handle
it.	The	computer's	abilities	to	provide	low-cost,	high-speed	processing	and
transmission	of	digital	data	will	transform	the	conventional	communication
devices	in	homes	and	offices.
The	idea	of	using	an	instrument	to	manipulate	numbers	isn't	new.	The	abacus
had	been	in	use	in	Asia	for	nearly	5,000	years	by	1642,	when	the	nineteen-
year-old	French	scientist	Blaise	Pascal	invented	a	mechanical	calculator.	It
was	a	counting	device.	Three	decades	later,	the	German	mathematician
Gottfried	von	Leibniz	improved	on	Pascal's	design.	His	"Stepped	Reckoner"
could	multiply,	divide,	and	calculate	square	roots.	Reliable	mechanical
calculators,	powered	by	rotating	dials	and	gears,	descendants	of	the	Stepped
Reckoner,	were	the	mainstay	of	business	until	their	electronic	counterparts
replaced	them.	When	I	was	a	boy,	a	cash	register	was	essentially	a	mechanical
calculator	linked	to	a	cash	drawer.
More	than	a	century	and	a	half	ago,	a	visionary	British	mathematician
glimpsed	the	possibility	of	the	computer	and	that	glimpse	made	him	famous
even	in	his	day.	Charles	Babbage	was	a	professor	of	mathematics	at
Cambridge	University	who	conceived	the	possibility	of	a	mechanical	device
that	would	be	able	to	perform	a	string	of	related	calculations.	As	early	as	the
1830s,	he	was	drawn	to	the	idea	that	information	could	be	manipulated	by	a
machine	if	the	information	could	be	converted	into	numbers	first.	The	steam-
powered	machine	Babbage	envisioned	would	use	pegs,	toothed	wheels,
cylinders,	and	other	mechanical	parts,	the	apparatus	of	the	then-new	Industrial
Age.	Babbage	believed	his	"Analytical	Engine"	would	be	used	to	take	the
drudgery	and	inaccuracy	out	of	calculating.

He	lacked	the	terms	we	now	use	to	refer	to	the	parts	of	his	machine.	He	called
the	central	processor,	or	working	guts	of	his	machine,	the	"mill."	He	referred
to	his	machine's	memory	as	the	"store."	Babbage	imagined	information	being
transformed	the	way	cotton	was—drawn	from	a	store	(warehouse)	and	milled
into	something	new.
His	Analytical	Engine	would	be	mechanical,	but	he	foresaw	how	it	would	be
able	to	follow	changing	sets	of	instructions	and	thus	serve	different	functions.
This	is	the	essence	of	software.	It	is	a	comprehensive	set	of	rules	a	machine
can	be	given	to	"instruct"	it	how	to	perform	particular	tasks.	Babbage	realized
that	to	create	these	instructions	he	would	need	an	entirely	new	kind	of
language,	and	he	devised	one	using	numbers,	letters,	arrows,	and	other
symbols.	The	language	was	designed	to	let	Babbage	"program"	the	Analytical
Engine	with	a	long	series	of	conditional	instructions,	which	would	allow	the
machine	to	modify	its	actions	in	response	to	changing	situations.	He	was	the
first	to	see	that	a	single	machine	could	serve	a	number	of	different	purposes.
For	the	next	century	mathematicians	worked	with	the	ideas	Babbage	had
outlined	and	finally,	by	the	mid-1940s,	an	electronic	computer	was	built	based
on	the	principles	of	his	Analytical	Engine.	It	is	hard	to	sort	out	the	paternity
of	the	modern	computer,	because	much	of	the	thinking	and	work	was	done	in
the	United	States	and	Britain	during	World	War	II	under	the	cloak	of	wartime
secrecy.	Three	major	contributors	were	Alan	Turing,	Claude	Shannon,	and
John	von	Neumann.
In	the	mid-1930s,	Alan	Turing,	like	Babbage	a	superlative	Cambridge-trained
British	mathematician,	proposed	what	is	known	today	as	a	Turing	machine.	It
was	his	version	of	a	completely	general-purpose	calculating	machine	that
could	be	instructed	to	work	with	almost	any	kind	of	information.
In	the	late	1930s,	when	Claude	Shannon	was	still	a	student,	he	demonstrated
that	a	machine	executing	logical	instructions	could	manipulate	information.
His	insight,	the	subject	of	his	master's	thesis,	was	about	how	computer
circuits—closed	for	true	and	open	for	false—could	perform	logical
operations,	using	the	number	1	to	represent	"true"	and	0	to	represent	"false."
This	is	a	binary	system.	It's	a	code.	Binary	is	the	alphabet	of	electronic
computers,	the	basis	of	the	language	into	which	all	information	is	translated,
stored,	and	used	within	a	computer.	It's	simple,	but	so	vital	to	the
understanding	of	the	way	computers	work	that	it's	worth	pausing	here	to
explain	it	more	fully.
Imagine	you	have	a	room	that	you	want	illuminated	with	as	much	as	250

watts	of	electric	lighting	and	you	want	the	lighting	to	be	adjustable,	from	0
watt	of	illumination	(total	darkness)	to	the	full	wattage.	One	way	to
accomplish	this	is	with	a	rotating	dimmer	switch	hooked	to	a	250-watt	bulb.
To	achieve	complete	darkness,	turn	the	knob	fully	counterclockwise	to	Off	for
0	watt	of	light.	For	maximum	brightness,	turn	the	knob	fully	clockwise	for	the
entire	250	watts.	For	some	illumination	level	in	between,	turn	the	knob	to	an
intermediate	position.
This	system	is	easy	to	use	but	has	limitations.	If	the	knob	is	at	an	intermediate
setting—if	lighting	is	lowered	for	an	intimate	dinner,	for	example—you	can
only	guess	what	the	lighting	level	is.	You	don't	really	know	how	many	watts
are	in	use,	or	how	to	describe	the	setting	precisely.	Your	information	is
approximate,	which	makes	it	hard	to	store	or	reproduce.
What	if	you	want	to	reproduce	exactly	the	same	level	of	lighting	next	week?
You	could	make	a	mark	on	the	switch	plate	so	that	you	know	how	far	to	turn
it,	but	this	is	hardly	exact,	and	what	happens	when	you	want	to	reproduce	a
different	setting?	What	if	a	friend	wants	to	reproduce	the	same	level	of
lighting?	You	can	say,	"Turn	the	knob	about	a	fifth	of	the	way	clockwise,"	or
"Turn	the	knob	until	the	arrow	is	at	about	two	o'clock"	but	your	friend's
reproduction	will	only	approximate	your	setting.	What	if	your	friend	then
passes	the	information	on	to	another	friend,	who	in	turn	passes	it	on	again?
Each	time	the	information	is	handed	on,	the	chances	of	its	remaining	accurate
decrease.
That	is	an	example	of	information	stored	in	"analog"	form.	The	dimmer's
knob	provides	an	analogy	to	the	bulb's	lighting	level.	If	it's	turned	halfway,
presumably	you	have	about	half	the	total	wattage.	When	you	measure	or
describe	how	far	the	knob	is	turned,	you're	actually	storing	information	about
the	analogy	(the	knob)	rather	than	about	the	lighting	level.	Analog
information	can	be	gathered,	stored,	and	reproduced,	but	it	tends	to	be
imprecise—and	runs	the	risk	of	becoming	less	precise	each	time	it	is
transferred.
Now	let's	look	at	an	entirely	different	way	of	describing	how	to	light	the
room,	a	digital	rather	than	analog	method	of	storing	and	transmitting
information.	Any	kind	of	information	can	be	converted	into	numbers	using
only	0s	and	1s.	These	are	called	binary	numbers—numbers	composed	entirely
of	0s	and	1s.	Each	0	or	1	is	called	a	bit.	Once	the	information	has	been
converted,	it	can	be	fed	to	and	stored	in	computers	as	long	strings	of	bits.
Those	numbers	are	all	that's	meant	by	"digital	information."

Instead	of	a	single	250-watt	bulb,	let's	say	you	have	eight	bulbs,	each	with	a
wattage	double	the	one	preceding	it,	from	1	to	128.	Each	of	these	bulbs	is
hooked	to	its	own	switch,	with	the	lowest-watt	bulb	on	the	right.	Such	an
arrangement	can	be	diagrammed	like	this:
By	turning	these	switches	on	and	off,	you	can	adjust	the	lighting	level	in	1-
watt	increments	from	0	watt	(all	switches	off)	to	255	watts	(all	switches	on).
This	gives	you	256	possibilities.	If	you	want	1	watt	of	light,	you	turn	on	only
the	rightmost	switch,	which	turns	on	the	1-watt	bulb.	If	you	want	2	watts	of
light,	you	turn	on	only	the	2-watt	bulb.	If	you	want	3	watts	of	light,	you	turn
on	both	the	1-watt	and	2-watt	bulbs,	because	1	plus	2	equals	the	desired	3
watts.	If	you	want	4	watts	of	light,	you	turn	on	the	4-watt	bulb.	If	you	want	5
watts,	you	turn	on	just	the	4-watt	and	1-watt	bulbs.	If	you	want	250	watts	of
light,	you	turn	on	all	but	the	4-watt	and	1-watt	bulbs.
If	you	have	decided	the	ideal	illumination	level	for	dining	is	137	watts	of
light,	you	turn	on	the	128-,	8-,	and	1-watt	bulbs,	like	this:
This	system	makes	it	easy	to	record	an	exact	lighting	level	for	later	use	or	to
communicate	it	to	others	who	have	the	same	light-switch	setup.	Because	the
way	we	record	binary	information	is	universal—low	number	to	the	right,	high
number	to	the	left,	always	doubling—you	don't	have	to	write	down	the	values
of	the	bulbs.	You	simply	record	the	pattern	of	switches:	on,	off,	off,	off,	on,
off,	off,	on.	With	that	information	a	friend	can	faithfully	reproduce	the	137
watts	of	light	in	your	room.	In	fact,	as	long	as	everyone	involved	double-
checks	the	accuracy	of	what	he	does,	the	message	can	be	passed	through	a

million	hands	and	at	the	end	every	person	will	have	the	same	information	and
be	able	to	achieve	exactly	137	watts	of	light.
To	shorten	the	notation	further,	you	can	record	each	"off"	as	0	and	each	"on"
as	1.	This	means	that	instead	of	writing	down	"on,	off,	off,	off,	on,	off,	off,
on,"	meaning	turn	on	the	first,	the	fourth,	and	the	eighth	of	the	eight	bulbs,
and	leave	the	others	off,	you	write	the	same	information	as	1,	0,	0,	0,	1,	0,	0,
1,	or	10001001,	a	binary	number.	In	this	case	it's	137.	You	call	your	friend
and	say:	"I've	got	the	perfect	lighting	level!	It's	10001001.	Try	it."	Your	friend
gets	it	exactly	right,	by	flipping	a	switch	on	for	each	1	and	off	for	each	0.
This	may	seem	like	a	complicated	way	to	describe	the	brightness	of	a	light
source,	but	it	is	an	example	of	the	theory	behind	binary	expression,	the	basis
of	all	modern	computers.
Binary	expression	made	it	possible	to	take	advantage	of	electric	circuits	to
build	calculators.	This	happened	during	World	War	II	when	a	group	of
mathematicians	led	by	J.	Presper	Eckert	and	John	Mauchly	at	the	University
of	Pennsylvania======================================================== omputers	at	an	early
age	we	can	ensure	that	they	play	their	rightful	role	in	all	the	work	that	benefits
from	computer	expertise.
My	own	experience	as	a	child,	and	that	of	my	friends	raising	children	today,
is	that	once	a	kid	is	exposed	to	computing,	he	or	she	is	hooked.	But	we	have
to	create	the	opportunity	for	that	exposure.	Schools	should	have	low-cost
access	to	computers	connected	to	the	information	highway,	and	teachers	need
to	become	comfortable	with	the	new	tools.
One	of	the	wonderful	things	about	the	information	highway	is	that	virtual
equity	is	far	easier	to	achieve	than	real-world	equity.	It	would	take	a	massive
amount	of	money	to	give	every	grammar	school	in	every	poor	area	the	same
library	resources	as	the	schools	in	Beverly	Hills.	However,	when	you	put
schools	on-line	they	all	get	the	same	access	to	information,	wherever	it	might
be	stored.	We	are	all	created	equal	in	the	virtual	world,	and	we	can	use	this
equality	to	help	address	some	of	the	sociological	problems	that	society	has	yet
to	solve	in	the	physical	world.	The	network	will	not	eliminate	barriers	of
prejudice	or	inequality,	but	it	will	be	a	powerful	force	in	that	direction.
The	question	of	how	to	price	intellectual	property,	such	as	entertainment	and
educational	materials,	is	fascinating.	Economists	understand	a	lot	about	how
the	pricing	of	classical	manufactured	goods	works.	They	can	show	how
rational	pricing	should	reflect	cost	structure	in	a	very	direct	manner.	In	a
market	with	multiple	competing	qualified	manufacturers,	prices	tend	to	drop
to	the	marginal	cost	of	making	one	more	of	whatever	they	are	selling.	But	this
model	doesn't	work	when	applied	to	intellectual	property.
A	basic	economics	course	describes	the	curves	of	supply	and	demand,	which
intersect	at	the	price	appropriate	for	a	product.	But	supply-and-demand
economics	gets	into	trouble	when	it	comes	to	intellectual	property,	because
ordinary	rules	regarding	manufacturing	costs	don't	apply.	Typically	there	are
huge	up-front	development	costs	for	intellectual	property.	These	fixed	costs
are	the	same	regardless	of	whether	one	copy	or	a	million	copies	of	the	work
are	sold.	George	Lucas's	next	movie	in	the	Star	Wars	series	will	cost	millions
to	make,	regardless	of	how	many	people	pay	to	see	it	in	theaters.

The	pricing	of	intellectual	property	is	more	complicated	than	most	pricing
because	today	it	is	relatively	inexpensive	to	manufacture	copies	of	most
intellectual	property.	Tomorrow,	on	the	information	highway,	the	cost	of
delivering	a	copy	of	a	work—which	will	amount	to	the	same	thing	as
manufacturing	it—will	be	even	lower,	and	dropping	every	year	because	of
Moore's	Law.	When	you	buy	a	new	medicine,	you're	paying	mostly	for	what
the	drug	company	spent	for	research,	development,	and	testing.	Even	if	the
marginal	cost	of	making	each	pill	is	minimal,	the	pharmaceutical	company
still	may	have	to	charge	quite	a	bit	for	each,	especially	if	the	market	is	not
huge.	The	revenue	from	the	average	patient	has	to	cover	a	sufficient	share	of
the	development	expenses	and	generate	enough	profit	to	make	investors	glad
they	took	the	substantial	financial	risks	involved	in	developing	a	new	drug.
When	a	poor	country	wants	the	medicine,	the	manufacturer	faces	a	moral
dilemma.	If	the	pharmaceutical	company	doesn't	waive	or	drastically	reduce
its	patent-licensing	fees,	the	medicine	won't	be	available	to	poor	countries.
However,	if	a	manufacturer	is	to	be	able	to	invest	in	R&D,	some	users	must
pay	more	than	the	marginal	cost.	Prices	for	drugs	vary	greatly	from	country	to
country	and	discriminate	against	poor	people	in	rich	countries	except	where
governments	cover	medical	costs.
One	possible	solution,	a	scheme	whereby	a	rich	person	pays	more	to	buy	a
new	medicine,	to	see	a	movie	or	to	read	a	book,	may	seem	inequitable;
however,	it	is	identical	to	a	system	already	in	place	today—taxation.	Through
the	income	tax	and	other	taxes,	people	with	high	incomes	pay	more	for	roads,
schools,	the	army,	and	every	other	government	facility	than	the	average
person	does.	It	cost	me	more	than	$100	million	last	year	to	get	those	services
because	I	paid	a	significant	capital	gains	tax	after	selling	some	Microsoft
shares.	I	have	no	complaint,	but	it	is	an	example	of	the	same	services	being
provided	at	vastly	different	prices.
The	pricing	for	highway	access	may	be	set	politically	rather	than	on	the	basis
of	costs.	It	is	going	to	be	expensive	to	enfranchise	people	in	remote	locations
because	the	cost	of	bringing	wiring	to	far-flung	homes	and	even	small
communities	is	very	high.	Companies	may	not	be	eager	to	make	the	necessary
investment,	and	the	geographically	disenfranchised	may	not	be	in	a	position
to	make	the	investment	on	their	own	behalf.	We	should	expect	heated	debate
about	whether	the	government	should	subsidize	connections	to	rural	areas,	or
impose	regulations	that	cause	urban	users	to	subsidize	rural	ones.	The
precedent	for	this	is	a	doctrine	known	as	"universal	service"	which	was
created	to	subsidize	rural	mail,	phone,	and	electrical	services	in	the	United
States.	It	dictates	a	single	price	for	the	delivery	of	a	letter,	a	phone	call,	or
electrical	power	regardless	of	where	you	live.	It	applies	even	though	it	is

more	expensive	to	deliver	services	in	rural	areas,	where	homes	and	businesses
are	farther	apart	than	in	areas	of	concentrated	population.
There	was	no	equivalent	policy	for	the	delivery	of	newspapers	or	radio	or
television	reception.	Nonetheless,	these	services	are	widely	available,	so
clearly	under	some	circumstances	government	intervention	isn't	necessary	to
ensure	high	availability.	The	U.S.	Postal	Service	was	founded	as	part	of	the
government	on	the	assumption	that	that	was	the	only	way	to	provide	truly
universal	service.	UPS	and	Federal	Express	might	disagree	on	this	point,
however,	because	they	have	managed	to	provide	broad	coverage	and	make
money.	The	debate	as	to	whether,	or	to	what	degree,	government	needs	to	be
involved	to	guarantee	broad	access	to	the	information	highway	is	certain	to
rage	on	for	many	years.
The	highway	will	let	those	who	live	in	remote	places	consult,	collaborate,	and
be	involved	with	the	rest	of	the	world.	Because	many	people	will	find	the
combination	of	rural	lifestyle	and	urban	information	attractive,	network
companies	will	have	an	incentive	to	run	fiber-optic	lines	to	high-income
remote	areas.	It	is	likely	that	some	states,	or	communities,	or	even	private	real
estate	developers	will	promote	their	areas	by	providing	great	connectivity.
This	will	lead	to	what	one	might	call	the	"Aspen-ization"	of	parts	of	the
country.	Interesting	rural	communities	with	high	marks	for	quality	of	life	will
deliberately	set	out	to	attract	a	new	class	of	sophisticated	urban	citizen.	Taken
as	a	whole,	urban	areas	will	tend	to	get	their	connections	before	rural	ones.
The	highway	will	spread	information	and	opportunity	across	borders	to
developing	nations,	too.	Cheap	global	communications	can	bring	people
anywhere	into	the	mainstream	of	the	world	economy.	An	English-speaking
Ph.D.	in	China	will	be	able	to	bid	against	colleagues	in	London	for	consulting
work.	Knowledge	workers	in	industrialized	countries	will,	in	a	sense,	face
new	competition—just	as	some	manufacturing	workers	in	industrialized
countries	have	experienced	competition	from	developing	nations	over	the	past
decade.	This	will	make	the	information	highway	a	powerful	force	for
international	trade	in	intellectual	goods	and	services,	just	as	the	availability	of
relatively	inexpensive	air	cargo	and	containerized	shipping	helped	propel
international	trade	in	physical	goods.
The	net	effect	will	be	a	wealthier	world,	which	should	be	stabilizing.
Developed	nations,	and	workers	in	those	nations,	are	likely	to	maintain	a
sizable	economic	lead.	However,	the	gap	between	the	have	and	have-not
nations	will	diminish.	Starting	out	behind	is	sometimes	an	advantage.	It	lets
those	who	adopt	late	skip	steps,	and	avoid	the	mistakes	of	the	trailblazers.

Some	countries	will	never	have	industrialization.	They	will	move	directly	into
the	Information	Age.	Europe	didn't	adopt	television	until	several	years	after
the	United	States.	The	result	was	higher	picture
quality,	because	by	the	time	Europe	set	its	standard	a	better	choice	was
available.	As	a	result,	Europeans	have	enjoyed	better-looking	television
pictures	for	decades.
Telephone	systems	are	another	example	of	how	starting	late	can	provide	an
advantage.	In	Africa,	China,	and	other	parts	of	the	developing	world,	many
citizens	who	have	phones	use	cellular	instruments.	Cellular	telephone	service
is	spreading	rapidly	in	Asia,	Latin	America,	and	other	developing	regions,
because	it	does	not	require	that	copper	wires	be	strung.	Many	people	in	the
cellular	industry	predict	that	improvements	in	technology	will	mean	that	these
areas	may	never	get	a	conventional	copper	wire-based	telephone	system.
These	countries	will	never	have	to	cut	down	a	million	trees	for	telephone
poles	or	string	a	hundred	thousand	miles	of	telephone	lines	only	to	rip	them
all	down	and	bury	the	entire	network.	The	wireless	telephone	system	will	be
their	first	telephone	system.	They	will	get	increasingly	better	cellular	systems
wherever	they	can't	afford	a	full	broadband	connection.
The	presence	of	advanced	communications	systems	promises	to	make	nations
more	alike	and	reduce	the	importance	of	national	boundaries.	The	fax
machine,	the	portable	videocamera,	and	Cable	News	Network	are	among	the
forces	that	brought	about	the	end	of	communist	regimes	and	the	Cold	War,
because	they	allowed	news	to	pass	both	ways	through	what	was	called	the
Iron	Curtain.
Now,	commercial	satellite	broadcasts	to	nations	such	as	China	and	Iran	offer
citizens	glimpses	of	the	outside	world	that	are	not	necessarily	sanctioned	by
their	governments.	This	new	access	to	information	can	draw	people	together
by	increasing	their	understanding	of	other	cultures.	Some	believe	it	will	cause
discontent	and	worse,	a	"Revolution	of	Expectations,"	when	disenfranchised
people	get	enough	data	a======================================================== he	telegraph	and,	later,	ticker	services	was	to	deliver	racetrack
results.	Satellite	television	broadcasts	contributed	to	off-track	betting.	Slot
machine	designs	have	always	tracked	the	progress	in	mechanical	calculators
and,	more	recently,	computers.	The	information	highway	will	have	an	even
more	significant	effect	on	both	legal	and	illegal	gambling.	We	are	sure	to	see
current	odds	posted	on	servers,	and	e-mail	as	a	way	to	make	bets.	Electronic
currency	will	be	used	to	place	bets	and	make	payoffs.
Gambling	is	a	highly	regulated	business,	so	it's	difficult	to	predict	what	forms
will	be	allowed	on	the	highway.	Maybe	air	travelers	who	are	stuck	on	a	plane
with	nothing	else	to	do	will	be	able	to	gamble	with	each	other.	Perhaps
gambling	games	will	have	to	provide	full	disclosure	of	the	odds	against	you.
The	technology	will	allow	people	to	bet	on	anything	they	choose	to,	and	if	it's
legal	someone	is	sure	to	set	up	a	service.	It	will	be	possible	to	bring	horse
races,	dog	races,	or	any	other	kind	of	live	sports	event	into	your	home	in	real-
time,	so	some	of	the	excitement	of	the	track	or	stadium	will	be	made
available.	Many	governments	raise	revenue	with	lotteries	and	in	the	future
could	provide	plug-into	electronic	lotteries.	The	highway	will	make	gambling
far	more	difficult	to	control	than	it	is	today.
We	can	be	sure	we'll	use	the	highway's	unique	capabilities	to	help	us	find
communities	of	others	with	common	interests.	Today	you	may	belong	to	the
local	ski	club	so	you	can	meet	other	people	who	like	to	ski.	You	may	also

subscribe	to	Recreational	Skier	so	you	can	get	information	about	new	ski
products.	Tomorrow	you	will	be	able	to	join	such	a	community	on	the
information	highway.	It	will	not	only	provide	you	with	up-to-date	information
about	weather	conditions	instantly,	but	will	also	be	a	way	for	you	to	stay	in
touch	with	other	enthusiasts.
The	greater	the	number	of	people	who	join	an	electronic	community,	the	more
valuable	it	will	be	to	everyone	who	uses	it.	Most	of	the	world's	skiing
enthusiasts	will	participate,	at	least	occasionally.	In	time,	the	world's	best
information	about	skis	and	skiing	will	be	available	electronically.	If	you	join,
you	will	find	the	best	slopes	near	Munich,	the	lowest	price	anywhere	for	a
particular	set	of	poles,	and	the	latest	news	and	advertising	about	all	ski-related
products.	If	people	have	taken	photos	or	made	videos	of	a	race	or	a	trip,	they
can	share	them.	Books	about	skiing	will	be	reviewed	by	anyone	who	has	an
opinion.	Laws	and	safety	practices	will	be	debated.	Instructional	videos	will
be	available	on	a	moment's	notice.	These	multi-media	documents	will	be
available	free	or	for	a	charge,	to	one	person	or	to	hundreds	of	thousands.	This
community	on	the	information	highway	will	become	the	place	to	go	if	you	are
interested	in	skiing.
If	you	want	to	get	yourself	in	better	physical	condition	before	trying	a	hard
slope,	you	might	find	training	more	fun	if	you	are	in	close	electronic	touch
with	a	dozen	other	people	who	are	your	size,	weight,	and	age,	and	who	share
your	specific	goals	for	exercise	and	weight	reduction.	You	would	have	less	to
be	self-conscious	about	in	an	exercise	program	in	which	everyone	else	is	like
you.	And	if	you	still	were	uncomfortable,	you	could	turn	your	video	camera
off.	Members	of	this	community	could	get	together	to	encourage	each	other
and	even	work	out	at	the	same	time.
The	community	of	skiers	is	quite	large	and	easy	to	define.	On	the	information
highway	there	will	be	applications	to	help	you	find	people	and	information
that	intersect	with	your	interests,	no	matter	how	specific.	If	you're	thinking	of
visiting	Berlin,	the	highway	will	make	vast	amounts	of	historical,	touristic,
and	sociological	information	available.	But	there	will	also	be	applications	to
let	you	find	fellow	enthusiasts	there.	You'll	be	invited	to	register	your	interests
in	databases	that	can	be	analyzed	by	the	applications.	These	applications	will
even	suggest	people	you	might	like	to	meet.	If	you	have	a	collection	of
Venetian	glass	paperweights,	you'll	probably	choose	to	be	a	member	of	one	or
more	world	communities	of	people	who	share	this	interest.	Some	of	those
people	may	live	in	Berlin	and	have	collections	they'd	be	delighted	to	show
you.	If	you	have	a	ten-year-old	daughter	you'll	be	taking	with	you	to	Berlin,
you	might	query	whether	there	is	anyone	in	Berlin	who	has	a	ten-year-old,

shares	your	language,	and	is	willing	to	spend	time	with	you	during	your	visit.
If	you	find	two	or	three	suitable	people,	you	have	created	a	small—and
probably	temporary—community	of	interest.
I	recently	visited	Africa	and	took	a	lot	of	pictures	of	chimpanzees.	If	the
information	highway	were	available	now,	I	would	put	out	a	message	saying
that	if	anyone	else	from	the	safari	wanted	to	exchange	photographs,	he	or	she
should	put	them	on	the	same	bulletin	board	where	I	had	posted	my
chimpanzee	photos.	I	would	be	able	to	set	it	up	so	only	fellow	safari	members
could	have	access	to	that	bulletin	board.
Already,	thousands	of	newsgroups	on	the	Internet	and	countless	forums	on
commercial	on-line	services	have	been	set	up	as	locations	for	small
communities	to	share	information.	For	example,	on	the	Internet	there	are
lively	text-based	discussion	groups	with	such	names	as	alt.agriculture.fruit,
alt.animals.raccoons,	alt.asian-movies,	alt.coffee,	bionet.-
biology.cardiovascular,	soc.religion.islam,	and	talk.philosophy,	misc.	But
these	topics	aren't	nearly	so	specialized	as	some	of	the	subjects	I	expect
electronic	communities	will	address	in	the	future.	Some	communities	will	be
very	local,	and	some	will	be	global.	You	won't	be	overwhelmed	by	the
number	of	choices	of	communities	any	more	than	you	are	now	by	the
telephone	system.	You'll	look	for	a	group	that	interests	you	in	general,	and
then	you'll	search	through	it	for	the	small	segment	you	want	to	join.	I	can
imagine	the	administration	of	every	municipality,	for	example,	becoming	the
focus	of	an	electronic	community.
Sometimes	I	get	annoyed	by	a	traffic	light	near	my	office	that	always	stays
red	longer	than	I	think	it	should.	I	could	write	a	letter	to	the	city,	telling	the
folks	who	program	the	lights	that	the	timing	isn't	optimal,	but	that	would	just
be	one	cranky	letter.	On	the	other	hand,	if	I	could	find	the	"community"	of
people	who	drive	the	route	I	do,	we	could	send	a	strong	complaint	to	the	city.
I	could	find	these	others	by	sending	a	message	to	people	who	live	near	me	or
by	posting	a	message	on	a	community	affairs	bulletin	board	that	showed	a
map	of	the	intersection	accompanied	by	the	message:	"During	the	morning
rush	hours	hardly	anyone	goes	left	at	this	intersection.	Does	anyone	else	think
the	cycle	should	be	shortened?"	Anyone	who	agreed	with	me	could	add	to	my
message.	It	would	make	it	easier	to	fight	City	Hall.
As	on-line	communities	grow	in	importance,	they	will	increasingly	be	where
people	will	turn	to	find	out	what	the	public	is	really	thinking.	People	like	to
know	what's	popular,	which	movies	friends	are	watching,	and	what	news
others	think	is	interesting.	I	want	to	read	the	same	"newspaper	front	page"	as

those	I'm	going	to	meet	with	later	today,	so	we	can	have	something	in
common	to	talk	about.	You	will	be	able	to	see	what	places	on	the	network	are
being	looked	at	often.	There	will	be	all	sorts	of	"hot	lists"	of	the	coolest
places.
Electronic	communities,	with	all	the	information	they	reveal,	will	also	create
problems.	Some	institutions	will	have	to	make	big	changes	as	on-line
communities	gain	power.	Doctors	and	medical	researchers	are	already	having
to	contend	with	patients	who	explore	medical	literature	electronically	and
compare	notes	with	other	patients	who	have	the	same	serious	disease.	Word
of	unorthodox	or	unapproved	treatments	spreads	fast	in	these	communities.
Some	patients	in	drug	trials	have	been	able	to	figure	out,	by	communicating
with	other	patients	in	the	trial,	that	they	are	receiving	a	placebo	rather	than	the
real	medication.	The	discovery	has	prompted	some	of	them	to	drop	out	of	the
trials	or	to	seek	alternate,	simultaneous	remedies.	This	undermines	the
research,	but	it	is	hard	to	fault	patients	who	are	trying	to	save	their	lives.
It's	not	just	medical	researchers	who	will	be	affected	by	so	much	access	to
information.	One	of	the	biggest	concerns	is	parents	having	to	contend	with
children	who	can	find	out	about	almost	anything	they	want	to,	right	from	a
home	information	appliance.	Already,	rating	systems	are	being	designed	to
allow	parental	control	over	what	kids	have	access	to.	This	could	become	a
major	political	issue	if	the	information	publishers	don't	handle	it	properly.
On	balance,	the	advantages	will	greatly	outweigh	the	problems.	The	more
information	there	is	available,	the	more	choices	we	will	have.	Today,	devoted
fans	plan	their	evenings	around	the	broadcast	times	of	their	favorite	television
shows,	but	once	video-on-demand	gives	us	the	opportunity	to	watch	whatever
we	like	whenever	we	like,	family	or	social	activities,	rather	than	a
broadcaster's	time	slots,	will	control	our	entertainment	schedules.	Before	the
telephone,	people	thought	of	their	neighbors	as	their	only	community.	Almost
everything	was	done	with	others	who	lived	nearby.	The	telephone	and	the
automobile	allowed	us	to	stretch	out.	We	may	visit	face-to-face	less	often	than
we	did	a	century	ago	because	we	can	pick	up	the	telephone,	but	this	doesn't
mean	we	have	become	isolated.	It	has	made	it	easier	for	us	to	talk	to	each
other	and	stay	in	touch.	Sometimes	it	may	seem	too	easy	for	people	to	reach
you.
A	decade	from	now,	you	may	shake	your	head	that	there	was	ever	a	time
when	any	stranger	or	a	wrong	number	could	interrupt	you	at	home	with	a
phone	call.	Cellular	phones,	pagers,	and	fax	machines	have	already	made	it
necessary	for	businesspeople	to	make	explicit	decisions	that	used	to	be

implicit.	A	decade	ago	we	didn't	have	to	decide	whether	we	wanted	to	receive
documents	at	home	or	take	calls	on	the	road.	It	was	easy	to	withdraw	to	your
house,	or	certainly	to	you======================================================== will	connect	to	the	wireless	part	of	the	highway,	a	switch	will
connect	that	to	the	wired	part,	and	then	to	the	computer/server	in	your	home
or	office	and	bring	you	the	information	you	asked	for.
There	will	also	be	local,	less	expensive	kinds	of	wireless	networks	available
inside	businesses	and	most	homes.	These	networks	will	allow	you	to	connect
to	the	highway	or	your	own	computer	system	without	paying	time	charges	so
long	as	you	are	within	a	certain	range.	Local	wireless	networks	will	use
technology	different	from	the	one	used	by	the	wide-area	wireless	networks.
However,	portable	information	devices	will	automatically	select	the	least
expensive	network	they	are	able	to	connect	to,	so	the	user	won't	be	aware	of
the	technological	differences.	The	indoor	wireless	networks	will	allow	wallet
PCs	to	be	used	in	place	of	remote	controls.
Wireless	service	poses	obvious	concerns	about	privacy	and	security,	because
radio	signals	can	easily	be	intercepted.	Even	wired	networks	can	be	tapped.
The	highway	software	will	have	to	encrypt	transmission	to	avoid
eavesdropping.
Governments	have	long	understood	the	importance	of	keeping	information
private,	for	both	economic	and	military	reasons.	The	need	to	make	personal,
commercial,	military,	or	diplomatic	messages	secure	(or	to	break	into	them)
has	attracted	powerful	intellects	through	the	generations.	It	is	very	satisfying
to	break	an	encoded	message.	Charles	Babbage,	who	made	dramatic	advances
in	the	art	of	code	breaking	in	the	mid-1800s,	wrote:	"Deciphering	is,	in	my
opinion,	one	of	the	most	fascinating	of	arts,	and	I	fear	I	have	wasted	upon	it
more	time	than	it	deserves."	I	discovered	its	fascination	as	a	kid	when,	like
kids	everywhere,	a	bunch	of	us	played	with	simple	ciphers.	We	would	encode
messages	by	substituting	one	letter	of	the	alphabet	for	another.	If	a	friend	sent
me	a	cipher	that	began	"ULFW	NZXX"	it	would	be	fairly	easy	to	guess	that
this	represented	"DEAR	BILL,"	and	that	U	stood	for	D,	and	L	for	E,	and	so
forth.	With	those	seven	letters	it	wasn't	hard	to	unravel	the	rest	of	the	cipher
fairly	quickly.

Past	wars	have	been	won	or	lost	because	the	most	powerful	governments	on
earth	didn't	have	the	cryptological	power	any	interested	junior	high	school
student	with	a	personal	computer	can	harness	today.	Soon	any	child	old
enough	to	use	a	computer	will	be	able	to	transmit	encoded	messages	that	no
government	on	earth	will	find	easy	to	decipher.	This	is	one	of	the	profound
implications	of	the	spread	of	fantastic	computing	power.
When	you	send	a	message	across	the	information	highway	it	will	be	"signed"
by	your	computer	or	other	information	appliance	with	a	digital	signature	that
only	you	are	capable	of	applying,	and	it	will	be	encrypted	so	that	only	the
intended	recipient	will	be	able	to	decipher	it.	You'll	send	a	message,	which
could	be	information	of	any	kind,	including	voice,	video,	or	digital	money.
The	recipient	will	be	able	to	be	almost	positive	that	the	message	is	really	from
you,	that	it	was	sent	at	exactly	the	indicated	time,	that	it	has	not	been
tampered	with	in	the	slightest,	and	that	others	cannot	decipher	it.
The	mechanism	that	will	make	this	possible	is	based	on	mathematical
principles,	including	what	are	called	"one-way	functions"	and	"public-key
encryption."	These	are	quite	advanced	concepts,	so	I'm	only	going	to	touch	on
them.	Keep	in	mind	that	regardless	of	how	complicated	the	system	is
technically,	it	will	be	extremely	easy	for	you	to	use.	You'll	just	tell	your
information	appliance	what	you	want	it	to	do	and	it	will	seem	to	happen
effortlessly.
A	one-way	function	is	something	that	is	much	easier	to	do	than	undo.
Breaking	a	pane	of	glass	is	a	one-way	function,	but	not	one	useful	for
encoding.	The	sort	of	one-way	function	required	for	cryptography	is	one	that
is	easy	to	undo	if	you	know	an	extra	piece	of	information	and	very	difficult	to
undo	without	that	information.	There	are	a	number	of	such	one-way	functions
in	mathematics.	One	involves	prime	numbers.	Kids	learn	about	prime
numbers	in	school.	A	prime	number	cannot	be	divided	evenly	by	any	number
except	1	and	itself.	Among	the	first	dozen	numbers,	the	primes	are	2,	3,	5,	7,
and	11.	The	numbers	4,	6,	8,	and	10	are	not	prime	because	2	divides	into	each
of	them	evenly.	The	number	9	is	not	prime	because	3	divides	into	it	evenly.
There	are	an	infinite	number	of	prime	numbers,	and	there	is	no	known	pattern
to	them	except	that	they	are	prime.	When	you	multiply	two	prime	numbers
together,	you	get	a	number	that	can	be	divided	evenly	only	by	those	same	two
primes.	For	example,	only	5	and	7	can	be	divided	evenly	into	35.	Finding	the
primes	is	called	"factoring"	the	number.
It	is	easy	to	multiply	the	prime	numbers	11,927	and	20,903	and	get	the
number	249,310,081,	but	it	is	much	harder	to	recover	from	the	product,

249,310,081,	the	two	prime	numbers	that	are	its	factors.	This	one-way
function,	the	difficulty	of	factoring	numbers,	underlies	an	ingenious	kind	of
cipher:	the	most	sophisticated	encryption	system	in	use	today.	It	takes	a	long
time	for	even	the	largest	computers	to	factor	a	really	large	product	back	into
its	constituent	primes.	A	coding	system	based	on	factoring	uses	two	different
decoding	keys,	one	to	encipher	a	message	and	a	different	but	related	one	to
decipher.	With	only	the	enciphering	key,	it's	easy	to	encode	a	message,	but
deciphering	it	within	any	practical	period	of	time	is	nearly	impossible.
Deciphering	requires	a	separate	key,	available	only	to	the	intended	recipient
of	the	message—or,	rather,	to	the	recipient's	computer.	The	enciphering	key	is
based	on	the	product	of	two	huge	prime	numbers,	whereas	the	deciphering
key	is	based	on	the	primes	themselves.	A	computer	can	generate	a	new	pair	of
unique	keys	in	a	flash,	because	it	is	easy	for	a	computer	to	generate	two	large
prime	numbers	and	multiply	them	together.	The	enciphering	key	thus	created
can	be	made	public	without	appreciable	risk,	because	of	the	difficulty	even
another	computer	would	have	factoring	it	to	obtain	the	deciphering	key.
The	practical	application	of	this	encryption	will	be	at	the	center	of	the
information	highway's	security	system.	The	world	will	become	quite	reliant
on	this	network,	so	it	is	important	that	security	be	handled	competently.	You
can	think	of	the	information	highway	as	a	postal	network	where	everyone	has
a	mailbox	that	is	impervious	to	tampering	and	has	an	unbreakable	lock.	Each
mailbox	has	a	slot	that	lets	anyone	slide	information	in,	but	only	the	owner	of
a	mailbox	has	the	key	to	get	information	out.	(Some	governments	may	insist
that	each	mailbox	have	a	second	door	with	a	separate	key	that	the	government
keeps,	but	we'll	ignore	that	political	consideration	for	now	and	concentrate	on
the	security	that	software	will	provide.)
Each	user's	computer	or	other	information	appliance	will	use	prime	numbers
to	generate	an	enciphering	key,	which	will	be	listed	publicly,	and	a
corresponding	deciphering	key,	which	only	the	user	will	know.	This	is	how	it
will	work	in	practice:	I	have	information	I	want	to	send	you.	My	information
appliance/computer	system	looks	up	your	public	key	and	uses	it	to	encrypt	the
information	before	sending	it.	No	one	can	read	the	message,	even	though	your
key	is	public	knowledge,	because	your	public	key	does	not	contain	the
information	needed	for	decryption.	You	receive	the	message	and	your
computer	decrypts	it	with	a	private	key	that	corresponds	to	your	public	key.
You	want	to	answer.	Your	computer	looks	up	my	public	key	and	uses	it	to
encrypt	your	reply.	No	one	else	can	read	the	message,	even	though	it	was
encrypted	with	a	key	that	is	totally	public.	Only	I	can	read	it	because	only	I
have	the	private	deciphering	key.	This	is	very	practical,	because	no	one	has	to

trade	keys	in	advance.
How	big	do	the	prime	numbers	and	their	products	have	to	be	to	ensure	an
effective	one-way	function?.
The	concept	of	public-key	encryption	was	invented	by	Whitfield	Diffie	and
Martin	Hellman	in	1977.	Another	set	of	computer	scientists,	Ron	Rivest,	Adi
Shamir,	and	Leonard	Adelman,	soon	came	up	with	the	notion	of	using	prime
factorization	as	part	of	what	is	now	known	as	the	RSA	cryptosystem,	after	the
initials	of	their	last	names.	They	projected	that	it	would	take	millions	of	years
to	factor	a	130-digit	number	that	was	the	product	of	two	primes,	regardless	of
how	much	computing	power	was	brought	to	bear.	To	prove	the	point,	they
challenged	the	world	to	find	the	two	factors	in	this	129-digit	number,	known
to	people	in	the	field	as	RSA	129:
114,381,625,757,888,867,669,235,779,976,146,612,010,218,296,
721,242,362,562,561,842,935,706,935,245,733,897,830,597,123,563,958,705,058,989,075,147,599,29.0,026,879,543,541
They	were	sure	that	a	message	they	had	encrypted	using	the	number	as	the
public	key	would	be	totally	secure	forever.	But	they	hadn't	anticipated	either
the	full	effects	of	Moore's	Law,	as	discussed	in	chapter	2,	which	has	made
computers	much	more	powerful,	or	the	success	of	the	personal	computer,
which	has	dramatically	increased	the	number	of	computers	and	computer
users	in	the	world.	In	1993	a	group	of	more	than	600	academics	and	hobbyists
from	around	the	world	began	an	assault	on	the	129-digit	number,	using	the
Internet	to	coordinate	the	work	of	various	computers.	In	less	than	a	year	they
factored	the	number	into	two	primes,	one	64	digits	long	and	the	other	65.	The
primes	are	as	follows:
3,490,529,510,847,650,949,147,849,619,903,898,133,417,764,638,
493,387,843,990,820,577
and
32,769,132,993,266,709,549,961,988,190,834,461,413,177,642,
967,992,942,539,798,288,533
And	the	encoded	message	says:	"The	magic	words	are	squeamish	and
ossifrage."
One	lesson	that	came	out	of	this	challenge	is	that	a	129-digit	public	key	is	not
long	enough	if	the	information	being	encrypted	is	really	important	and
sensitive.	Another	is	that	no	one	should	get	too	cocksure	about	the	security	of

encryption.
Increasing	the	key	just	a	few	digits	makes	it	much	more	difficult	to	crack.
Mathematicians	today	believe	that	a	250-digit-long	pr======================================================== pler	it	is	to	search
and	navigate	through	them	quickly,	because	their	content	can	be	restructured
so	easily.
The	organizational	structure	of	a	reservation	book	at	a	restaurant	is	by	date
and	time.	A	9:00	P.M.	reservation	is	written	farther	down	the	page	than	an
8:00	P.M.	reservation.	Saturday-night	dinner	reservations	follow	those	for
Saturday	lunch.	A	mâitre	d'	or	anyone	else	can	rapidly	find	out	who	has	a
reservation	on	any	date	for	any	time	because	the	book's	information	is	ordered
that	way.	But	if,	for	whatever	reason,	someone	wants	to	extract	information	in
another	way,	the	simple	chronology	is	useless.
Imagine	the	plight	of	a	restaurant	captain	if	I	called	to	say,	"My	name	is
Gates.	My	wife	made	us	a	reservation	for	some	time	next	month.	Would	you
mind	checking	to	see	when	it	is?"

"I'm	sorry,	sir,	do	you	know	the	date	of	the	reservation?"	the	captain	would	be
likely	to	ask.
"No,	that's	what	I'm	trying	to	find	out."
"Would	that	have	been	on	a	weekend?"	the	captain	asks.
He	knows	he's	going	to	be	paging	through	the	book	by	hand,	and	he's	hoping
to	reduce	the	task	by	focusing	the	dates	in	any	possible	way.
A	restaurant	can	use	a	paper-based	reservation	book	because	the	total	number
of	reservations	isn't	large.	An	airline	reservation	system	is	not	a	book	but	a
database	containing	an	enormous	quantity	of	information—flights,	air	fares,
bookings,	seat	assignments,	and	billing	information—for	hundreds	of	flights	a
day	worldwide.	American	Airlines'	SABRE	reservation	system	stores	the
information—4.4	trillion	bytes	of	it,	which	is	more	than	4	million	million
characters—on	computer	hard	disks.	If	the	information	in	the	SABRE	system
were	copied	into	a	hypothetical	paper	reservation	book,	it	would	require	more
than	2	billion	pages.
For	as	long	as	we've	had	paper	documents	or	collections	of	documents,	we
have	been	ordering	information	linearly,	with	indexes,	tables	of	contents,	and
cross-references	of	various	kinds	to	provide	alternate	means	of	navigation.	In
most	offices	filing	cabinets	are	organized	by	customer,	vendor,	or	project	in
alphabetical	order,	but	to	speed	access,	often	a	duplicate	set	of
correspondence	is	filed	chronologically.	Professional	indexers	add	value	to	a
book	by	building	an	alternative	way	to	find	information.	And	before	library
catalogs	were	computerized,	new	books	were	entered	into	the	paper	catalogs
on	several	different	cards	so	a	reader	could	find	a	book	by	its	title	or	any	one
of	its	authors	or	topics.	This	redundancy	was	to	make	information	easier	to
find.
When	I	was	young	I	loved	my	family's	1960	World	Book	Encyclopedia.	Its
heavy	bound	volumes	contained	just	text	and	pictures.	They	showed	what
Edison's	phonograph	looked	like,	but	didn't	let	me	listen	to	its	scratchy	sound.
The	encyclopedia	had	photographs	of	a	fuzzy	caterpillar	changing	into	a
butterfly,	but	there	was	no	video	to	bring	the	transformation	to	life.	It	also
would	have	been	nice	if	it	had	quizzed	me	on	what	I	had	read,	or	if	the
information	had	always	been	up-to-date.	Naturally	I	wasn't	aware	of	those
drawbacks	then.	When	I	was	eight,	I	began	to	read	the	first	volume.	I	was
determined	to	read	straight	through	every	volume.	I	could	have	absorbed
more	if	it	had	been	easy	to	read	all	the	articles	about	the	sixteenth	century	in
sequence	or	all	the	articles	pertaining	to	medicine.	Instead	I	read	about

"Garter	Snakes"	then	"Gary,	Indiana,"	then	"Gas."	But	I	had	a	great	time
reading	the	encyclopedia	anyway	and	kept	at	it	for	five	years	until	I	reached
the	Ps.	Then	I	discovered	the	Encyclopaedia	Britannica,	with	its	greater
sophistication	and	detail.	I	knew	I	would	never	have	the	patience	to	read	all	of
it.	Also,	by	then,	satisfying	my	enthusiasm	for	computers	was	taking	up	most
of	my	spare	time.
Current	print	encyclopedias	consist	of	nearly	two	dozen	volumes,	with
millions	of	words	of	text	and	thousands	of	illustrations,	and	cost	hundreds	or
thousands	of	dollars.	That's	quite	an	investment,	especially	considering	how
rapidly	the	information	gets	out	of	date.	Microsoft	Encarta,	which	is
outselling	print	and	other	multi-media	encyclopedias,	comes	on	a	single	1-
ounce	CD-ROM	(which	stands	for	Compact	Disc	Read	Only	Memory).
Encarta	includes	26,000	topics	with	9	million	words	of	text,	8	hours	of
sounds,	7,000	photographs	and	illustrations,	800	maps,	250	interactive	charts
and	tables,	and	100	animations	and	video	clips.	It	costs	less	than	$100.	If	you
want	to	know	how	the	Egyptian	"ud"	(a	musical	instrument)	sounds,	hear	the
1936	abdication	speech	of	Great	Britain's	King	Edward	VIII,	or	see	an
animation	explaining	how	a	machine	works,	the	information's	all	there—and
no	paper-based	encyclopedia	will	ever	have	it.
Articles	in	a	print	encyclopedia	often	are	followed	by	a	list	of	articles	on
related	subjects.	To	read	them,	you	have	to	find	the	referenced	article,	which
may	be	in	another	volume.	With	a	CD-ROM	encyclopedia	all	you	have	to	do
is	click	on	the	reference	and	the	article	will	appear.	On	the	information
highway,	encyclopedia	articles	will	include	links	to	related	subjects—not	just
those	covered	in	the	encyclopedia,	but	those	in	other	sources.	There	will	be	no
limit	to	how	much	detail	you	will	be	able	to	explore	on	a	subject	that	interests
you.	In	fact,	an	encyclopedia	on	the	highway	will	be	more	than	just	a	specific
reference	work—it	will	be,	like	the	library	card	catalog,	a	doorway	to	all
knowledge.
1995:	Screen	from	Microsoft	Encarta	electronic	multimedia	encyclopedia

Today,	printed	information	is	hard	to	locate.	It's	almost	impossible	to	find	all
the	best	information—including	books,	news	articles,	and	film	clips—on	a
specific	topic.	It	is	extremely	time-consuming	to	assemble	the	information
you	can	find.	For	example,	if	you	wanted	to	read	biographies	of	all	the	recent
Nobel	Prize	laureates,	compiling	them	could	take	an	entire	day.	Electronic
documents,	however,	will	be	interactive.	Request	a	kind	of	information,	and
the	document	responds.	Indicate	that	you've	changed	your	mind,	and	the
document	responds	again.	Once	you	get	used	to	this	sort	of	system,	you	find
that	being	able	to	look	at	information	in	different	ways	makes	that
information	more	valuable.	The	flexibility	invites	exploration,	and	the
exploration	is	rewarded	with	discovery.
You'll	be	able	to	get	your	daily	news	in	a	similar	way.	You'll	be	able	to	specify
how	long	you	want	your	newscast	to	last.	This	will	be	possible	because	you'll
be	able	to	have	each	of	the	news	stories	selected	individually.	The	newscast
assembled	for	and	delivered	only	to	you	might	include	world	news	from
NBC,	the	BBC,	CNN,	or	the	Los	Angeles	Times,	with	a	weather	report	from	a
favorite	local	TV	meteorologist—or	from	any	private	meteorologist	who
wanted	to	offer	his	or	her	own	service.	You	will	be	able	to	request	longer
stories	on	the	subjects	that	particularly	interest	you	and	just	highlights	on
others.	If,	while	you	are	watching	the	newscast,	you	want	more	than	has	been
put	together,	you	will	easily	be	able	to	request	more	background	or	detail,
either	from	another	news	broadcast	or	from	file	information.
Among	all	the	types	of	paper	documents,	narrative	fiction	is	one	of	the	few
that	will	not	benefit	from	electronic	organization.	Almost	every	reference
book	has	an	index,	but	novels	don't	because	there	is	no	need	to	be	able	to	look
something	up	in	a	novel.	Novels	are	linear.	Likewise,	we'll	continue	to	watch
most	movies	from	start	to	finish.	This	isn't	a	technological	judgment—it	is	an
artistic	one:	Their	linearity	is	intrinsic	to	the	storytelling	process.	New	forms
of	interactive	fiction	are	being	invented	that	take	advantage	of	the	electronic
world,	but	linear	novels	and	movies	will	still	be	popular.
The	highway	will	make	it	easy	to	distribute	digital	documents	cheaply,
whatever	their	form.	Millions	of	people	and	companies	will	be	creating
documents	and	publishing	them	on	the	network.	Some	documents	will	be
aimed	at	paying	audiences	and	some	will	be	free	to	anyone	who	wants	to	pay
attention.	Digital	storage	is	fantastically	inexpensive.	Hard-disk	drives	in
personal	computers	will	soon	cost	about	$0.15	for	a	megabyte	(million	bytes)
of	information.	To	put	this	in	perspective,	1	megabyte	will	hold	about	700
pages	of	text,	so	the	cost	is	something	like	$0.00021	per	page—about	one

two-hundredth	what	the	local	copy	center	would	charge	at	$0.05	a	page.	And
because	there	is	the	option	of	reusing	the	storage	space	for	something	else,	the
cost	is	actually	the	cost	of	storage	per	unit	time—in	other	words,	of	renting
the	space.	If	we	assume	just	a	three-year	average	lifetime	for	the	hard-disk
drive,	the	amortized	price	per	page	per	year	is	$0.00007.	And	storage	is
getting	cheaper	all	the	time.	Hard-disk	prices	have	been	dropping	by	about	50
percent	per	year	for	the	last	several	years.
Text	is	particularly	easy	to	store	because	it	is	very	compact	in	digital	form.
The	old	saying	that	a	picture	is	worth	a	thousand	words	is	more	than	true	in
the	digital	world.	High-quality	photographic	images	take	more	space	than
text,	and	video	(which	you	can	think	of	as	a	sequence	of	up	to	thirty	new
images	appearing	every	second)	takes	even	more.	Nevertheless,	the	cost	of
distribution	for	these	kinds	of	data	is	still	quite	low.	A	feature	film	takes	up
about	4	gigabytes	(4,000	megabytes)	in	compressed	digital	format,	which	is
about	$1,600	worth	of	hard-disk	space.
Sixteen	hundred	dollars	to	store	a	single	film	doesn't	sound	low-cost.
However,	consider	that	the	typical	local	video-rental	store	usually	buys	at
least	eight	copies	of	a	hot	new	movie	for	about	$80	a	copy.	With	these	eight
copies	the	store	can	supply	only	eight	customers	per	day.
Once	the	disk	and	the	computer	that	manages	it	are	connected	up	to	the
highway,	only	one	copy	of	the	information	will	be	necessary	for	everyone	to
have	access.	The	most	popular	documents	will	have	copies	made	on	different
servers	to	avoid	delays	when	an	unusual	number	of	users	want	access.	With
one	investment,	roughly	what	a	single	shop	today	spends	for	a	popular
videotape	title,======================================================== We	saw	three	ways	to	get	MS-DOS	out	in	front.	First	was	to	make
MS-DOS	the	best	product.	Second	was	to	help	other	software	companies
write	MS-DOS-based	software.	Third	was	to	ensure	MS-DOS	was
inexpensive.
1981:	The	IBM	personal	computer
We	gave	IBM	a	fabulous	deal—a	low,	one-time	fee	that	granted	the	company
the	right	to	use	Microsoft's	operating	system	on	as	many	computers	as	it
could	sell.	This	offered	IBM	an	incentive	to	push	MS-DOS,	and	to	sell	it
inexpensively.	Our	strategy	worked.	IBM	sold	the	UCSD	Pascal	P-System	for
about	$450,	CP/M-86	for	about	$175,	and	MS-DOS	for	about	$60.
Our	goal	was	not	to	make	money	directly	from	IBM,	but	to	profit	from
licensing	MS-DOS	to	computer	companies	that	wanted	to	offer	machines
more	or	less	compatible	with	the	IBM	PC.	IBM	could	use	our	software	for
free,	but	it	did	not	have	an	exclusive	license	or	control	of	future
enhancements.	This	put	Microsoft	in	the	business	of	licensing	a	software
platform	to	the	personal-computer	industry.	Eventually	IBM	abandoned	the
UCSD	Pascal	P-system	and	CP/M-86	enhancements.
Consumers	bought	the	IBM	PC	with	confidence,	and	in	1982,	software

developers	began	turning	out	applications	to	run	on	it.	Each	new	customer,
and	each	new	application,	added	to	the	IBM	PC's	strength	as	a	potential	de
facto	standard	for	the	industry.	Soon	most	of	the	new	and	best	software,	such
as	Lotus	1-2-3,	was	being	written	for	it.	Mitch	Kapor,	with	Jonathan	Sachs,
created	1-2-3	and	revolutionized	spreadsheets.	The	original	inventors	of	the
electronic	spreadsheet,	Dan	Bricklin	and	Bob	Frankston,	deserve	immense
credit	for	their	product,	VisiCalc,	but	1-2-3	made	it	obsolete.	Mitch	is	a
fascinating	person	whose	eclectic	background—in	his	case	as	a	disc	jockey
and	transcendental	meditation	instructor—is	typical	of	that	of	the	best
software	designers.
A	positive-feedback	cycle	began	driving	the	PC	market.	Once	it	got	going,
thousands	of	software	applications	appeared,	and	untold	numbers	of
companies	began	making	add-in	or	"accessory"	cards,	which	extended	the
hardware	capabilities	of	the	PC.	The	availability	of	software	and	hardware
add-ons	sold	PCs	at	a	far	greater	rate	than	IBM	had	anticipated—by	a	factor
of	millions.	The	positive-feedback	cycle	spun	out	billions	of	dollars	for	IBM.
For	a	few	years,	more	than	half	of	all	personal	computers	used	in	business
were	IBMs	and	most	of	the	rest	were	compatible	with	its	machines.
The	IBM	standard	became	the	platform	everybody	imitated.	A	lot	of	the
reason	was	timing	and	its	use	of	a	16-bit	processor.	Both	timing	and
marketing	are	key	to	acceptance	with	technology	products.	The	PC	happened
to	be	a	good	machine,	but	another	company	could	have	set	the	standard	by
getting	enough	desirable	applications	and	selling	enough	machines.
IBM's	early	business	decisions,	caused	by	its	rush	to	get	the	PCs	out,	made	it
very	easy	for	other	companies	to	build	compatible	machines.	The	architecture
was	for	sale.	The	microprocessor	chips	from	Intel	and	Microsoft's	operating
system	were	available.	This	openness	was	a	powerful	incentive	for
component	builders,	software	developers,	and	everyone	else	in	the	business	to
try	to	copy.
Within	three	years	almost	all	the	competing	standards	for	personal	computers
disappeared.	The	only	exceptions	were	Apple's	Apple	II	and	Macintosh.
Hewlett	Packard,	DEC,	Texas	Instruments,	and	Xerox,	despite	their
technologies,	reputations,	and	customer	bases,	failed	in	the	personal-computer
market	in	the	early	1980s	because	their	machines	weren't	compatible	and
didn't	offer	significant	enough	improvements	over	the	IBM	architecture.	A
host	of	start-ups,	such	as	Eagle	and	Northstar,	thought	people	would	buy	their
hardware	because	it	offered	something	different	and	slightly	better	than	the
IBM	PC.	All	of	the	start-ups	either	changed	to	building	compatible	hardware

or	failed.	The	IBM	PC	became	the	hardware	standard.	By	the	mid-1980s,
there	were	dozens	of	IBM-compatible	PCs.	Although	buyers	of	a	PC	might
not	have	articulated	it	this	way,	what	they	were	looking	for	was	the	hardware
that	ran	the	most	software,	and	they	wanted	the	same	system	the	people	they
knew	and	worked	with	had.
It	has	become	popular	for	certain	revisionist	historians	to	conclude	that	IBM
made	a	mistake	working	with	Intel	and	Microsoft	to	create	its	PC.	They	argue
that	IBM	should	have	kept	the	PC	architecture	proprietary,	and	that	Intel	and
Microsoft	somehow	got	the	better	of	IBM.	But	the	revisionists	are	missing	the
point.	IBM	became	the	central	force	in	the	PC	industry	precisely	because	it
was	able	to	harness	an	incredible	amount	of	innovative	talent	and
entrepreneurial	energy	and	use	it	to	promote	its	open	architecture.	IBM	set	the
standards.
In	the	mainframe	business	IBM	was	king	of	the	hill,	and	competitors	found	it
hard	to	match	the	IBM	sales	force	and	high	R&D.	If	a	competitor	tried
climbing	the	hill,	IBM	could	focus	its	assets	to	make	the	ascent	nearly
impossible.	But	in	the	volatile	world	of	the	personal	computer,	IBM's	position
was	more	like	that	of	the	leading	runner	in	a	marathon.	As	long	as	the	leader
keeps	running	as	fast	or	faster	than	the	others,	he	stays	in	the	lead	and
competitors	will	have	to	keep	trying	to	catch	up.	If,	however,	he	slacks	off	or
stops	pushing	himself,	the	rest	will	pass	him	by.	There	weren't	many
deterrents	to	the	other	racers,	as	would	soon	become	clear.
By	1983,	I	thought	our	next	step	should	be	to	develop	a	graphical	operating
system.	I	didn't	believe	we	would	be	able	to	retain	our	position	at	the
forefront	of	the	software	industry	if	we	stuck	with	MS-DOS,	because	MS-
DOS	was	character-based.	A	user	had	to	type	in	often-obscure	commands,
which	then	appeared	on	the	screen.	MS-DOS	didn't	provide	pictures	and	other
graphics	to	help	users	with	applications.	The	interface	is	the	way	the
computer	and	the	user	communicate.	I	believed	that	in	the	future	interfaces
would	be	graphical	and	that	it	was	essential	for	Microsoft	to	move	beyond
MS-DOS	and	set	a	new	standard	in	which	pictures	and	fonts	(typefaces)
would	be	part	of	an	easier-to-use	interface.	In	order	to	realize	our	vision,	PCs
had	to	be	made	easier	to	use	not	only	to	help	existing	customers,	but	also	to
attract	new	ones	who	wouldn't	take	the	time	to	learn	to	work	with	a
complicated	interface.
To	illustrate	the	huge	difference	between	a	character-based	computer	program
and	a	graphical	one,	imagine	playing	a	board	game	such	as	chess,	checkers,
Go,	or	Monopoly	on	a	computer	screen.	With	a	character-based	system,	you

type	in	your	moves	using	characters.	You	write	"Move	the	piece	on	square	11
to	square	19"	or	something	slightly	more	cryptic	like	"Pawn	to	QB3."	But	in	a
graphical	computer	system,	you	see	the	board	game	on	your	screen.	You
move	pieces	by	pointing	at	them	and	actually	dragging	them	to	their	new
locations.
Researchers	at	Xerox's	now-famous	Palo	Alto	Research	Center	in	California
explored	new	paradigms	for	human-computer	interaction.	They	showed	that	it
was	easier	to	instruct	a	computer	if	you	could	point	at	things	on	the	screen
and	see	pictures.	They	used	a	device	called	a	"mouse,"	which	could	be	rolled
on	a	tabletop	to	move	a	pointer	around	on	the	screen.	Xerox	did	a	poor	job	of
taking	commercial	advantage	of	this	groundbreaking	idea,	because	its
machines	were	expensive	and	didn't	use	standard	microprocessors.	Getting
great	research	to	translate	into	products	that	sell	is	still	a	big	problem	for
many	companies.
1984:	Character	user	interface	in	an	early	version	of	Microsoft	Word	for	DOS
In	1983,	Microsoft	announced	that	we	planned	to	bring	graphical	computing
to	the	IBM	PC,	with	a	product	called	Windows.	Our	goal	was	to	create
software	that	would	extend	MS-DOS	and	let	people	use	a	mouse,	employ
graphical	images	on	the	computer	screen,	and	make	available	on	the	screen	a
number	of	"windows,"	each	running	a	different	computer	program.	At	that
time	two	of	the	personal	computers	on	the	market	had	graphical	capabilities:
the	Xerox	Star	and	the	Apple	Lisa.	Both	were	expensive,	limited	in	capability,
and	built	on	proprietary	hardware	architectures.	Other	hardware	companies
couldn't	license	the	operating	systems	to	build	compatible	systems,	and
neither	computer	attracted	many	software	companies	to	develop	applications.
Microsoft	wanted	to	create	an	open	standard	and	bring	graphical	capabilities
to	any	computer	that	was	running	MS-DOS.

1995:	Graphical	user	interface	in	Microsoft	Word	for	Windows
The	first	popular	graphical	platform	came	to	market	in	1984,	when	Apple
released	its	Macintosh.	Everything	about	the	Macintosh's	proprietary
operating	system	was	graphical,	and	it	was	an	enormous	success.	The	initial
hardware	and	operating-system	software	Apple	released	were	quite	limited
but	vividly	demonstrated	the	potential	of	the	graphical	interface.	As	the
hardware	and	software	improved,	the	potential	was	realized.
We	worked	closely	with	Apple	throughout	the	development	of	the	Macintosh.
Steve	Jobs	led	the	Macintosh	team.	Working	with	him	was	really	fun.	Steve
has	an	amazing	intuition	for	engineering	and	design	as	well	as	an	ability	to
motivate	people	that	is	world	class.
It	took	a	lot	of	imagination	to	develop	graphical	computer	programs.	What
should	one	look	like?	How	should	it	behave?	Some	ideas	were	inherited	from
the	work	done	at	Xerox	and	some	were	original.	At	first	we	went	to	excess
with	the	possibilities.	We	used	nearly	every	one	of	the	fonts	and	icons	we
could.	Then	we	figured	out	all	that	made	it	hard	to	look	at	and	changed	to
more	sober	menus.	We	created	a	word	processor,	Microsoft	Word,	and	a
spreadsheet,	Microsoft	Excel,	for	the	Macintosh.	These	were	Microsoft's	first
graphical	products.
The	Macintosh	had	great	system	software,	but	Apple	refused	(until	1995)	to
let	anyone	else	make	computer	hardware	that	would	run	it.	This	was
traditional	hardware-company	thinking:	If	you	wanted	the	software,	you	had
to	buy	Apple	computers.	Microsoft	wanted	the	Macintosh	to	sell	well	and	be
widely	accepted,	not	only	because	we	had	invested	a	lot	in	creating
applications======================================================== re	limited,
Minitel's	success	has	fostered	innovations	and	provided	lessons.	France
Telecom	is	investing	in	a	packet	switch	data	network.
In	Germany,	Deutsche	Telekom	lowered	the	price	of	ISDN	service
dramatically	in	1995.	This	has	led	to	a	significant	increase	in	the	number	of
users	connecting	personal	computers.	Bringing	down	ISDN	prices	was	clever,
because	lower	prices	will	foster	the	development	of	applications	that	will	help
hasten	the	arrival	of	a	broadband	system.
The	level	of	PC	penetration	in	business	is	even	higher	in	the	Nordic	countries
than	in	the	United	States.	These	countries	understand	that	their	highly
educated	workforces	will	benefit	from	having	high-speed	connections	to	the
rest	of	the	world.
Although	the	interest	in	high-tech	communications	systems	is	probably
greater	in	Japan	than	in	any	other	country,	it	is	very	difficult	to	predict	the	fate
of	the	information	highway	there.	The	use	of	personal	computers	in
businesses,	schools,	and	homes	is	significantly	less	widespread	in	Japan	than
in	other	developed	countries.	This	is	partly	because	of	the	difficulty	of
entering	kanji	characters	on	a	keyboard,	but	also	because	of	Japan's	large	and
entrenched	market	for	dedicated	word-processing	machines.
Japan	is	second	only	to	the	United	States	in	the	number	of	companies
investing	in	developing	both	highway	building	blocks	and	the	highway's
content.	Many	large	Japanese	companies	have	excellent	technology	and	a
record	of	taking	long-term	approaches	to	their	investments.	Sony	owns	Sony
Music	and	Sony	Pictures,	which	includes	Columbia	Records	and	Columbia
Studios.	Toshiba	has	a	large	investment	in	Time	Warner.	NEC's	corporate
slogan,	"Computers	&	Communication,"	coined	in	1984,	anticipating	the
highway,	is	an	indication	of	its	commitment.
The	cable	industry	in	Japan	was	overregulated	until	quite	recently,	but	the	rate
of	change	is	impressive.	The	Japanese	phone	company,	NTT,	has	the	largest
valuation	of	any	public	company	in	the	world	and	will	play	a	leadership	role
in	every	aspect	of	the	highway	system.
In	South	Korea,	although	significantly	fewer	PCs	per	capita	are	being	sold
there	than	in	the	United	States,	more	than	25	percent	of	the	machines	are
going	into	homes.	This	statistic	demonstrates	how	countries	with	a	strong
family	structure	that	put	great	emphasis	on	getting	ahead	by	educating

children	will	be	fertile	ground	for	products	that	provide	educational
advantages.	One	appropriate	use	of	governmental	authority	will	be	the
creation	of	incentives	to	encourage	low-cost	connections	for	schools	and	to
ensure	that	the	highway	reaches	rural	areas	and	low-income	areas	too.
Australia	and	New	Zealand	are	also	interested	in	the	highway,	partly	because
of	the	great	geographic	distance	between	them	and	other	developed	countries.
The	phone	companies	in	Australia	are	being	privatized	and	the	market	opened
to	competitors,	encouraging	forward-looking	plans.	New	Zealand	has	the
most	open	telecommunications	market	in	the	world,	and	its	newly	privatized
phone	company	has	set	an	example	of	how	effective	privatization	can	be.
I	doubt	that	any	of	the	developed	countries,	including	all	of	Western	Europe,
North	America,	Australia,	New	Zealand,	and	Japan,	will	end	up	more	than	a
year	or	two	ahead	of	or	behind	the	others	unless	poor	political	decisions	are
made.	Within	each	country	some	communities	will	get	service	earlier	than
others	because	of	their	economic	demographics.	Networks	will	go	into	richer
neighborhoods	first	because	that's	where	residents	are	likely	to	spend	more.
Local	regulators	may	even	find	themselves	competing	to	create	favorable
environments	for	the	early	deployment	of	the	highway.	No	taxpayer	money
will	be	needed	to	build	the	highway	in	industrialized	countries	with	pro-
competition	regulations.	The	speed	with	which	the	highway	is	brought
directly	into	homes	will	correlate	in	large	part	with	the	per	capita	gross
domestic	product	(GDP)	of	a	country.	Despite	this,	even	in	developing
countries	the	connections	into	businesses	and	schools	will	have	a	huge	impact
and	reduce	the	income	gap	between	these	countries	and	developed	ones.
Areas	such	as	Bangalore	in	India,	or	Shanghai	and	Guangzhou	in	China,	will
install	highway	connections	to	businesses	that	they	will	use	to	offer	the
services	of	their	highly	educated	workers	to	the	global	market.
In	many	countries	nowadays,	the	top	political	leaders	are	making	plans	to
encourage	highway	investment.	The	competition	among	nations	trying	either
to	take	the	lead	in	development	or	to	make	sure	they	don't	fall	behind	is
creating	a	very	positive	dynamic.	As	different	countries	try	different
approaches,	everyone	will	watch	to	see	what	works	best.	Some	national
governments	may	rationalize	that	if	they	decide	they	must	have	a	network
right	away	and	private	enterprise	is	not	willing	to	build	it,	they	will	have	to
help	build	or	fund	pieces	of	their	information	highway.	A	government
bootstrap	could,	in	principle,	cause	an	information	highway	to	be	built	sooner
than	might	happen	otherwise,	but	the	very	real	possibility	of	an	unattractive
outcome	has	to	be	considered	carefully.	Such	a	country	might	end	up	with	a
boondoggle,	white-elephant	information	highway	built	by	engineers	out	of

touch	with	the	rapid	pace	of	technological	development.
Something	like	this	happened	in	Japan	with	the	Hi-Vision	high-definition
television	project.	MITI,	the	powerful	Ministry	of	International	Trade	and
Industry,	and	broadcasting	company,	and	NHK,	the	government-run	TV
broadcasting	company,	coordinated	an	effort	among	Japanese	consumer-
electronics	companies	to	build	a	new	analog	HDTV	system.	NHK	committed
to	broadcasting	shows	a	few	hours	a	day	in	the	new	format.	Unfortunately,	the
system	was	rendered	obsolete	before	it	was	ever	deployed,	when	it	became
clear	that	digital	technology	was	superior.	Many	Japanese	companies	found
themselves	in	a	difficult	position.	Privately,	they	knew	the	system	was	not	a
good	investment,	but	they	had	to	maintain	their	public	commitments	to	the
government-sponsored	format.	As	I	write	this,	the	"plan	of	record"	in	Japan
remains	to	move	to	this	analog	system,	although	nobody	actually	expects	it	to
happen.	Japan	will,	however,	benefit	from	the	investment	in	developing	high-
definition	cameras	and	displays	that	the	Hi-Vision	project	encouraged.
Building	the	information	highway	will	not	be	as	simple	as	saying	"Run	fiber
everywhere."	Any	government	or	company	getting	involved	will	need	to	track
new	developments	and	be	prepared	to	shift	directions.	Such	flexibility
requires	technological	expertise	that,	with	the	attendant	risks,	is	better
covered	by	industry.
Competition	in	the	private	sector	will	be	fierce	on	many	fronts.	Cable,	phone,
and	other	companies	will	compete	to	provide	the	fiber,	wireless,	and	satellite
infrastructure.	Hardware	companies	will	fight	to	sell	servers,	ATM	switches,
and	set-top	boxes	to	network	companies,	and	PCs,	digital	TVs,	telephones,
and	other	information	appliances	to	consumers.	At	the	same	time	companies
in	the	software	business,	including	Apple,	AT&T,	IBM,	Microsoft,	Oracle,
and	Sun	Microsystems,	will	be	offering	software	components	to	network
providers.	Eventually,	millions	of	companies	and	individuals	will	be	selling
software	applications	and	information,	including	entertainment,	across	the
network	that	springs	up.
I've	discussed	at	some	length	how	critical	it	is	that	the	physical	infrastructure
be	built	out	to	provide	broadband	connections	to	homes.	I	described	the
competition	in	the	United	States,	and	the	strategies	of	the	telephone	and	cable
industries,	the	major	players.	The	cable	companies	are	younger	and	smaller
than	the	big	telephone	companies	and	tend	to	be	more	entrepreneurial.	Cable
television	networks	provide	customers	with	one-way	broadband	video
through	a	web	of	coaxial,	and	sometimes	fiber-optic,	cable.	Although	the
penetration	rate	worldwide	is	quite	low—189	million	subscribers—cable

systems	run	past	nearly	70	percent	of	all	American	homes,	and	into	63	million
of	them.	Already,	cable	systems	are	gradually	being	converted	to	carry	a
digital	signal,	and	a	number	of	cable	companies	are	working	to	provide	PC
users	with	connections	to	the	Internet	and	on-line	services.	They're	gambling
that	many	PC	users	accustomed	to	downloading	information	on	a	telephone
line	at	28,800	bits	per	second	will	be	willing	to	pay	more	to	download
information	through	their	television	cable	at	3	million	bits	per	second.
As	for	the	phone	companies,	they	are	much	stronger	financially.	The
American	telephone	system	is	the	world's	largest	switched-distributed
network	providing	point-to-point	connections.	The	combined	local	telephone
exchange	market,	with	annual	revenues	of	about	$100	billion,	is	far	more
profitable	than	the	$20	billion	U.S.	cable	business.	The	seven	regional	Bell
operating	companies	(RBOCs)	will	compete	with	their	former	parent,	AT&T,
to	provide	long-distance,	cellular,	and	new	services.	But,	like	phone
companies	around	the	world,	the	RBOCs	are	new	to	the	competitive	world,
just	emerging	from	their	heritage	as	heavily	regulated	utilities.
The	local	phone	companies	will	be	motivated	by	increased	competition.	They
are	in	a	defensive	position.	Other	phone	companies	and	cable	companies	are
going	to	want	to	offer	telephone	as	well	as	other	communications	services	in
their	areas.	New	regulations	will	unleash	this	competition	and,	as	I've	already
noted,	the	cost	of	long-distance	voice-telephone	service	will	drop
dramatically.	If	that	happens,	phone	companies	will	be	deprived	of	much	of
their	current	profitable	revenue.
The	companies	providing	local	service	have	slowly	been	introducing
advanced	digital	transmission	capabilities	into	their	networks.	They	haven't
felt	pressure	to	hurry,	because	until	now	it	seemed	they	were	protected	from
competition	by	the	large	financial	barriers	to	market	entry.	They	knew	a
potential	rival	would	have	to	make	a	duplicate	investment	of,	say,	$100
million	in	equipment	in	order	to	compete	in	a	given	community.	But