======================================================== up	when	we	could	or	making	the	games	more
difficult.	A	friend	at	Lakeside	developed	a	program	in	BASIC	that	simulated
the	play	of	Monopoly.	BASIC	(Beginner's	All-purpose	Symbolic	Instruction

Code)	is,	as	its	name	suggests,	a	relatively	easy-to-learn	programming
language	we	used	to	develop	increasingly	complex	programs.	He	figured	out
how	to	make	the	computer	play	hundreds	of	games	really	fast.	We	fed	it
instructions	to	test	out	various	methods	of	play.	We	wanted	to	discover	what
strategies	won	most.	And—chug-a-chug,	chug-a-chug—the	computer	told	us.
Like	all	kids,	we	not	only	fooled	around	with	our	toys,	we	changed	them.	If
you've	ever	watched	a	child	with	a	cardboard	carton	and	a	box	of	crayons
create	a	spaceship	with	cool	control	panels,	or	listened	to	their	improvised
rules,	such	as	"Red	cars	can	jump	all	others,"	then	you	know	that	this	impulse
to	make	a	toy	do	more	is	at	the	heart	of	innovative	childhood	play.	It	is	also
the	essence	of	creativity.
Of	course,	in	those	days	we	were	just	goofing	around,	or	so	we	thought.	But
the	toy	we	had—well,	it	turned	out	to	be	some	toy.	A	few	of	us	at	Lakeside
refused	to	quit	playing	with	it.	In	the	minds	of	a	lot	of	people	at	school	we
became	linked	with	the	computer,	and	it	with	us.	I	was	asked	by	a	teacher	to
help	teach	computer	programming,	and	that	seemed	to	be	OK	With	everyone.
But	when	I	got	the	lead	in	the	school	play,	Black	Comedy,	some	students	were
heard	muttering,	"Why	did	they	pick	the	computer	guy?"	That's	still	the	way	I
sometimes	get	identified.
1968:	Bill	Gates	(Standing)	and	Paul	Allen	working	at	the	computer	terminal
at	Lakeside	School.
It	seems	there	was	a	whole	generation	of	us,	all	over	the	world,	who	dragged
that	favorite	toy	with	us	into	adulthood.	In	doing	so,	we	caused	a	kind	of
revolution—peaceful,	mainly—and	now	the	computer	has	taken	up	residence
in	our	offices	and	homes.	Computers	shrank	in	size	and	grew	in	power,	as
they	dropped	dramatically	in	price.	And	it	all	happened	fairly	quickly.	Not	as
quickly	as	I	once	thought,	but	still	pretty	fast.	Inexpensive	computer	chips
now	show	up	in	engines,	watches,	antilock	brakes,	facsimile	machines,
elevators,	gasoline	pumps,	cameras,	thermostats,	treadmills,	vending

machines,	burglar	alarms,	and	even	talking	greeting	cards.	School	kids	today
are	doing	amazing	things	with	personal	computers	that	are	no	larger	than
textbooks	but	outperform	the	largest	computers	of	a	generation	ago.
Now	that	computing	is	astoundingly	inexpensive	and	computers	inhabit	every
part	of	our	lives,	we	stand	at	the	brink	of	another	revolution.	This	one	will
involve	unprecedentedly	inexpensive	communication;	all	the	computers	will
join	together	to	communicate	with	us	and	for	us.	Interconnected	globally,	they
will	form	a	network,	which	is	being	called	the	information	highway.	A	direct
precursor	is	the	present	Internet,	which	is	a	group	of	computers	joined	and
exchanging	information	using	current	technology.
The	reach	and	use	of	the	new	network,	its	promise	and	perils,	is	the	subject	of
this	book.
Every	aspect	of	what's	about	to	happen	seems	exciting.	When	I	was	nineteen	I
caught	a	look	at	the	future,	based	my	career	on	what	I	saw,	and	I	turned	out	to
have	been	right.	But	the	Bill	Gates	of	nineteen	was	in	a	very	different	position
from	the	one	I'm	in	now.	In	those	days,	not	only	did	I	have	all	the	self-
assurance	of	a	smart	teenager,	but	also	nobody	was	watching	me,	and	if	I
failed—so	what?	Today	I'm	much	more	in	the	position	of	the	computer	giants
of	the	seventies,	but	I	hope	I've	learned	some	lessons	from	them.
At	one	time	I	thought	I	might	want	to	major	in	economics	in	college.	I
eventually	changed	my	mind,	but	in	a	way	my	whole	experience	with	the
computer	industry	has	been	a	series	of	economics	lessons.	I	saw	firsthand	the
effects	of	positive	spirals	and	inflexible	business	models.	I	watched	the	way
industry	standards	evolved.	I	witnessed	the	importance	of	compatibility	in
technology,	of	feedback,	and	of	constant	innovation.	And	I	think	we	may	be
about	to	witness	the	realization	of	Adam	Smith's	ideal	market,	at	last.
But	I'm	not	using	those	lessons	just	for	theorizing	about	this	future—I'm
betting	on	it.	Back	when	I	was	a	teenager,	I	envisioned	the	impact	that	low-
cost	computers	could	have.	"A	computer	on	every	desk	and	in	every	home"
became	Microsoft's	corporate	mission,	and	we	have	worked	to	help	make	that
possible.	Now	those	computers	are	being	connected	to	one	another,	and	we're
building	software—the	instructions	that	tell	the	computer	hardware	what	to
do—that	will	help	individuals	get	the	benefits	of	this	connected
communication	power.	It	is	impossible	to	predict	exactly	what	it	will	be	like
to	use	the	network.	We'll	communicate	with	it	through	a	variety	of	devices,
including	some	that	look	like	television	sets,	some	like	today's	PCs;	some	will
look	like	telephones,	and	some	will	be	the	size	and	something	like	the	shape

of	a	wallet.	And	at	the	heart	of	each	will	be	a	powerful	computer,	invisibly
connected	to	millions	of	others.
There	will	be	a	day,	not	far	distant,	when	you	will	be	able	to	conduct
business,	study,	explore	the	world	and	its	cultures,	call	up	any	great
entertainment,	make	friends,	attend	neighborhood	markets,	and	show	pictures
to	distant	relatives—without	leaving	your	desk	or	armchair.	You	won't	leave
your	network	connection	behind	at	the	office	or	in	the	classroom.	It	will	be
more	than	an	object	you	carry	or	an	appliance	you	purchase.	It	will	be	your
passport	into	a	new,	mediated	way	of	life.
Firsthand	experiences	and	pleasures	are	personal	and	unmediated.	No	one,	in
the	name	of	progress,	will	take	away	from	you	the	experience	of	lying	on	a
beach,	walking	in	the	woods,	sitting	in	a	comedy	club,	or	shopping	at	a	flea
market.	But	firsthand	experiences	aren't	always	rewarding.	For	example,
waiting	in	line	is	a	firsthand	experience,	but	we	have	been	trying	to	invent
ways	to	avoid	it	ever	since	we	first	queued	up.
Much	of	human	progress	has	come	about	because	someone	invented	a	better
and	more	powerful	tool.	Physical	tools	speed	up	work	and	rescue	people	from
hard	labor.	The	plow	and	the	wheel,	the	crane	and	the	bulldozer,	amplify	the
physical	abilities	of	those	using	them.
Informational	tools	are	symbolic	mediators	that	amplify	the	intellect	rather
than	the	muscle	of	their	users.	You're	having	a	mediated	experience	as	you
read	this	book:	We're	not	actually	in	the	same	room,	but	you	are	still	able	to
find	out	what's	on	my	mind.	A	great	deal	of	work	now	involves	decision
making	and	knowledge,	so	information	tools	have	become,	and	will	continue
increasingly	to	be,	the	focus	of	inventors.	Just	as	any	text	could	be
represented	with	an	arrangement	of	letters,	these	tools	allow	information	of
all	types	to	be	represented	in	digital	form,	in	a	pattern	of	electrical	pulses	that
is	easy	for	computers	to	deal	with.	The	world	today	has	more	than	100	million
computers	whose	purpose	is	to	manipulate	information.	They	are	helping	us
now	by	making	it	much	easier	to	store	and	transmit	information	that	is	already
in	digital	form,	but	in	the	near	future	they	will	allow	us	access	to	almost	any
information	in	the	world.
In	the	United	States,	the	connecting	of	all	these	computers	has	been	compared
to	another	massive	project:	the	gridding	of	the	country	with	interstate
highways,	which	began	during	the	Eisenhower	era.	This	is	why	the	new
network	was	dubbed	the	"information	superhighway."	The	term	was
popularized	by	then-senator	Al	Gore,	whose	father	sponsored	the	1956

Federal	Aid	Highway	Act.
The	highway	metaphor	isn't	quite	right	though.	The	phrase	suggests	landscape
and	geography,	a	distance	between	points,	and	embodies	the	implication	that
you	have	to	travel	to	get	from	one	place	to	another.	In	fact,	one	of	the	most
remarkable	aspects	of	this	new	communications	technology	is	that	it	will
eliminate	distance.	It	won't	matter	if	someone	you're	contacting	is	in	the	next
room	or	on	another	continent,	because	this	highly	mediated	network	will	be
unconstrained	by	miles	and	kilometers.
The	term	"highway"	also	suggests	that	everyone	is	driving	and	following	the
same	route.	This	network	is	more	like	a	lot	of	country	lanes	where	everyone
can	look	at	or	do	whatever	his	individual	interests	suggest.	Another
implication	is	that	perhaps	it	should	be	built	by	the	government,	which	I	think
would	be	a	major	mistake	in	most	countries.	But	the	real	problem	is	that	the
metaphor	emphasizes	the	infrastructure	of	the	endeavor	rather	than	its
applications.	At	Microsoft	we	talk	about	"Information	At	Your	Fingertips,"
which	spotlights	a	benefit	rather	than	the	network	itself.	A	different	metaphor
that	I	think	comes	closer	to	describing	a	lot	of	the	activities	that	will	take
place	is	that	of	the	ultimate	market.	Markets	from	trading	floors	to	malls	are
fundamental	to	human	society,	and	I	believe	this	new	one	will	eventually	be
the	world's	central	department	store.	It	will	be	where	we	social	animals	will
sell,	trade,	invest,	haggle,	pick	stuff	up,	argue,	meet	new	people,	and	hang
out.	When	you	hear	the	phrase	"information	highway,"	rather	than	seeing	a
road,	imagine	a	marketplace	or	an	exchange.	Think	of	the	hustle	and	bustle	of
the	New	York	Stock	Exchange	or	a	farmers'	market	or	of	a	bookstore	full	of
people	looking	for	fascinating	stories	and	information.	All	manner	of	human
activity	takes	place,	from	billion-dollar	deals	to	flirtations.	Many	transactions
will	involve	money,	tendered	in	digital	form	rather	than	currency.	Digital
information	of	all	kinds,	not	just	as	money,	will	be	the	new	medium	of
exchange	in	this	market.
The	global	information	market	will	be	huge	and	will	combine	all	the	various
ways	human	goods,	services,	and	ideas	are	exchanged.	On	a	practical	level,
this	will	give	you	broader	choices	about	most	things,	including	how	you	earn
and	invest,	what	you	buy	and	how	much	you	pay	for	it,	who	your	friends	are
and	how	you	spend	your	time	with	them,	and	where	and	how	securely	you
and	your	family	live.	Your	workplace	and	your	idea	of	what	it======================================================== s	that.
IBM	was	such	a	great	company.	Why	should	it	have	so	much	trouble	with	PC
software	development?	One	answer	was	that	IBM	tended	to	promote	all	their
good	programmers	into	management	and	leave	the	less	talented	behind.	Even
more	significant,	IBM	was	haunted	by	its	successful	past.	Its	traditional
engineering	process	was	unsuitable	for	the	rapid	pace	and	market
requirements	of	PC	software.
In	April	1987,	IBM	unveiled	its	integrated	hardware/software,	which	was
supposed	to	beat	back	imitators.	The	"clone-killer"	hardware	was	called	PS/2
and	it	ran	the	new	operating	system,	OS/2.
The	PS/2	included	a	number	of	innovations.	The	most	celebrated	was	the	new
"microchannel	bus"	circuitry,	which	allowed	accessory	cards	to	connect	to	the
system	and	permitted	the	PC	hardware	to	be	extended	to	meet	such	particular
customer	requirements	as	sound	or	mainframe	communications	capabilities.
Every	compatible	computer	included	a	hardware-connection	"bus"	to	allow
these	cards	to	work	with	the	PC.	The	PS/2's	Microchannel	was	an	elegant
replacement	for	the	connection	bus	in	the	PC	AT.	But	it	solved	problems	that
most	customers	didn't	have.	It	was	potentially	much	faster	than	the	PC	AT's
bus.	But	in	actual	practice	the	speed	of	the	bus	hadn't	been	holding	anyone	up,
and	therefore	customers	couldn't	get	much	benefit	from	this	newly	available
speed.	More	important,	the	Microchannel	didn't	work	with	any	of	the
thousands	of	add-in	cards	that	worked	with	the	PC	AT	and	compatible	PCs.
Ultimately,	IBM	agreed	to	license	the	Microchannel,	for	a	royalty,	to
manufacturers	of	add-in	cards	and	PCs.	But	by	then	a	coalition	of
manufacturers	had	already	announced	a	new	bus	with	many	of	the	capabilities
of	the	Microchannel	but	compatible	with	the	PC	AT	bus.	Customers	rejected
Microchannel	in	favor	of	machines	with	the	old	PC	AT	bus.	The	complement
of	accessory	cards	for	the	PS/2	never	came	close	to	the	number	available	for
PC	AT-compatible	systems.	This	forced	IBM	to	continue	to	release	machines
that	supported	the	old	bus.	The	real	casualty	was	that	IBM	lost	control	of
personal-computer	architecture.	Never	again	would	they	be	able	to	move	the
industry	singlehanded	to	a	new	design.
Despite	a	great	deal	of	promotion	from	both	IBM	and	Microsoft,	customers
thought	OS/2	was	too	unwieldy	and	complicated.	The	worse	OS/2	looked,	the
better	Windows	seemed.	Because	we'd	lost	the	chances	both	for	compatibility
between	Windows	and	OS/2,	and	for	OS/2	to	run	on	modest	machines,	it	still

made	sense	to	us	to	continue	to	develop	Windows.	Windows	was	far
"smaller"—meaning	it	used	less	hard-disk	space	and	could	work	in	a	machine
with	less	memory,	so	there	would	be	a	place	for	it	on	machines	that	could
never	run	OS/2.	We	called	this	the	"family"	strategy.	In	other	words,	OS/2
would	be	the	high-end	system	and	Windows	would	be	the	junior	member	of
the	family,	for	smaller	machines.
IBM	was	never	happy	about	our	family	strategy,	but	it	had	its	own	plans.	In
the	spring	of	1988,	it	joined	other	computer	makers	in	establishing	the	Open
Software	Foundation	to	promote	UNIX,	an	operating	system	that	had
originally	been	developed	at	AT&T's	Bell	Labs	in	1969	but	over	the	years	had
splintered	into	a	number	of	versions.	Some	of	the	versions	were	developed	at
universities,	which	used	UNIX	as	a	working	laboratory	for	operating-systems
theory.	Other	versions	were	developed	by	computer	companies.	Each
company	enhanced	UNIX	for	its	own	computers,	which	made	their	operating
system	incompatible	with	everyone	else's.	This	meant	that	UNIX	had	become
not	a	single	open	system,	but	a	collection	of	operating	systems	competing
with	one	another.	All	the	differences	made	software	compatibility	harder	and
held	back	the	rise	of	a	strong	third-party	software	market	for	UNIX.	Only	a
few	software	companies	could	afford	to	develop	and	test	applications	for	a
dozen	different	versions	of	UNIX.	Also,	computer-software	stores	couldn't
afford	to	stock	all	the	different	versions.
The	Open	Software	Foundation	was	the	most	promising	of	several	attempts	to
"unify"	UNIX	and	create	a	common	software	architecture	that	would	work	on
various	different	manufacturers'	hardware.	In	theory,	a	unified	UNIX	could
get	a	positive-feedback	cycle	going.	But	despite	significant	funding,	it	turned
out	to	be	impossible	for	the	Open	Software	Foundation	to	mandate
cooperation	from	a	committee	of	vendors	who	were	competing	for	each	sale.
Its	members,	including	IBM,	DEC,	and	others,	continued	to	promote	the
benefits	of	their	particular	versions	of	UNIX.	The	UNIX	companies	suggested
their	systems	would	benefit	customers	by	offering	them	more	choices.	But	if
you	bought	a	UNIX	system	from	one	vendor,	your	software	couldn't
automatically	run	on	any	other	system.	This	meant	you	were	tied	to	that
vendor,	whereas	in	the	PC	world	you	have	a	choice	of	where	to	buy	your
hardware.
The	problems	of	the	Open	Software	Foundation	and	similar	initiatives	point
up	the	difficulty	of	trying	to	impose	a	standard	in	a	field	in	which	innovation
is	moving	rapidly	and	all	the	companies	that	make	up	the	standards
committee	are	competitors.	The	marketplace	(in	computers	or	consumer
electronics)	adopts	standards	because	customers	insist	on	standards.	Standards

are	to	ensure	interoperability,	minimize	user	training,	and	of	course	foster	the
largest	possible	software	industry.	Any	company	that	wants	to	create	a
standard	has	to	price	it	very	reasonably	or	it	won't	be	adopted.	The	market
effectively	chooses	a	reasonably	priced	standard	and	replaces	it	when	it	is
obsolete	or	too	expensive.
Microsoft	operating	systems	are	offered	today	by	more	than	nine	hundred
different	manufacturers,	which	gives	customers	choices	and	options.
Microsoft	has	been	able	to	provide	compatibility	because	hardware
manufacturers	have	agreed	not	to	allow	modifications	to	our	software	that
introduce	incompatibility.	This	means	that	hundreds	of	thousands	of	software
developers	don't	need	to	worry	about	what	PCs	their	software	will	run	on.
Although	the	term	"open"	is	used	in	many	different	ways,	to	me	it	means
offering	choice	in	hardware	and	software	applications	to	the	customer.
Consumer	electronics	has	also	benefited	from	standards	managed	by	private
companies.	Years	ago	consumer	electronics	companies	often	tried	to	restrict
competitors	from	using	their	technology,	but	now	all	of	the	major	consumer
electronics	makers	are	quite	open	to	licensing	their	patents	and	trade	secrets.
The	royalties	for	their	products	are	typically	under	5	percent	of	the	cost	of	the
device.	Audiocassettes,	VHS	tapes,	compact	discs,	televisions,	and	cellular
telephones	are	all	examples	of	technologies	that	were	created	by	private
companies	that	receive	royalties	from	everyone	who	makes	the	equipment.
Dolby	Laboratories'	algorithms,	for	example,	are	the	de	facto	standard	for
noise	reduction.
In	May	1990,	the	last	weeks	before	the	release	of	Windows	3.0,	we	tried	to
reach	an	agreement	with	IBM	for	it	to	license	Windows	to	use	on	its	personal
computers.	We	told	IBM	we	thought	that	although	OS/2	would	work	out	over
time,	for	the	moment	Windows	was	going	to	be	a	success	and	OS/2	would
find	its	niche	slowly.
In	1992,	IBM	and	Microsoft	stopped	their	joint	development	of	OS/2.	IBM
continued	to	develop	the	operating	system	alone.	The	ambitious	plan	for
OfficeVision	was	eventually	canceled.
Analysts	estimate	that	IBM	poured	more	than	$2	billion	into	OS/2,
OfficeVision,	and	related	projects.	If	IBM	and	Microsoft	had	found	a	way	to
work	together,	thousands	of	people-years—the	best	years	of	some	of	the	best
employees	at	both	companies—would	not	have	been	wasted.	If	OS/2	and
Windows	had	been	compatible,	graphical	computing	would	have	become
mainstream	years	sooner.

The	acceptance	of	graphical	interfaces	was	also	held	back	because	most	major
software-applications	companies	did	not	invest	in	them.	They	largely	ignored
the	Macintosh	and	ignored	or	ridiculed	Windows.	Lotus	and	WordPerfect,	the
market	leaders	for	spreadsheet	and	word-processing	applications,	made	only
modest	efforts	on	OS/2.	In	retrospect,	this	was	a	mistake,	and,	in	the	end,	a
costly	one.	When	Windows	finally	benefited	from	a	positive-feedback	cycle,
generated	by	applications	from	many	of	the	small	software	companies,	the	big
companies	fell	behind	because	they	didn't	move	to	Windows	fast	enough.
Windows,	like	the	PC,	continues	to	evolve.	Microsoft	has	continued
to	add	new	capabilities	to	various	versions.	Anyone	can	develop	application
software	that	runs	on	the	Windows	platform,	without	having	to	notify	or	get
permission	from	Microsoft.	In	fact,	today	there	are	tens	of	thousands	of
commercially	available	software	packages	for	the	platform,	including
offerings	that	compete	with	most	Microsoft	applications.
Customers	express	to	me	their	worry	that	Microsoft,	because	it	is,	by
definition,	the	only	source	for	Microsoft	operating-system	software,	could
raise	prices	and	slow	down	or	even	stop	its	innovation.	Even	if	we	did	we
wouldn't	be	able	to	sell	our	new	versions.	Existing	users	would	not	upgrade
and	we	wouldn't	get	any	new	users.	Our	revenue	would	fall	and	many	more
companies	would	compete	to	take	our	place.	The	positive-feedback
mechanism	helps	challengers	as	well	as	the	incumbent.	You	can't	rest	on	your
laurels,	because	there	is	always	a	competitor	coming	up	behind	you.
No	product	stays	on	top	unless	it	is	improved.	Even	the	VHS	standard	will	be
replaced	when	better	formats	appear	at	reasonable	prices.	In	fact,	the	era	of
VHS	is	almost	over.	Within	the	next	several	years	we	will	see	new	digital	tape
formats,	digital	movie	discs	that	put	feature	films	on	discs	like	a	music	CD,
and	eventually	the	information	highway	will	enable	new	services	such	as
video-on-demand,	and	VHS	will	be	unnecessary.
MS-DOS	is	being	replaced	now.	Despite	its	incredible	strength	as	the	leading
operating	system	for	personal	computers,	it	is	being	replaced	by	a	system	with
a	graphical	user	interface.	The	Macintosh	software	might	have	become	the
successor	to	MS-DOS.	So	might	OS/2	or	UNIX.	I======================================================== ange	seems	terse,	keep	in	mind	that	the	average	Microsoft
employee	receives	dozens	of	electronic	messages	a	day.	An	e-mail	message	is
like	a	statement	or	a	question	at	a	meeting—one	thought	or	inquiry	in	an	on-
going	communication.	Microsoft	provides	e-mail	for	business	purposes,	but,
like	the	office	telephone,	it	serves	many	other	purposes,	social	and	personal.
For	example,	hikers	can	reach	all	the	members	of	the	Microsoft	Hiking	Club
to	try	to	find	a	ride	to	the	mountain.	And	certainly	a	few	romances	around
Microsoft	have	benefited	from	e-mail.	When	my	wife,	Melinda,	and	I	were
first	going	out,	we	took	advantage	of	it.	For	some	reason	people	are	less	shy
about	sending	e-mail	than	communicating	on	the	phone	or	in	person.	This	can
be	a	benefit	or	a	problem,	depending	on	the	situation.
I	spend	several	hours	a	day	reading	and	answering	e-mail	to	and	from
employees,	customers,	and	partners	around	the	world.	Anyone	in	the
company	can	send	me	e-mail,	and	because	I	am	the	only	person	who	reads	it,
no	one	has	to	worry	about	protocol	in	a	message	to	me.
I	probably	wouldn't	have	to	spend	so	long	if	my	e-mail	address	weren't
semipublic.	There	is	actually	a	book	called	E-Mail	Addresses	of	the	Rich	&
Famous,	which	includes	my	e-mail	address	as	well	as	ones	for	Rush
Limbaugh	and	Senator	Ted	Kennedy.	When	John	Seabrook	was	writing	an
article	about	me	for	The	New	Yorker	magazine,	he	conducted	his	interview
primarily	on	e-mail.	It	was	a	very	effective	way	to	have	a	dialogue,	and	I
enjoyed	the	piece	when	it	appeared,	but	it	mentioned	my	e-mail	address.	The
result	has	been	an	avalanche	of	mail	ranging	from	students	asking	me,	in
effect,	to	do	their	homework	assignments,	to	people	asking	for	money,	to	mail
from	a	group	interested	in	whales	who	for	some	reason	added	my	e-mail
name	to	their	list.	My	address	is	also	a	target	for	both	rude	and	friendly
messages	from	strangers,	and	provocative	ones	from	the	press	("If	you	don't
answer	this	by	tomorrow	I	will	publish	a	story	about	you	and	that	topless
waitress!").
We	have	special	e-mail	addresses	at	Microsoft	for	job	applications,	product
feedback,	and	other	legitimate	communications.	But	a	lot	of	that	mail	still

comes	to	me	and	I	have	to	reroute	it.	There	are	also	three	e-mail	equivalents
of	chain	letters	that	keep	making	the	rounds.	One	threatens	general	bad	luck	if
it	isn't	forwarded.	Another	specifically	says	the	punishment	will	be	that	your
sex	life	will	suffer.	A	third,	which	has	been	going	around	for	six	years,
contains	a	cookie	recipe	and	a	story	about	a	company's	having	overcharged	a
woman	for	the	recipe,	and	so	she	wants	you	to	distribute	it	for	free.	In	the
various	versions	different	companies	are	named.	Apparently	it	is	the	idea	of
getting	back	at	a	corporation,	any	corporation,	that	has	made	that	one	such	a
perennial	favorite.	This	is	all	mixed	in	with	mail	that	really	should	come	to
me,	often	about	important	issues.	Fortunately,	e-mail	software	is	improving
all	the	time	and	it	now	includes	a	feature	that	lets	me	prioritize	mail	from
senders	I	have	designated.
When	I	travel,	I	connect	my	portable	computer	back	into	Microsoft's
electronic	mail	system	every	night	to	retrieve	new	messages	and	send	off	the
ones	I've	written	over	the	course	of	the	day	to	people	in	the	company.	Most
recipients	will	not	even	be	aware	that	I	am	out	of	the	ofrice.	When	I'm
connected	to	our	corporate	network	from	a	remote	site,	I	can	also	click	on	a
single	icon	to	see	how	sales	are	doing,	to	check	the	status	of	projects,	or	to
access	any	other	management	databases.	It	is	reassuring	to	check	my
electronic	in-box	when	I'm	thousands	of	miles	and	a	dozen	time	zones	away,
because	bad	news	almost	always	comes	through	on	e-mail.	So	if	nothing	bad
is	waiting	there,	I	don't	need	to	worry.
We	now	use	e-mail	in	all	sorts	of	ways	we	hadn't	anticipated.	For	example,	at
the	beginning	of	the	annual	Microsoft	Giving	Campaign,	which	raises	money
for	charity,	employees	receive	an	e-mail	message	encouraging	them	to
participate.	The	e-mail	message	contains	an	electronic	pledge-card	program.
When	the	icon	in	the	message	is	clicked,	the	pledge	card	appears	on	the
employee's	screen	and	he	or	she	can	pledge	a	cash	gift	or	sign	up	for	a	payroll
deduction.	If	the	latter	option	is	chosen,	the	information	is	automatically
entered	into	Microsofts	payroll	database.	From	the	electronic	form	employees
can	direct	their	gift	to	their	local	United	Way	or	to	another	nonprofit
organization.	If	they	want	to,	they	can	choose	to	have	their	donation	go	to	one
or	more	of	the	charities	the	United	Way	supports,	and	can	even	access	a
server	to	obtain	information	about	those	organizations	or	about	volunteering
in	their	community.	From	start	to	finish	it's	completely	electronic.	As	the
leader	of	the	company,	I	can	analyze	summary	information	day	by	day	to	find
out	if	we	are	getting	good	participation	or	if	we	need	to	have	a	few	more
rallies	to	get	out	the	message	about	how	important	we	think	the	giving
campaign	is.

Today,	besides	company-operated,	text-based	e-mail	systems,	the	kind
Microsoft	operates	for	its	own	use,	there	are	commercial	services	such	as
MCI	Mail	and	B.T.	Gold	(operated	by	British	Telecom).	There	are	also
offerings	from	all	of	the	commercial	on-line	systems	such	as	CompuServe,
Prodigy,	and	the	Microsoft	Network.	These	perform	some	of	the	same
functions	that	telegrams	and,	later,	telex	systems	once	did.	Users	connected	to
these	e-mail	systems	can	send	a	message	to	virtually	anyone	who	has	a
standard	Internet	e-mail	address.	Both	private	and	commercial	e-mail	systems
include	"gateways"	that	transfer	messages	sent	by	a	user	of	one	mail	system
to	a	recipient	on	another.	You	can	get	a	message	to	almost	anyone	who	has	a
PC	and	a	modem,	although	for	certain	communications	privacy	is	a	problem
because	transmissions	across	the	Internet	are	not	very	secure.	Some
commercial	services,	such	as	MCI,	will	also	deliver	a	message	by	fax,	telex,
or	traditional	mail	if	the	recipient	doesn't	have	an	electronic	mailbox.
Future	advances	in	electronic	mail	will	streamline	lots	of	activities	we	may
not	even	realize	are	inefficient.	For	example,	think	about	how	you	pay	bills.
More	often	than	not,	a	company	prints	out	a	bill	on	a	piece	of	paper	and	puts
it	in	an	envelope	that	is	physically	carried	to	your	house.	You	open	the	bill,
check	your	records	to	see	if	the	amount	and	details	seem	appropriate,	write	a
check,	and	then	try	to	time	when	you	mail	it	back	so	that	it	arrives	shortly
before	the	due	date.	We're	so	used	to	this	process	we	don't	even	think	about
how	wasteful	it	is.	Let's	say	you	disagree	with	a	bill.	You	call	the	company
up,	wait	on	hold,	and	try	to	get	through	to	the	right	person—who	may	not
really	be	the	right	person	at	all.	In	which	case	you	have	to	wait	for	someone
else	to	call	you	back.
Very	soon	you'll	check	your	PC,	wallet,	or	television	set	the	information
appliance	of	your	choice—for	e-mail,	including	bills.	When	a	bill	comes	in,
the	device	will	show	your	payment	history.	If	you	want	to	inquire	about	the
bill,	you'll	do	it	asynchronously—at	your	convenience—by	sending	e-mail:
"Hey	how	come	this	charge	is	so	high?"
Tens	of	thousands	of	businesses	in	the	United	States	already	exchange
information	via	an	electronic	system	called	Electronic	Document	Interchange,
or	EDI.	It	allows	companies	that	have	contractual	relationships	to	execute
specific	kinds	of	transactions	automatically.	Dealings	are	highly	structured—
reordering	products	or	checking	the	status	of	a	shipment—which	makes
conventional	EDI	unsuitable	for	ad	hoc	communications,	although	many
companies	are	working	to	combine	the	benefits	of	EDI	and	e-mail	into	a
single	system.

The	asynchronicity	of	e-mail	and	EDI	is	one	of	their	advantages,	but	there	is
still	a	place	for	synchronous	communications.	Sometimes	you	want	to	call
someone	up,	talk	directly,	and	get	an	immediate	response	rather	than	leaving	a
message.
Within	a	few	years	there	will	be	hybrid	communications	systems	that
combine	elements	of	synchronous	and	asynchronous	communications.	These
systems	will	use	DSVD	(and	later	ISDN)	telephone	connections	to	permit	the
simultaneous	transfer	of	voice	and	data,	even	before	the	full	information
highway	is	in	place.
It	will	work	this	way:	When	companies	post	information	about	their	products
on	the	Internet,	part	of	that	information	will	include	instructions	for	how	a
customer	can	connect	synchronously	with	a	sales	representative	who	will	be
able	to	answer	questions	through	a	voice-data	connection.	For	example,	if
you're	shopping	for	boots	on	Eddie	Bauer's	home	page	(an	electronic	catalog)
and	you	want	to	know	if	the	boots	you	like	are	appropriate	for	use	in	Florida's
Everglades	or	on	a	glacier,	you'll	be	able	to	click	a	button	to	get	a
representative	to	come	on	the	line	and	talk	to	you.	The	representative	will	see
immediately	that	you	are	looking	at	the	boots	and	will	have	whatever	other
information	about	yourself	you	have	decided	to	make	available,	not	just	your
clothing	and	shoe	sizes,	style	and	color	preferences,	but	your	athletic
interests,	your	past	purchases	from	other	companies,	and	even	your	price
range.	Some	people	will	choose	not	to	make	any	information	about
themselves	available.	Eddie	Bauer's	computer	may	route	your	inquiry	to	the
same	person	you	spoke	to	last	time,	or	it	may	route	you	to	someone	who	has
expertise	in	the	product	displayed	on	your	screen,	in	this	case,	boots.	Without
preamble,	you	will	be	able	to	ask,	"Do	these	boots	work	well	in	swamps	like
the	Everglades?"	or	whatever	your	question	is.	The	representative	doesn't
have	to	be	in	an	office.	He	can	be	anywhere	as	long	as	he	has	access	to	a	PC
and	has	indicated	he	is	available.	If	he	speaks	the	right	language	and	has	the
right	expertise,	he	can	help	out.
Or	if	you	decided	to	change	your	will,	you'd	phone	your	lawyer,	and	she
might	say,	"Let's	take	a	quick	look	at	that."	She	would	then	call	your	will	up
on	her	PC,	and	it	would	appear	on	your	screen	as	well	as	hers	courtesy	of
DSVD,	ISDN,	or	similar	techno======================================================== oduct	of	two	primes
would	take	millions	of	years	to	factor	with	any	foreseeable	amount	of	future
computing	power.	But	who	really	knows.	This	uncertainty—and	the	unlikely
but	conceivable	possibility	that	someone	could	come	up	with	an	easy	way	of
factoring	big	numbers—means	that	a	software	platform	for	the	information
highway	will	have	to	be	designed	in	such	a	way	that	its	encryption	scheme
can	be	changed	readily.
One	thing	we	don't	have	to	worry	about	is	running	out	of	prime	numbers,	or
the	prospect	of	two	computers'	accidentally	using	the	same	numbers	as	keys.
There	are	far	more	prime	numbers	of	appropriate	length	than	there	are	atoms
in	the	universe,	so	the	chance	of	an	accidental	duplication	is	vanishingly
small.
Key	encryption	allows	more	than	just	privacy.	It	can	also	assure	the
authenticity	of	a	document	because	a	private	key	can	be	used	to	encode	a
message	that	only	the	public	key	can	decode.	It	works	like	this:	If	I	have
information	I	want	to	sign	before	sending	it	to	you,	my	computer	uses	my
private	key	to	encipher	it.	Now	the	message	can	be	read	only	if	my	public	key
—which	you	and	everyone	else	knows—is	used	to	decipher	it.	This	message
is	verifiably	from	me,	because	no	one	else	has	the	private	key	that	could	have
encrypted	it	in	this	way.
My	computer	takes	this	enciphered	message	and	enciphers	it	again,	this	time
using	your	public	key.	Then	it	sends	this	double-coded	message	to	you	across
the	information	highway.
Your	computer	receives	the	message	and	uses	your	private	key	to	decipher	it.
This	removes	the	second	level	of	encoding	but	leaves	the	level	I	applied	with
my	private	key.	Then	your	computer	uses	my	public	key	to	decipher	the
message	again.	Because	it	really	is	from	me,	the	message	deciphers	correctly
and	you	know	it	is	authentic.	If	even	one	bit	of	information	was	changed,	the
message	would	not	decode	properly	and	the	tampering	or	communications
error	would	be	apparent.	This	extraordinary	security	will	enable	you	to
transact	business	with	strangers	or	even	people	you	distrust,	because	you'll	be
able	to	be	sure	that	digital	money	is	valid	and	signatures	and	documents	are
provably	authentic.
Security	can	be	increased	further	by	having	time	stamps	incorporated	into
encrypted	messages.	If	anyone	tries	to	tinker	with	the	time	that	a	document

supposedly	was	written	or	sent,	the	tinkering	will	be	detectable.	This	will
rehabilitate	the	evidentiary	value	of	photographs	and	videos,	which	has	been
under	assault	because	digital	retouching	has	become	so	easy	to	do.
My	description	of	public-key	encryption	oversimplifies	the	technical	details
of	the	system.	For	one	thing,	because	it	is	relatively	slow,	it	will	not	be	the
only	form	of	encipherment	used	on	the	highway.	But	public-key	encryption
will	be	the	way	that	documents	are	signed,	authenticity	is	established,	and	the
keys	to	other	kinds	of	encryption	are	distributed	securely.
The	major	benefit	of	the	PC	revolution	has	been	the	way	it	has	empowered
people.	The	highway's	low-cost	communications	will	empower	in	an	even
more	fundamental	way.	The	beneficiaries	won't	just	be	technology-oriented
individuals.	As	more	and	more	computers	are	connected	to	high-bandwidth
networks,	and	as	software	platforms	provide	a	foundation	for	great
applications,	everyone	will	have	access	to	most	of	the	world's	information.

6
THE	CONTENT
REVOLUTION
For	more	than	500	years,	the	bulk	of	human	knowledge	and	information	has
been	stored	as	paper	documents.	You've	got	one	in	your	hands	right	now
(unless	you're	reading	this	from	the	CD-ROM	or	a	future	on-line	edition).
Paper	will	be	with	us	indefinitely,	but	its	importance	as	a	means	of	finding,
preserving,	and	distributing	information	is	already	diminishing.
When	you	think	of	a	"document"	you	probably	visualize	pieces	of	paper	with
something	printed	on	them,	but	that	is	a	narrow	definition.	A	document	can	be
any	body	of	information.	A	newspaper	article	is	a	document,	but	the	broadest
definition	also	includes	a	television	show,	a	song,	or	an	interactive	video
game.	Because	all	information	can	be	stored	in	a	digital	form,	documents	will
be	easy	to	find,	store,	and	send	on	the	highway.	Paper	is	harder	to	transmit
and	very	limiting	if	the	contents	are	more	than	text	with	drawings	and	images.
Future	digitally	stored	documents	will	include	pictures,	audio,	programming
instructions	for	interactivity,	and	animation,	or	a	combination	of	these	and
other	elements.
On	the	information	highway,	rich	electronic	documents	will	be	able	to	do
things	no	piece	of	paper	can.	The	highway's	powerful	database	technology
will	allow	them	to	be	indexed	and	retrieved	using	interactive	exploration.	It
will	be	extremely	cheap	and	easy	to	distribute	them.	In	short,	these	new
digital	documents	will	replace	many	printed	paper	ones	because	they	will	be
able	to	help	us	in	new	ways.
But	not	for	quite	some	time.	The	paper-based	book,	magazine,	or	newspaper
still	has	a	lot	of	advantages	over	its	digital	counterpart.	To	read	a	digital
document	you	need	an	information	appliance	such	as	a	personal	computer.	A
book	is	small,	lightweight,	high-resolution,	and	inexpensive	compared	to	the
cost	of	a	computer.	For	at	least	a	decade	it	won't	be	as	convenient	to	read	a
long,	sequential	document	on	a	computer	screen	as	on	paper.	The	first	digital
documents	to	achieve	widespread	use	will	do	so	by	offering	new	functionality
rather	than	simply	duplicating	the	older	medium.	A	television	set	is	also
larger,	more	expensive,	more	cumbersome,	and	lower	resolution	than	a	book
or	magazine,	but	that	hasn't	limited	its	popularity.	Television	brought	video

entertainment	into	our	homes,	and	it	was	so	compelling	that	television	sets
found	their	place	alongside	books	and	magazines.
Ultimately,	incremental	improvements	in	computer	and	screen	technology
will	give	us	a	lightweight,	universal	electronic	book,	or	"e-book,"	which	will
approximate	today's	paper	book.	Inside	a	case	roughly	the	same	size	and
weight	as	today's	hardcover	or	paperback	book,	you'll	have	a	display	that	can
show	high-resolution	text,	pictures,	and	video.	You'll	be	able	to	flip	pages
with	your	finger	or	use	voice	commands	to	search	for	the	passages	you	want.
Any	document	on	the	network	will	be	accessible	from	such	a	device.
The	real	point	of	electronic	documents	is	not	simply	that	we	will	read	them	on
hardware	devices.	Going	from	paper	book	to	e-book	is	just	the	final	stage	of	a
process	already	well	under	way.	The	exciting	aspect	of	digital	documentation
is	the	redefinition	of	the	document	itself.
This	will	cause	dramatic	repercussions.	We	will	have	to	rethink	not	only	what
is	meant	by	the	term	"document,"	but	also	by	"author,"	"publisher,"	"office,"
"classroom,"	and	"textbook."
Today,	if	two	companies	are	negotiating	a	contract,	the	first	draft	is	probably
typed	into	a	computer,	then	printed	on	paper.	Chances	are	it	is	then	faxed	to
the	other	party,	who	edits,	amends,	and	alters	it	by	writing	on	the	paper	or	by
reentering	the	changed	document	into	another	computer,	from	which	it	is
printed.	He	then	faxes	it	back;	the	changes	are	incorporated;	a	new	paper
document	is	printed	and	faxed	back	again;	and	the	editing	process	is	repeated.
During	this	transaction	it	is	hard	to	tell	who	made	which	changes.
Coordinating	all	the	alterations	and	transmittals	introduces	a	lot	of	overhead.
Electronic	documents	can	simplify	this	process	by	allowing	a	version	of	the
contract	to	be	passed	back	and	forth	with	corrections	and	annotations	and
indications	who	made	them	and	when	printed	alongside	the	original	text.
Within	a	few	years	the	digital	document,	complete	with	authenticatable	digital
signatures,	will	be	the	original,	and	paper	printouts	will	be	secondary.	Already
many	businesses	are	advancing	beyond	paper	and	fax	machines	and
exchanging	editable	documents,	computer	to	computer,	through	electronic
mail.	This	book	would	have	been	much	harder	to	write	without	e-mail.
Readers	whose	opinions	I	was	soliciting	were	sent	drafts	electronically,	and	it
was	helpful	to	be	able	to	look	at	the	suggested	revisions	and	see	who	had
made	them	and	when.
By	the	end	of	the	decade	a	significant	percentage	of	documents,	even	in
offices,	won't	even	be	fully	printable	on	paper.	They	will	be	like	a	movie	or	a

song	is	today.	You	will	still	be	able	to	print	a	two-dimensional	view	of	its
content,	but	it	will	be	like	reading	a	musical	score	instead	of	experiencing	an
audio	recording.
Some	documents	are	so	superior	in	digital	form	that	the	paper	version	is
rarely	used.	Boeing	decided	to	design	its	new	777	jetliner	using	a	gigantic
electronic	document	to	hold	all	the	engineering	information.	To	coordinate
collaboration	among	the	design	teams,	manufacturing	groups	and	outside
contractors	during	development	of	previous	airplanes,	Boeing	had	used
blueprints	and	constructed	an	expensive	full-scale	mock-up	of	the	airplane.
The	mock-up	had	been	necessary	to	make	sure	that	parts	of	the	airplane,
designed	by	different	engineers,	actually	fit	together	properly.	During
development	of	the	777,	Boeing	did	away	with	blueprints	and	the	mock-up
and	from	the	start	used	an	electronic	document	that	contained	digital	3-D
models	of	all	the	parts	and	how	they	fit	together.	Engineers	at	computer
terminals	were	able	to	look	at	the	design	and	see	different	views	of	the
content.	They	could	track	the	progress	in	any	area,	search	for	interesting	test
results,	annotate	with	cost	information,	and	change	any	part	of	the	design	in
ways	that	would	be	impossible	on	paper.	Each	person,	working	with	the	same
data,	was	able	to	look	for	what	specifically	concerned	him.	Every	change
could	be	shared,	and	everyone	could	see	who	made	any	change,	when	it	was
made,	and	why.	Boeing	was	able	to	save	hundreds	of	thousands	of	pieces	of
paper	and	many	person-years	of	drafting	and	copying	by	using	digital
documents.
Digital	documents	can	also	be	faster	to	work	with	than	paper.	You	can
transmit	information	instantly	and	retrieve	it	almost	as	quickly.	Those	using
digital	documents	are	already	discovering	how	much	sim======================================================== omputers	at	an	early
age	we	can	ensure	that	they	play	their	rightful	role	in	all	the	work	that	benefits
from	computer	expertise.
My	own	experience	as	a	child,	and	that	of	my	friends	raising	children	today,
is	that	once	a	kid	is	exposed	to	computing,	he	or	she	is	hooked.	But	we	have
to	create	the	opportunity	for	that	exposure.	Schools	should	have	low-cost
access	to	computers	connected	to	the	information	highway,	and	teachers	need
to	become	comfortable	with	the	new	tools.
One	of	the	wonderful	things	about	the	information	highway	is	that	virtual
equity	is	far	easier	to	achieve	than	real-world	equity.	It	would	take	a	massive
amount	of	money	to	give	every	grammar	school	in	every	poor	area	the	same
library	resources	as	the	schools	in	Beverly	Hills.	However,	when	you	put
schools	on-line	they	all	get	the	same	access	to	information,	wherever	it	might
be	stored.	We	are	all	created	equal	in	the	virtual	world,	and	we	can	use	this
equality	to	help	address	some	of	the	sociological	problems	that	society	has	yet
to	solve	in	the	physical	world.	The	network	will	not	eliminate	barriers	of
prejudice	or	inequality,	but	it	will	be	a	powerful	force	in	that	direction.
The	question	of	how	to	price	intellectual	property,	such	as	entertainment	and
educational	materials,	is	fascinating.	Economists	understand	a	lot	about	how
the	pricing	of	classical	manufactured	goods	works.	They	can	show	how
rational	pricing	should	reflect	cost	structure	in	a	very	direct	manner.	In	a
market	with	multiple	competing	qualified	manufacturers,	prices	tend	to	drop
to	the	marginal	cost	of	making	one	more	of	whatever	they	are	selling.	But	this
model	doesn't	work	when	applied	to	intellectual	property.
A	basic	economics	course	describes	the	curves	of	supply	and	demand,	which
intersect	at	the	price	appropriate	for	a	product.	But	supply-and-demand
economics	gets	into	trouble	when	it	comes	to	intellectual	property,	because
ordinary	rules	regarding	manufacturing	costs	don't	apply.	Typically	there	are
huge	up-front	development	costs	for	intellectual	property.	These	fixed	costs
are	the	same	regardless	of	whether	one	copy	or	a	million	copies	of	the	work
are	sold.	George	Lucas's	next	movie	in	the	Star	Wars	series	will	cost	millions
to	make,	regardless	of	how	many	people	pay	to	see	it	in	theaters.

The	pricing	of	intellectual	property	is	more	complicated	than	most	pricing
because	today	it	is	relatively	inexpensive	to	manufacture	copies	of	most
intellectual	property.	Tomorrow,	on	the	information	highway,	the	cost	of
delivering	a	copy	of	a	work—which	will	amount	to	the	same	thing	as
manufacturing	it—will	be	even	lower,	and	dropping	every	year	because	of
Moore's	Law.	When	you	buy	a	new	medicine,	you're	paying	mostly	for	what
the	drug	company	spent	for	research,	development,	and	testing.	Even	if	the
marginal	cost	of	making	each	pill	is	minimal,	the	pharmaceutical	company
still	may	have	to	charge	quite	a	bit	for	each,	especially	if	the	market	is	not
huge.	The	revenue	from	the	average	patient	has	to	cover	a	sufficient	share	of
the	development	expenses	and	generate	enough	profit	to	make	investors	glad
they	took	the	substantial	financial	risks	involved	in	developing	a	new	drug.
When	a	poor	country	wants	the	medicine,	the	manufacturer	faces	a	moral
dilemma.	If	the	pharmaceutical	company	doesn't	waive	or	drastically	reduce
its	patent-licensing	fees,	the	medicine	won't	be	available	to	poor	countries.
However,	if	a	manufacturer	is	to	be	able	to	invest	in	R&D,	some	users	must
pay	more	than	the	marginal	cost.	Prices	for	drugs	vary	greatly	from	country	to
country	and	discriminate	against	poor	people	in	rich	countries	except	where
governments	cover	medical	costs.
One	possible	solution,	a	scheme	whereby	a	rich	person	pays	more	to	buy	a
new	medicine,	to	see	a	movie	or	to	read	a	book,	may	seem	inequitable;
however,	it	is	identical	to	a	system	already	in	place	today—taxation.	Through
the	income	tax	and	other	taxes,	people	with	high	incomes	pay	more	for	roads,
schools,	the	army,	and	every	other	government	facility	than	the	average
person	does.	It	cost	me	more	than	$100	million	last	year	to	get	those	services
because	I	paid	a	significant	capital	gains	tax	after	selling	some	Microsoft
shares.	I	have	no	complaint,	but	it	is	an	example	of	the	same	services	being
provided	at	vastly	different	prices.
The	pricing	for	highway	access	may	be	set	politically	rather	than	on	the	basis
of	costs.	It	is	going	to	be	expensive	to	enfranchise	people	in	remote	locations
because	the	cost	of	bringing	wiring	to	far-flung	homes	and	even	small
communities	is	very	high.	Companies	may	not	be	eager	to	make	the	necessary
investment,	and	the	geographically	disenfranchised	may	not	be	in	a	position
to	make	the	investment	on	their	own	behalf.	We	should	expect	heated	debate
about	whether	the	government	should	subsidize	connections	to	rural	areas,	or
impose	regulations	that	cause	urban	users	to	subsidize	rural	ones.	The
precedent	for	this	is	a	doctrine	known	as	"universal	service"	which	was
created	to	subsidize	rural	mail,	phone,	and	electrical	services	in	the	United
States.	It	dictates	a	single	price	for	the	delivery	of	a	letter,	a	phone	call,	or
electrical	power	regardless	of	where	you	live.	It	applies	even	though	it	is

more	expensive	to	deliver	services	in	rural	areas,	where	homes	and	businesses
are	farther	apart	than	in	areas	of	concentrated	population.
There	was	no	equivalent	policy	for	the	delivery	of	newspapers	or	radio	or
television	reception.	Nonetheless,	these	services	are	widely	available,	so
clearly	under	some	circumstances	government	intervention	isn't	necessary	to
ensure	high	availability.	The	U.S.	Postal	Service	was	founded	as	part	of	the
government	on	the	assumption	that	that	was	the	only	way	to	provide	truly
universal	service.	UPS	and	Federal	Express	might	disagree	on	this	point,
however,	because	they	have	managed	to	provide	broad	coverage	and	make
money.	The	debate	as	to	whether,	or	to	what	degree,	government	needs	to	be
involved	to	guarantee	broad	access	to	the	information	highway	is	certain	to
rage	on	for	many	years.
The	highway	will	let	those	who	live	in	remote	places	consult,	collaborate,	and
be	involved	with	the	rest	of	the	world.	Because	many	people	will	find	the
combination	of	rural	lifestyle	and	urban	information	attractive,	network
companies	will	have	an	incentive	to	run	fiber-optic	lines	to	high-income
remote	areas.	It	is	likely	that	some	states,	or	communities,	or	even	private	real
estate	developers	will	promote	their	areas	by	providing	great	connectivity.
This	will	lead	to	what	one	might	call	the	"Aspen-ization"	of	parts	of	the
country.	Interesting	rural	communities	with	high	marks	for	quality	of	life	will
deliberately	set	out	to	attract	a	new	class	of	sophisticated	urban	citizen.	Taken
as	a	whole,	urban	areas	will	tend	to	get	their	connections	before	rural	ones.
The	highway	will	spread	information	and	opportunity	across	borders	to
developing	nations,	too.	Cheap	global	communications	can	bring	people
anywhere	into	the	mainstream	of	the	world	economy.	An	English-speaking
Ph.D.	in	China	will	be	able	to	bid	against	colleagues	in	London	for	consulting
work.	Knowledge	workers	in	industrialized	countries	will,	in	a	sense,	face
new	competition—just	as	some	manufacturing	workers	in	industrialized
countries	have	experienced	competition	from	developing	nations	over	the	past
decade.	This	will	make	the	information	highway	a	powerful	force	for
international	trade	in	intellectual	goods	and	services,	just	as	the	availability	of
relatively	inexpensive	air	cargo	and	containerized	shipping	helped	propel
international	trade	in	physical	goods.
The	net	effect	will	be	a	wealthier	world,	which	should	be	stabilizing.
Developed	nations,	and	workers	in	those	nations,	are	likely	to	maintain	a
sizable	economic	lead.	However,	the	gap	between	the	have	and	have-not
nations	will	diminish.	Starting	out	behind	is	sometimes	an	advantage.	It	lets
those	who	adopt	late	skip	steps,	and	avoid	the	mistakes	of	the	trailblazers.

Some	countries	will	never	have	industrialization.	They	will	move	directly	into
the	Information	Age.	Europe	didn't	adopt	television	until	several	years	after
the	United	States.	The	result	was	higher	picture
quality,	because	by	the	time	Europe	set	its	standard	a	better	choice	was
available.	As	a	result,	Europeans	have	enjoyed	better-looking	television
pictures	for	decades.
Telephone	systems	are	another	example	of	how	starting	late	can	provide	an
advantage.	In	Africa,	China,	and	other	parts	of	the	developing	world,	many
citizens	who	have	phones	use	cellular	instruments.	Cellular	telephone	service
is	spreading	rapidly	in	Asia,	Latin	America,	and	other	developing	regions,
because	it	does	not	require	that	copper	wires	be	strung.	Many	people	in	the
cellular	industry	predict	that	improvements	in	technology	will	mean	that	these
areas	may	never	get	a	conventional	copper	wire-based	telephone	system.
These	countries	will	never	have	to	cut	down	a	million	trees	for	telephone
poles	or	string	a	hundred	thousand	miles	of	telephone	lines	only	to	rip	them
all	down	and	bury	the	entire	network.	The	wireless	telephone	system	will	be
their	first	telephone	system.	They	will	get	increasingly	better	cellular	systems
wherever	they	can't	afford	a	full	broadband	connection.
The	presence	of	advanced	communications	systems	promises	to	make	nations
more	alike	and	reduce	the	importance	of	national	boundaries.	The	fax
machine,	the	portable	videocamera,	and	Cable	News	Network	are	among	the
forces	that	brought	about	the	end	of	communist	regimes	and	the	Cold	War,
because	they	allowed	news	to	pass	both	ways	through	what	was	called	the
Iron	Curtain.
Now,	commercial	satellite	broadcasts	to	nations	such	as	China	and	Iran	offer
citizens	glimpses	of	the	outside	world	that	are	not	necessarily	sanctioned	by
their	governments.	This	new	access	to	information	can	draw	people	together
by	increasing	their	understanding	of	other	cultures.	Some	believe	it	will	cause
discontent	and	worse,	a	"Revolution	of	Expectations,"	when	disenfranchised
people	get	enough	data	a======================================================== up	when	we	could	or	making	the	games	more
difficult.	A	friend	at	Lakeside	developed	a	program	in	BASIC	that	simulated
the	play	of	Monopoly.	BASIC	(Beginner's	All-purpose	Symbolic	Instruction

Code)	is,	as	its	name	suggests,	a	relatively	easy-to-learn	programming
language	we	used	to	develop	increasingly	complex	programs.	He	figured	out
how	to	make	the	computer	play	hundreds	of	games	really	fast.	We	fed	it
instructions	to	test	out	various	methods	of	play.	We	wanted	to	discover	what
strategies	won	most.	And—chug-a-chug,	chug-a-chug—the	computer	told	us.
Like	all	kids,	we	not	only	fooled	around	with	our	toys,	we	changed	them.	If
you've	ever	watched	a	child	with	a	cardboard	carton	and	a	box	of	crayons
create	a	spaceship	with	cool	control	panels,	or	listened	to	their	improvised
rules,	such	as	"Red	cars	can	jump	all	others,"	then	you	know	that	this	impulse
to	make	a	toy	do	more	is	at	the	heart	of	innovative	childhood	play.	It	is	also
the	essence	of	creativity.
Of	course,	in	those	days	we	were	just	goofing	around,	or	so	we	thought.	But
the	toy	we	had—well,	it	turned	out	to	be	some	toy.	A	few	of	us	at	Lakeside
refused	to	quit	playing	with	it.	In	the	minds	of	a	lot	of	people	at	school	we
became	linked	with	the	computer,	and	it	with	us.	I	was	asked	by	a	teacher	to
help	teach	computer	programming,	and	that	seemed	to	be	OK	With	everyone.
But	when	I	got	the	lead	in	the	school	play,	Black	Comedy,	some	students	were
heard	muttering,	"Why	did	they	pick	the	computer	guy?"	That's	still	the	way	I
sometimes	get	identified.
1968:	Bill	Gates	(Standing)	and	Paul	Allen	working	at	the	computer	terminal
at	Lakeside	School.
It	seems	there	was	a	whole	generation	of	us,	all	over	the	world,	who	dragged
that	favorite	toy	with	us	into	adulthood.	In	doing	so,	we	caused	a	kind	of
revolution—peaceful,	mainly—and	now	the	computer	has	taken	up	residence
in	our	offices	and	homes.	Computers	shrank	in	size	and	grew	in	power,	as
they	dropped	dramatically	in	price.	And	it	all	happened	fairly	quickly.	Not	as
quickly	as	I	once	thought,	but	still	pretty	fast.	Inexpensive	computer	chips
now	show	up	in	engines,	watches,	antilock	brakes,	facsimile	machines,
elevators,	gasoline	pumps,	cameras,	thermostats,	treadmills,	vending

machines,	burglar	alarms,	and	even	talking	greeting	cards.	School	kids	today
are	doing	amazing	things	with	personal	computers	that	are	no	larger	than
textbooks	but	outperform	the	largest	computers	of	a	generation	ago.
Now	that	computing	is	astoundingly	inexpensive	and	computers	inhabit	every
part	of	our	lives,	we	stand	at	the	brink	of	another	revolution.	This	one	will
involve	unprecedentedly	inexpensive	communication;	all	the	computers	will
join	together	to	communicate	with	us	and	for	us.	Interconnected	globally,	they
will	form	a	network,	which	is	being	called	the	information	highway.	A	direct
precursor	is	the	present	Internet,	which	is	a	group	of	computers	joined	and
exchanging	information	using	current	technology.
The	reach	and	use	of	the	new	network,	its	promise	and	perils,	is	the	subject	of
this	book.
Every	aspect	of	what's	about	to	happen	seems	exciting.	When	I	was	nineteen	I
caught	a	look	at	the	future,	based	my	career	on	what	I	saw,	and	I	turned	out	to
have	been	right.	But	the	Bill	Gates	of	nineteen	was	in	a	very	different	position
from	the	one	I'm	in	now.	In	those	days,	not	only	did	I	have	all	the	self-
assurance	of	a	smart	teenager,	but	also	nobody	was	watching	me,	and	if	I
failed—so	what?	Today	I'm	much	more	in	the	position	of	the	computer	giants
of	the	seventies,	but	I	hope	I've	learned	some	lessons	from	them.
At	one	time	I	thought	I	might	want	to	major	in	economics	in	college.	I
eventually	changed	my	mind,	but	in	a	way	my	whole	experience	with	the
computer	industry	has	been	a	series	of	economics	lessons.	I	saw	firsthand	the
effects	of	positive	spirals	and	inflexible	business	models.	I	watched	the	way
industry	standards	evolved.	I	witnessed	the	importance	of	compatibility	in
technology,	of	feedback,	and	of	constant	innovation.	And	I	think	we	may	be
about	to	witness	the	realization	of	Adam	Smith's	ideal	market,	at	last.
But	I'm	not	using	those	lessons	just	for	theorizing	about	this	future—I'm
betting	on	it.	Back	when	I	was	a	teenager,	I	envisioned	the	impact	that	low-
cost	computers	could	have.	"A	computer	on	every	desk	and	in	every	home"
became	Microsoft's	corporate	mission,	and	we	have	worked	to	help	make	that
possible.	Now	those	computers	are	being	connected	to	one	another,	and	we're
building	software—the	instructions	that	tell	the	computer	hardware	what	to
do—that	will	help	individuals	get	the	benefits	of	this	connected
communication	power.	It	is	impossible	to	predict	exactly	what	it	will	be	like
to	use	the	network.	We'll	communicate	with	it	through	a	variety	of	devices,
including	some	that	look	like	television	sets,	some	like	today's	PCs;	some	will
look	like	telephones,	and	some	will	be	the	size	and	something	like	the	shape

of	a	wallet.	And	at	the	heart	of	each	will	be	a	powerful	computer,	invisibly
connected	to	millions	of	others.
There	will	be	a	day,	not	far	distant,	when	you	will	be	able	to	conduct
business,	study,	explore	the	world	and	its	cultures,	call	up	any	great
entertainment,	make	friends,	attend	neighborhood	markets,	and	show	pictures
to	distant	relatives—without	leaving	your	desk	or	armchair.	You	won't	leave
your	network	connection	behind	at	the	office	or	in	the	classroom.	It	will	be
more	than	an	object	you	carry	or	an	appliance	you	purchase.	It	will	be	your
passport	into	a	new,	mediated	way	of	life.
Firsthand	experiences	and	pleasures	are	personal	and	unmediated.	No	one,	in
the	name	of	progress,	will	take	away	from	you	the	experience	of	lying	on	a
beach,	walking	in	the	woods,	sitting	in	a	comedy	club,	or	shopping	at	a	flea
market.	But	firsthand	experiences	aren't	always	rewarding.	For	example,
waiting	in	line	is	a	firsthand	experience,	but	we	have	been	trying	to	invent
ways	to	avoid	it	ever	since	we	first	queued	up.
Much	of	human	progress	has	come	about	because	someone	invented	a	better
and	more	powerful	tool.	Physical	tools	speed	up	work	and	rescue	people	from
hard	labor.	The	plow	and	the	wheel,	the	crane	and	the	bulldozer,	amplify	the
physical	abilities	of	those	using	them.
Informational	tools	are	symbolic	mediators	that	amplify	the	intellect	rather
than	the	muscle	of	their	users.	You're	having	a	mediated	experience	as	you
read	this	book:	We're	not	actually	in	the	same	room,	but	you	are	still	able	to
find	out	what's	on	my	mind.	A	great	deal	of	work	now	involves	decision
making	and	knowledge,	so	information	tools	have	become,	and	will	continue
increasingly	to	be,	the	focus	of	inventors.	Just	as	any	text	could	be
represented	with	an	arrangement	of	letters,	these	tools	allow	information	of
all	types	to	be	represented	in	digital	form,	in	a	pattern	of	electrical	pulses	that
is	easy	for	computers	to	deal	with.	The	world	today	has	more	than	100	million
computers	whose	purpose	is	to	manipulate	information.	They	are	helping	us
now	by	making	it	much	easier	to	store	and	transmit	information	that	is	already
in	digital	form,	but	in	the	near	future	they	will	allow	us	access	to	almost	any
information	in	the	world.
In	the	United	States,	the	connecting	of	all	these	computers	has	been	compared
to	another	massive	project:	the	gridding	of	the	country	with	interstate
highways,	which	began	during	the	Eisenhower	era.	This	is	why	the	new
network	was	dubbed	the	"information	superhighway."	The	term	was
popularized	by	then-senator	Al	Gore,	whose	father	sponsored	the	1956

Federal	Aid	Highway	Act.
The	highway	metaphor	isn't	quite	right	though.	The	phrase	suggests	landscape
and	geography,	a	distance	between	points,	and	embodies	the	implication	that
you	have	to	travel	to	get	from	one	place	to	another.	In	fact,	one	of	the	most
remarkable	aspects	of	this	new	communications	technology	is	that	it	will
eliminate	distance.	It	won't	matter	if	someone	you're	contacting	is	in	the	next
room	or	on	another	continent,	because	this	highly	mediated	network	will	be
unconstrained	by	miles	and	kilometers.
The	term	"highway"	also	suggests	that	everyone	is	driving	and	following	the
same	route.	This	network	is	more	like	a	lot	of	country	lanes	where	everyone
can	look	at	or	do	whatever	his	individual	interests	suggest.	Another
implication	is	that	perhaps	it	should	be	built	by	the	government,	which	I	think
would	be	a	major	mistake	in	most	countries.	But	the	real	problem	is	that	the
metaphor	emphasizes	the	infrastructure	of	the	endeavor	rather	than	its
applications.	At	Microsoft	we	talk	about	"Information	At	Your	Fingertips,"
which	spotlights	a	benefit	rather	than	the	network	itself.	A	different	metaphor
that	I	think	comes	closer	to	describing	a	lot	of	the	activities	that	will	take
place	is	that	of	the	ultimate	market.	Markets	from	trading	floors	to	malls	are
fundamental	to	human	society,	and	I	believe	this	new	one	will	eventually	be
the	world's	central	department	store.	It	will	be	where	we	social	animals	will
sell,	trade,	invest,	haggle,	pick	stuff	up,	argue,	meet	new	people,	and	hang
out.	When	you	hear	the	phrase	"information	highway,"	rather	than	seeing	a
road,	imagine	a	marketplace	or	an	exchange.	Think	of	the	hustle	and	bustle	of
the	New	York	Stock	Exchange	or	a	farmers'	market	or	of	a	bookstore	full	of
people	looking	for	fascinating	stories	and	information.	All	manner	of	human
activity	takes	place,	from	billion-dollar	deals	to	flirtations.	Many	transactions
will	involve	money,	tendered	in	digital	form	rather	than	currency.	Digital
information	of	all	kinds,	not	just	as	money,	will	be	the	new	medium	of
exchange	in	this	market.
The	global	information	market	will	be	huge	and	will	combine	all	the	various
ways	human	goods,	services,	and	ideas	are	exchanged.	On	a	practical	level,
this	will	give	you	broader	choices	about	most	things,	including	how	you	earn
and	invest,	what	you	buy	and	how	much	you	pay	for	it,	who	your	friends	are
and	how	you	spend	your	time	with	them,	and	where	and	how	securely	you
and	your	family	live.	Your	workplace	and	your	idea	of	what	it======================================================== pler	it	is	to	search
and	navigate	through	them	quickly,	because	their	content	can	be	restructured
so	easily.
The	organizational	structure	of	a	reservation	book	at	a	restaurant	is	by	date
and	time.	A	9:00	P.M.	reservation	is	written	farther	down	the	page	than	an
8:00	P.M.	reservation.	Saturday-night	dinner	reservations	follow	those	for
Saturday	lunch.	A	mâitre	d'	or	anyone	else	can	rapidly	find	out	who	has	a
reservation	on	any	date	for	any	time	because	the	book's	information	is	ordered
that	way.	But	if,	for	whatever	reason,	someone	wants	to	extract	information	in
another	way,	the	simple	chronology	is	useless.
Imagine	the	plight	of	a	restaurant	captain	if	I	called	to	say,	"My	name	is
Gates.	My	wife	made	us	a	reservation	for	some	time	next	month.	Would	you
mind	checking	to	see	when	it	is?"

"I'm	sorry,	sir,	do	you	know	the	date	of	the	reservation?"	the	captain	would	be
likely	to	ask.
"No,	that's	what	I'm	trying	to	find	out."
"Would	that	have	been	on	a	weekend?"	the	captain	asks.
He	knows	he's	going	to	be	paging	through	the	book	by	hand,	and	he's	hoping
to	reduce	the	task	by	focusing	the	dates	in	any	possible	way.
A	restaurant	can	use	a	paper-based	reservation	book	because	the	total	number
of	reservations	isn't	large.	An	airline	reservation	system	is	not	a	book	but	a
database	containing	an	enormous	quantity	of	information—flights,	air	fares,
bookings,	seat	assignments,	and	billing	information—for	hundreds	of	flights	a
day	worldwide.	American	Airlines'	SABRE	reservation	system	stores	the
information—4.4	trillion	bytes	of	it,	which	is	more	than	4	million	million
characters—on	computer	hard	disks.	If	the	information	in	the	SABRE	system
were	copied	into	a	hypothetical	paper	reservation	book,	it	would	require	more
than	2	billion	pages.
For	as	long	as	we've	had	paper	documents	or	collections	of	documents,	we
have	been	ordering	information	linearly,	with	indexes,	tables	of	contents,	and
cross-references	of	various	kinds	to	provide	alternate	means	of	navigation.	In
most	offices	filing	cabinets	are	organized	by	customer,	vendor,	or	project	in
alphabetical	order,	but	to	speed	access,	often	a	duplicate	set	of
correspondence	is	filed	chronologically.	Professional	indexers	add	value	to	a
book	by	building	an	alternative	way	to	find	information.	And	before	library
catalogs	were	computerized,	new	books	were	entered	into	the	paper	catalogs
on	several	different	cards	so	a	reader	could	find	a	book	by	its	title	or	any	one
of	its	authors	or	topics.	This	redundancy	was	to	make	information	easier	to
find.
When	I	was	young	I	loved	my	family's	1960	World	Book	Encyclopedia.	Its
heavy	bound	volumes	contained	just	text	and	pictures.	They	showed	what
Edison's	phonograph	looked	like,	but	didn't	let	me	listen	to	its	scratchy	sound.
The	encyclopedia	had	photographs	of	a	fuzzy	caterpillar	changing	into	a
butterfly,	but	there	was	no	video	to	bring	the	transformation	to	life.	It	also
would	have	been	nice	if	it	had	quizzed	me	on	what	I	had	read,	or	if	the
information	had	always	been	up-to-date.	Naturally	I	wasn't	aware	of	those
drawbacks	then.	When	I	was	eight,	I	began	to	read	the	first	volume.	I	was
determined	to	read	straight	through	every	volume.	I	could	have	absorbed
more	if	it	had	been	easy	to	read	all	the	articles	about	the	sixteenth	century	in
sequence	or	all	the	articles	pertaining	to	medicine.	Instead	I	read	about

"Garter	Snakes"	then	"Gary,	Indiana,"	then	"Gas."	But	I	had	a	great	time
reading	the	encyclopedia	anyway	and	kept	at	it	for	five	years	until	I	reached
the	Ps.	Then	I	discovered	the	Encyclopaedia	Britannica,	with	its	greater
sophistication	and	detail.	I	knew	I	would	never	have	the	patience	to	read	all	of
it.	Also,	by	then,	satisfying	my	enthusiasm	for	computers	was	taking	up	most
of	my	spare	time.
Current	print	encyclopedias	consist	of	nearly	two	dozen	volumes,	with
millions	of	words	of	text	and	thousands	of	illustrations,	and	cost	hundreds	or
thousands	of	dollars.	That's	quite	an	investment,	especially	considering	how
rapidly	the	information	gets	out	of	date.	Microsoft	Encarta,	which	is
outselling	print	and	other	multi-media	encyclopedias,	comes	on	a	single	1-
ounce	CD-ROM	(which	stands	for	Compact	Disc	Read	Only	Memory).
Encarta	includes	26,000	topics	with	9	million	words	of	text,	8	hours	of
sounds,	7,000	photographs	and	illustrations,	800	maps,	250	interactive	charts
and	tables,	and	100	animations	and	video	clips.	It	costs	less	than	$100.	If	you
want	to	know	how	the	Egyptian	"ud"	(a	musical	instrument)	sounds,	hear	the
1936	abdication	speech	of	Great	Britain's	King	Edward	VIII,	or	see	an
animation	explaining	how	a	machine	works,	the	information's	all	there—and
no	paper-based	encyclopedia	will	ever	have	it.
Articles	in	a	print	encyclopedia	often	are	followed	by	a	list	of	articles	on
related	subjects.	To	read	them,	you	have	to	find	the	referenced	article,	which
may	be	in	another	volume.	With	a	CD-ROM	encyclopedia	all	you	have	to	do
is	click	on	the	reference	and	the	article	will	appear.	On	the	information
highway,	encyclopedia	articles	will	include	links	to	related	subjects—not	just
those	covered	in	the	encyclopedia,	but	those	in	other	sources.	There	will	be	no
limit	to	how	much	detail	you	will	be	able	to	explore	on	a	subject	that	interests
you.	In	fact,	an	encyclopedia	on	the	highway	will	be	more	than	just	a	specific
reference	work—it	will	be,	like	the	library	card	catalog,	a	doorway	to	all
knowledge.
1995:	Screen	from	Microsoft	Encarta	electronic	multimedia	encyclopedia

Today,	printed	information	is	hard	to	locate.	It's	almost	impossible	to	find	all
the	best	information—including	books,	news	articles,	and	film	clips—on	a
specific	topic.	It	is	extremely	time-consuming	to	assemble	the	information
you	can	find.	For	example,	if	you	wanted	to	read	biographies	of	all	the	recent
Nobel	Prize	laureates,	compiling	them	could	take	an	entire	day.	Electronic
documents,	however,	will	be	interactive.	Request	a	kind	of	information,	and
the	document	responds.	Indicate	that	you've	changed	your	mind,	and	the
document	responds	again.	Once	you	get	used	to	this	sort	of	system,	you	find
that	being	able	to	look	at	information	in	different	ways	makes	that
information	more	valuable.	The	flexibility	invites	exploration,	and	the
exploration	is	rewarded	with	discovery.
You'll	be	able	to	get	your	daily	news	in	a	similar	way.	You'll	be	able	to	specify
how	long	you	want	your	newscast	to	last.	This	will	be	possible	because	you'll
be	able	to	have	each	of	the	news	stories	selected	individually.	The	newscast
assembled	for	and	delivered	only	to	you	might	include	world	news	from
NBC,	the	BBC,	CNN,	or	the	Los	Angeles	Times,	with	a	weather	report	from	a
favorite	local	TV	meteorologist—or	from	any	private	meteorologist	who
wanted	to	offer	his	or	her	own	service.	You	will	be	able	to	request	longer
stories	on	the	subjects	that	particularly	interest	you	and	just	highlights	on
others.	If,	while	you	are	watching	the	newscast,	you	want	more	than	has	been
put	together,	you	will	easily	be	able	to	request	more	background	or	detail,
either	from	another	news	broadcast	or	from	file	information.
Among	all	the	types	of	paper	documents,	narrative	fiction	is	one	of	the	few
that	will	not	benefit	from	electronic	organization.	Almost	every	reference
book	has	an	index,	but	novels	don't	because	there	is	no	need	to	be	able	to	look
something	up	in	a	novel.	Novels	are	linear.	Likewise,	we'll	continue	to	watch
most	movies	from	start	to	finish.	This	isn't	a	technological	judgment—it	is	an
artistic	one:	Their	linearity	is	intrinsic	to	the	storytelling	process.	New	forms
of	interactive	fiction	are	being	invented	that	take	advantage	of	the	electronic
world,	but	linear	novels	and	movies	will	still	be	popular.
The	highway	will	make	it	easy	to	distribute	digital	documents	cheaply,
whatever	their	form.	Millions	of	people	and	companies	will	be	creating
documents	and	publishing	them	on	the	network.	Some	documents	will	be
aimed	at	paying	audiences	and	some	will	be	free	to	anyone	who	wants	to	pay
attention.	Digital	storage	is	fantastically	inexpensive.	Hard-disk	drives	in
personal	computers	will	soon	cost	about	$0.15	for	a	megabyte	(million	bytes)
of	information.	To	put	this	in	perspective,	1	megabyte	will	hold	about	700
pages	of	text,	so	the	cost	is	something	like	$0.00021	per	page—about	one

two-hundredth	what	the	local	copy	center	would	charge	at	$0.05	a	page.	And
because	there	is	the	option	of	reusing	the	storage	space	for	something	else,	the
cost	is	actually	the	cost	of	storage	per	unit	time—in	other	words,	of	renting
the	space.	If	we	assume	just	a	three-year	average	lifetime	for	the	hard-disk
drive,	the	amortized	price	per	page	per	year	is	$0.00007.	And	storage	is
getting	cheaper	all	the	time.	Hard-disk	prices	have	been	dropping	by	about	50
percent	per	year	for	the	last	several	years.
Text	is	particularly	easy	to	store	because	it	is	very	compact	in	digital	form.
The	old	saying	that	a	picture	is	worth	a	thousand	words	is	more	than	true	in
the	digital	world.	High-quality	photographic	images	take	more	space	than
text,	and	video	(which	you	can	think	of	as	a	sequence	of	up	to	thirty	new
images	appearing	every	second)	takes	even	more.	Nevertheless,	the	cost	of
distribution	for	these	kinds	of	data	is	still	quite	low.	A	feature	film	takes	up
about	4	gigabytes	(4,000	megabytes)	in	compressed	digital	format,	which	is
about	$1,600	worth	of	hard-disk	space.
Sixteen	hundred	dollars	to	store	a	single	film	doesn't	sound	low-cost.
However,	consider	that	the	typical	local	video-rental	store	usually	buys	at
least	eight	copies	of	a	hot	new	movie	for	about	$80	a	copy.	With	these	eight
copies	the	store	can	supply	only	eight	customers	per	day.
Once	the	disk	and	the	computer	that	manages	it	are	connected	up	to	the
highway,	only	one	copy	of	the	information	will	be	necessary	for	everyone	to
have	access.	The	most	popular	documents	will	have	copies	made	on	different
servers	to	avoid	delays	when	an	unusual	number	of	users	want	access.	With
one	investment,	roughly	what	a	single	shop	today	spends	for	a	popular
videotape	title,======================================================== ange	seems	terse,	keep	in	mind	that	the	average	Microsoft
employee	receives	dozens	of	electronic	messages	a	day.	An	e-mail	message	is
like	a	statement	or	a	question	at	a	meeting—one	thought	or	inquiry	in	an	on-
going	communication.	Microsoft	provides	e-mail	for	business	purposes,	but,
like	the	office	telephone,	it	serves	many	other	purposes,	social	and	personal.
For	example,	hikers	can	reach	all	the	members	of	the	Microsoft	Hiking	Club
to	try	to	find	a	ride	to	the	mountain.	And	certainly	a	few	romances	around
Microsoft	have	benefited	from	e-mail.	When	my	wife,	Melinda,	and	I	were
first	going	out,	we	took	advantage	of	it.	For	some	reason	people	are	less	shy
about	sending	e-mail	than	communicating	on	the	phone	or	in	person.	This	can
be	a	benefit	or	a	problem,	depending	on	the	situation.
I	spend	several	hours	a	day	reading	and	answering	e-mail	to	and	from
employees,	customers,	and	partners	around	the	world.	Anyone	in	the
company	can	send	me	e-mail,	and	because	I	am	the	only	person	who	reads	it,
no	one	has	to	worry	about	protocol	in	a	message	to	me.
I	probably	wouldn't	have	to	spend	so	long	if	my	e-mail	address	weren't
semipublic.	There	is	actually	a	book	called	E-Mail	Addresses	of	the	Rich	&
Famous,	which	includes	my	e-mail	address	as	well	as	ones	for	Rush
Limbaugh	and	Senator	Ted	Kennedy.	When	John	Seabrook	was	writing	an
article	about	me	for	The	New	Yorker	magazine,	he	conducted	his	interview
primarily	on	e-mail.	It	was	a	very	effective	way	to	have	a	dialogue,	and	I
enjoyed	the	piece	when	it	appeared,	but	it	mentioned	my	e-mail	address.	The
result	has	been	an	avalanche	of	mail	ranging	from	students	asking	me,	in
effect,	to	do	their	homework	assignments,	to	people	asking	for	money,	to	mail
from	a	group	interested	in	whales	who	for	some	reason	added	my	e-mail
name	to	their	list.	My	address	is	also	a	target	for	both	rude	and	friendly
messages	from	strangers,	and	provocative	ones	from	the	press	("If	you	don't
answer	this	by	tomorrow	I	will	publish	a	story	about	you	and	that	topless
waitress!").
We	have	special	e-mail	addresses	at	Microsoft	for	job	applications,	product
feedback,	and	other	legitimate	communications.	But	a	lot	of	that	mail	still

comes	to	me	and	I	have	to	reroute	it.	There	are	also	three	e-mail	equivalents
of	chain	letters	that	keep	making	the	rounds.	One	threatens	general	bad	luck	if
it	isn't	forwarded.	Another	specifically	says	the	punishment	will	be	that	your
sex	life	will	suffer.	A	third,	which	has	been	going	around	for	six	years,
contains	a	cookie	recipe	and	a	story	about	a	company's	having	overcharged	a
woman	for	the	recipe,	and	so	she	wants	you	to	distribute	it	for	free.	In	the
various	versions	different	companies	are	named.	Apparently	it	is	the	idea	of
getting	back	at	a	corporation,	any	corporation,	that	has	made	that	one	such	a
perennial	favorite.	This	is	all	mixed	in	with	mail	that	really	should	come	to
me,	often	about	important	issues.	Fortunately,	e-mail	software	is	improving
all	the	time	and	it	now	includes	a	feature	that	lets	me	prioritize	mail	from
senders	I	have	designated.
When	I	travel,	I	connect	my	portable	computer	back	into	Microsoft's
electronic	mail	system	every	night	to	retrieve	new	messages	and	send	off	the
ones	I've	written	over	the	course	of	the	day	to	people	in	the	company.	Most
recipients	will	not	even	be	aware	that	I	am	out	of	the	ofrice.	When	I'm
connected	to	our	corporate	network	from	a	remote	site,	I	can	also	click	on	a
single	icon	to	see	how	sales	are	doing,	to	check	the	status	of	projects,	or	to
access	any	other	management	databases.	It	is	reassuring	to	check	my
electronic	in-box	when	I'm	thousands	of	miles	and	a	dozen	time	zones	away,
because	bad	news	almost	always	comes	through	on	e-mail.	So	if	nothing	bad
is	waiting	there,	I	don't	need	to	worry.
We	now	use	e-mail	in	all	sorts	of	ways	we	hadn't	anticipated.	For	example,	at
the	beginning	of	the	annual	Microsoft	Giving	Campaign,	which	raises	money
for	charity,	employees	receive	an	e-mail	message	encouraging	them	to
participate.	The	e-mail	message	contains	an	electronic	pledge-card	program.
When	the	icon	in	the	message	is	clicked,	the	pledge	card	appears	on	the
employee's	screen	and	he	or	she	can	pledge	a	cash	gift	or	sign	up	for	a	payroll
deduction.	If	the	latter	option	is	chosen,	the	information	is	automatically
entered	into	Microsofts	payroll	database.	From	the	electronic	form	employees
can	direct	their	gift	to	their	local	United	Way	or	to	another	nonprofit
organization.	If	they	want	to,	they	can	choose	to	have	their	donation	go	to	one
or	more	of	the	charities	the	United	Way	supports,	and	can	even	access	a
server	to	obtain	information	about	those	organizations	or	about	volunteering
in	their	community.	From	start	to	finish	it's	completely	electronic.	As	the
leader	of	the	company,	I	can	analyze	summary	information	day	by	day	to	find
out	if	we	are	getting	good	participation	or	if	we	need	to	have	a	few	more
rallies	to	get	out	the	message	about	how	important	we	think	the	giving
campaign	is.

Today,	besides	company-operated,	text-based	e-mail	systems,	the	kind
Microsoft	operates	for	its	own	use,	there	are	commercial	services	such	as
MCI	Mail	and	B.T.	Gold	(operated	by	British	Telecom).	There	are	also
offerings	from	all	of	the	commercial	on-line	systems	such	as	CompuServe,
Prodigy,	and	the	Microsoft	Network.	These	perform	some	of	the	same
functions	that	telegrams	and,	later,	telex	systems	once	did.	Users	connected	to
these	e-mail	systems	can	send	a	message	to	virtually	anyone	who	has	a
standard	Internet	e-mail	address.	Both	private	and	commercial	e-mail	systems
include	"gateways"	that	transfer	messages	sent	by	a	user	of	one	mail	system
to	a	recipient	on	another.	You	can	get	a	message	to	almost	anyone	who	has	a
PC	and	a	modem,	although	for	certain	communications	privacy	is	a	problem
because	transmissions	across	the	Internet	are	not	very	secure.	Some
commercial	services,	such	as	MCI,	will	also	deliver	a	message	by	fax,	telex,
or	traditional	mail	if	the	recipient	doesn't	have	an	electronic	mailbox.
Future	advances	in	electronic	mail	will	streamline	lots	of	activities	we	may
not	even	realize	are	inefficient.	For	example,	think	about	how	you	pay	bills.
More	often	than	not,	a	company	prints	out	a	bill	on	a	piece	of	paper	and	puts
it	in	an	envelope	that	is	physically	carried	to	your	house.	You	open	the	bill,
check	your	records	to	see	if	the	amount	and	details	seem	appropriate,	write	a
check,	and	then	try	to	time	when	you	mail	it	back	so	that	it	arrives	shortly
before	the	due	date.	We're	so	used	to	this	process	we	don't	even	think	about
how	wasteful	it	is.	Let's	say	you	disagree	with	a	bill.	You	call	the	company
up,	wait	on	hold,	and	try	to	get	through	to	the	right	person—who	may	not
really	be	the	right	person	at	all.	In	which	case	you	have	to	wait	for	someone
else	to	call	you	back.
Very	soon	you'll	check	your	PC,	wallet,	or	television	set	the	information
appliance	of	your	choice—for	e-mail,	including	bills.	When	a	bill	comes	in,
the	device	will	show	your	payment	history.	If	you	want	to	inquire	about	the
bill,	you'll	do	it	asynchronously—at	your	convenience—by	sending	e-mail:
"Hey	how	come	this	charge	is	so	high?"
Tens	of	thousands	of	businesses	in	the	United	States	already	exchange
information	via	an	electronic	system	called	Electronic	Document	Interchange,
or	EDI.	It	allows	companies	that	have	contractual	relationships	to	execute
specific	kinds	of	transactions	automatically.	Dealings	are	highly	structured—
reordering	products	or	checking	the	status	of	a	shipment—which	makes
conventional	EDI	unsuitable	for	ad	hoc	communications,	although	many
companies	are	working	to	combine	the	benefits	of	EDI	and	e-mail	into	a
single	system.

The	asynchronicity	of	e-mail	and	EDI	is	one	of	their	advantages,	but	there	is
still	a	place	for	synchronous	communications.	Sometimes	you	want	to	call
someone	up,	talk	directly,	and	get	an	immediate	response	rather	than	leaving	a
message.
Within	a	few	years	there	will	be	hybrid	communications	systems	that
combine	elements	of	synchronous	and	asynchronous	communications.	These
systems	will	use	DSVD	(and	later	ISDN)	telephone	connections	to	permit	the
simultaneous	transfer	of	voice	and	data,	even	before	the	full	information
highway	is	in	place.
It	will	work	this	way:	When	companies	post	information	about	their	products
on	the	Internet,	part	of	that	information	will	include	instructions	for	how	a
customer	can	connect	synchronously	with	a	sales	representative	who	will	be
able	to	answer	questions	through	a	voice-data	connection.	For	example,	if
you're	shopping	for	boots	on	Eddie	Bauer's	home	page	(an	electronic	catalog)
and	you	want	to	know	if	the	boots	you	like	are	appropriate	for	use	in	Florida's
Everglades	or	on	a	glacier,	you'll	be	able	to	click	a	button	to	get	a
representative	to	come	on	the	line	and	talk	to	you.	The	representative	will	see
immediately	that	you	are	looking	at	the	boots	and	will	have	whatever	other
information	about	yourself	you	have	decided	to	make	available,	not	just	your
clothing	and	shoe	sizes,	style	and	color	preferences,	but	your	athletic
interests,	your	past	purchases	from	other	companies,	and	even	your	price
range.	Some	people	will	choose	not	to	make	any	information	about
themselves	available.	Eddie	Bauer's	computer	may	route	your	inquiry	to	the
same	person	you	spoke	to	last	time,	or	it	may	route	you	to	someone	who	has
expertise	in	the	product	displayed	on	your	screen,	in	this	case,	boots.	Without
preamble,	you	will	be	able	to	ask,	"Do	these	boots	work	well	in	swamps	like
the	Everglades?"	or	whatever	your	question	is.	The	representative	doesn't
have	to	be	in	an	office.	He	can	be	anywhere	as	long	as	he	has	access	to	a	PC
and	has	indicated	he	is	available.	If	he	speaks	the	right	language	and	has	the
right	expertise,	he	can	help	out.
Or	if	you	decided	to	change	your	will,	you'd	phone	your	lawyer,	and	she
might	say,	"Let's	take	a	quick	look	at	that."	She	would	then	call	your	will	up
on	her	PC,	and	it	would	appear	on	your	screen	as	well	as	hers	courtesy	of
DSVD,	ISDN,	or	similar	techno======================================================== o	ballet
slippers.	Of	course	you	will	still	ask	people	you	know	for	recommendations,
but	efficiently,	by	electronic	mail.
If	you're	thinking	of	doing	business	with	a	company	or	buying	a	product,
you'll	be	able	to	check	what	others	say	about	it.	If	you	want	to	buy	a
refrigerator,	you	will	look	for	the	electronic	bulletin	boards	containing	formal
and	informal	reviews	of	refrigerators	and	their	manufacturers	and	retailers.
You'll	get	into	the	habit	of	checking	these	bulletin	boards	before	you	make
any	significant	purchase.	When	you	have	a	compliment	or	complaint	about	a
record	club,	a	doctor,	or	even	a	computer	chip,	it	will	be	easy	to	find	the	place
on	the	network	where	that	company	or	product	is	discussed	and	add	your
opinion.	Ultimately,	companies	that	don't	serve	their	customers	well	will	see
their	reputations	and	their	sales	decline,	while	those	that	do	a	great	job	will

attract	sizable	followings	through	this	new	form	of	word	of	"mouth."
But	the	various	endorsements	and	especially	the	negative	comments	will	have
to	be	examined	carefully.	They	may	be	motivated	more	by	fanaticism	than	a
genuine	desire	to	share	pertinent	information.
Let's	say	a	company	is	selling	an	air	conditioner	that	99.9	percent	of	its
customers	are	very	happy	with.	One	angry	consumer	in	the	remaining	0.1
percent	can	post	horrible	insults	about	a	brand	of	air	conditioner,	the	company
that	manufactures	it,	and	individuals	in	the	company,	and	keep	sending	the
messages	over	and	over	and	over.	The	effect	could	be	compared	to	sitting	in	a
meeting	where	everyone	has	a	volume	control	that	could	be	set	from	0	to
1,000,	and	the	normal	level	of	conversation	is,	say,	3.	Then	a	few	people
decide	to	crank	their	volume	up	to	1,000	and	start	shouting.	This	means	that	if
I	happen	to	look	in	on	the	bulletin	board	because	I'm	buying	an	air
conditioner,	my	visit	may	be	a	waste	of	time	because	all	I	find	there	is	the
shouting.	It	is	unfair	to	me	and	to	the	company	selling	the	air	conditioners.
Already,	a	network	etiquette,	or	"netiquette,"	is	evolving.	As	the	information
highway	becomes	society's	town	square,	we	will	come	to	expect	it	to	conform
to	our	culture's	mores.	There	are	vast	cultural	differences	around	the	world,	so
the	highway	will	be	divided	into	different	parts,	some	dedicated	to	various
cultures,	and	some	specified	for	global	usage.	So	far,	a	frontier	mentality	has
prevailed,	and	participants	in	electronic	forums	have	been	known	to	lapse	into
behavior	that	is	antisocial	and	even	illegal.	Illegal	copies	of	copyrighted
intellectual	property,	including	articles,	books,	and	software	applications,	are
distributed	freely.	Get-rich-quick	scams	pop	up	here	and	there.	Pornography
flourishes	within	the	easy	reach	of	children.	Single-minded	voices	rant,
sometimes	almost	incessantly,	about	products,	companies,	and	people	they
have	come	to	dislike.	Forum	participants	get	horrible	insults	hurled	at	them
because	of	some	comment	they	have	made.	The	ease	with	which	an
individual,	any	individual,	can	share	his	opinions	with	the	members	of	a	huge
electronic	community	is	unprecedented.	And	the	ones	who	are	yelling	are
able,	because	the	electronic	community	is	so	efficient,	to	take	a	piece	of	hate
mail	and	post	it	on	twenty	bulletin	boards.	I've	seen	bulletin	boards	collapse
into	foolishness	after	people	start	getting	shrill.	Other	participants	in	the
discussion	don't	know	what	to	do.	Some	people	yell	back;	a	few	try	to	say
rational	things.	But	the	shrill	comments	continue,	and	that	destroys	the	sense
of	community.
The	Internet,	true	to	its	roots	as	an	academic	cooperative,	has	relied	on	peer
pressure	for	regulation.	For	example,	if	someone	in	a	discussion	group	posts

an	extraneous	comment	or,	worse,	tries	to	sell	something	in	an	electronic
forum	that	is	seen	by	others	as	a	noncommercial	setting,	the	would-be
diverger	or	merchant	may	get	a	withering	barrage	of	insults.	The	enforcement
so	far	has	been	mostly	by	self-appointed	censors
who	"flame"	those	they	believe	have	crossed	the	line	into	antisocial	behavior.
The	commercial	on-line	services	employ	volunteers	and	professional
moderators	to	monitor	conduct	on	their	bulletin	boards.	Forums	that	have
moderators	can	filter	out	some	antisocial	behavior	by	refusing	to	allow	insults
or	copyrighted	information	to	remain	on	a	system's	servers.	Most	Internet
forums	remain	unmoderated,	however.	Anything	goes,	and	because	people
can	post	messages	and	information	anonymously,	little	accountability	exists.
We	need	a	more	sophisticated	process	to	gather	consensus	opinions	without
depending	on	the	Attorney	General's	Consumer	Complaints	Division	to	act	as
a	filter.	We	will	have	to	find	some	way	to	force	people	to	turn	their	volume
down	so	the	highway	doesn't	become	an	amplifier	for	libel	or	slander	or	an
outlet	for	venting	irritation.
Many	providers	of	Internet	access	are	beginning	to	restrict	entry	to	forums
containing	sexually	explicit	material,	and	there	has	been	a	crackdown	on	the
illegal	traffic	of	copyrighted	materials.	Some	universities	are	getting	students
and	staff	to	remove	objectionable	postings.	This	rubs	some	the	wrong	way,
because	they	see	cyberspace	as	a	place	where	anything	goes.	The	commercial
services	have	had	similar	problems.	There	have	been	complaints	about
restriction	of	free	speech.	And	parents	were	outraged	when	their	family
account	was	closed	after	their	eleven-year-old	made	an	objectionable
comment	to	a	moderator.	Companies	will	create	special	communities	on	the
Internet	and	will	"compete"	by	having	rules	about	how	they	are	going	to	deal
with	these	issues.
Politicians	are	already	wrestling	with	the	question	of	when	an	on-line	service
should	be	treated	as	a	common	carrier	and	when	it	should	be	treated	as	a
publisher.	Telephone	companies	are	legally	considered	common	carriers.
They	transport	messages	without	assuming	any	responsibility	for	them.	If	an
obscene	caller	bothers	you,	the	telephone	company	will	cooperate	with	the
police,	but	nobody	thinks	it	is	the	phone	company's	fault	that	some	creep	is
calling	you	and	talking	dirty.	Magazines	and	newspapers,	on	the	other	hand,
are	publishers.	They	are	legally	responsible	for	their	content	and	can	be	sued
for	libel.	They	also	have	a	strong	interest	in	maintaining	their	reputation	and
editorial	integrity	because	that	is	an	important	part	of	their	business.	Any
responsible	newspaper	checks	very	carefully	before	making	a	previously

unpublished	allegation	about	someone—in	part	because	it	doesn't	want	a	libel
suit,	but	also	because	inaccuracy	would	hurt	its	reputation.
On-line	services	function	simultaneously	as	common	carriers	and	publishers,
which	is	where	the	problem	lies.	When	they	act	as	publishers,	and	offer
content	they	have	acquired,	authored,	or	edited,	it	makes	sense	that	the	rules
of	libel	and	the	self-governing	incentive	of	editorial	reputation	would	apply.
But	we	also	expect	them	to	deliver	our	e-mail	like	a	common	carrier	without
examining	or	taking	responsibility	for	its	contents.	Likewise,	chat	lines,
bulletin	boards,	and	forums	that	encourage	users	to	interact	without	editorial
supervision	are	a	new	means	of	communication,	and	shouldn't	be	treated	the
same	way	as	material	published	on	the	service.	A	New	York	judge,	however,
recently	cleared	the	way	for	a	libel	lawsuit	by	ruling	that	the	on-line	service
involved	was	a	publisher	of	information,	not	just	a	distributor.	Perhaps	by	the
time	you	read	this	things	will	have	been	clarified.	The	stakes	in	the	resolution
of	this	issue	are	high.	If	network	providers	are	treated	entirely	as	publishers,
they	will	have	to	monitor	and	preapprove	the	content	of	all	information	they
transmit.	This	could	create	an	unwelcome	atmosphere	of	censorship	and
curtail	spontaneous	exchange,	so	important	in	the	electronic	world.
Ideally,	the	industry	will	develop	some	standards	so	that	when	you	go	into	a
bulletin	board	or	article,	you	get	an	indication	of	whether	or	not	some
"publisher"	has	looked	it	over,	edited	it,	and	stands	behind	its	content.	The
question	will	be	what	standards	and	who	will	oversee	them?	A	bulletin	board
for	lesbians	should	not	be	forced	to	accept	antilesbian	comments,	nor	should	a
bulletin	board	about	some	product	be	overwhelmed	by	messages	from	a
competitor.	It	would	be	a	shame	to	have	to	keep	children	away	from	all
bulletin	boards,	but	it	would	also	be	unrealistic,	and	possibly	an	abridgment
of	free	expression,	to	force	all	bulletin	boards	to	undergo	review	by	someone
willing	to	accept	liability	for	everything	they	contain.	What	we	will	most
likely	end	up	with	is	a	series	of	categories,	like	the	ratings	given	movies,	that
will	indicate	whether	shrill	voices	have	been	controlled	and	whether	an
"editor"	has	deleted	messages	he	thought	were	out	of	line	with	the	policies	of
the	group	involved.
The	bulletin	boards	I've	been	discussing	are	the	free,	public	ones,	but	there
will	also	be	places	where	professional	information	and	advice	will	be	offered
for	a	fee.	You	might	wonder	why	you	would	need	an	expert	when	so	much
information	will	be	available.	For	the	same	reasons	you	might	need	one	now.
All	sorts	of	consumer	data	can	be	had	now.	Consumer	Reports	offers
objective	evaluations	of	a	lot	of	products,	but	the	reviews	are	aimed	at	a	broad
audience—they	don't	necessarily	discuss	your	particular	requirements.	If	you

can't	find	exactly	the	advice	you	need	on	the	highway,	you	will	be	able	to	hire
a	knowledgeable	sales	consultant,	for	five	minutes	or	an	afternoon,	via
videoconference.	She	will	help	you	choose	products,	which	your	computer
will	then	buy	for	you	from	the	cheapest	reliable	source.
I	expect	the	traditional	binding	together	of	advice	and	sales	to	be	much	less
prevalent,	because	although	the	advice	appears	free	to	the	customer,	it	is	paid
for	by	the	stores	and	services	that	offer	it.	This	cost	then	gets	added	on	to	the
price	of	the	goods.	Stores	that	are	charging	more	because	they	offer	advice
will	have	increasing	difficulty	competing	with	the	discounters	who	will
operate	on	the	information	highway.	The======================================================== han	Traf-O-Data:	the	Altair	8800	("Altair"	was	a	destination	in	a	Star	Trek
episode).	It	was	being	sold	for	$397	as	a	kit.	When	it	was	assembled,	it	had	no
keyboard	or	display.	It	had	sixteen	address	switches	to	direct	commands	and
sixteen	lights.	You	could	get	the	little	lights	on	the	front	panel	to	blink,	but
that	was	about	all.	Part	of	the	problem	was	that	the	Altair	8800	lacked
software.	It	couldn't	be	programmed,	which	made	it	more	a	novelty	than	a
tool.
What	the	Altair	did	have	was	an	Intel	8080	microprocessor	chip	as	its	brain.
When	we	saw	that,	panic	set	in.	"Oh	no!	It's	happening	without	us!	People	are
going	to	go	write	real	software	for	this	chip"	I	was	sure	it	would	happen
sooner	rather	than	later,	and	I	wanted	to	be	involved	from	the	beginning.	The
chance	to	get	in	on	the	first	stages	of	the	PC	revolution	seemed	the
opportunity	of	a	lifetime,	and	I	seized	it.
Twenty	years	later	I	feel	the	same	way	about	what's	going	on	now.	Then	I	was
afraid	others	would	have	the	same	vision	we	did;	today	I	know	thousands	do.
The	legacy	of	the	earlier	revolution	is	that	50	million	PCs	are	sold	each	year
worldwide,	and	that	fortunes	have	been	completely	reordered	in	the	computer
industry.	There	have	been	plenty	of	winners	and	losers.	This	time	lots	of
companies	are	rushing	to	get	in	early	while	change	is	taking	place	and	there
are	endless	opportunities.

When	we	look	back	at	the	last	twenty	years	it	is	obvious	that	a	number	of
large	companies	were	so	set	in	their	ways	that	they	did	not	adapt	properly	and
lost	out	as	a	result.	Twenty	years	from	now	we'll	look	back	and	see	the	same
pattern.	I	know	that	as	I	write	this	there's	at	least	one	young	person	out	there
who	will	create	a	major	new	company,	convinced	that	his	or	her	insight	into
the	communications	revolution	is	the	right	one.	Thousands	of	innovative
companies	will	be	founded	to	exploit	the	coming	changes.
In	1975,	when	Paul	and	I	naively	decided	to	start	a	company,	we	were	acting
like	characters	in	all	those	Judy	Garland	and	Mickey	Rooney	movies	who
crowed,	"We'll	put	on	a	show	in	the	barn!"	There	was	no	time	to	waste.	Our
first	project	was	to	create	BASIC	for	the	little	computer.
We	had	to	squeeze	a	lot	of	capability	into	the	computer's	small	memory.	The
typical	Altair	had	about	4,000	characters	of	memory.	Today	most	personal
computers	have	4	or	8	million	characters	of	memory.	Our	task	was	further
complicated	because	we	didn't	actually	own	an	Altair,	and	had	never	even
seen	one.	That	didn't	really	matter	because	what	we	were	really	interested	in
was	the	new	Intel	8080	microprocessor	chip,	and	we'd	never	seen	that,	either.
Undaunted,	Paul	studied	a	manual	for	the	chip,	then	wrote	a	program	that
made	a	big	computer	at	Harvard	mimic	the	little	Altair.	This	was	like	having	a
whole	orchestra	available	and	using	it	to	play	a	simple	duet,	but	it	worked.
Writing	good	software	requires	a	lot	of	concentration,	and	writing	BASIC	for
the	Altair	was	exhausting.	Sometimes	I	rock	back	and	forth	or	pace	when	I'm
thinking,	because	it	helps	me	focus	on	a	single	idea	and	exclude	distractions.	I
did	a	lot	of	rocking	and	pacing	in	my	dorm	room	the	winter	of	1975.	Paul	and
I	didn't	sleep	much	and	lost	track	of	night	and	day.	When	I	did	fall	asleep,	it
was	often	at	my	desk	or	on	the	floor.	Some	days	I	didn't	eat	or	see	anyone.
But	after	five	weeks,	our	BASIC	was	written—and	the	world's	first
microcomputer	software	company	was	born.	In	time	we	named	it
"Microsoft."
We	knew	getting	a	company	started	would	mean	sacrifice.	But	we	also
realized	we	had	to	do	it	then	or	forever	lose	the	opportunity	to	make	it	in
microcomputer	software.	In	the	spring	of	1975,	Paul	quit	his	programming
job	and	I	decided	to	go	on	leave	from	Harvard.
I	talked	it	over	with	my	parents,	both	of	whom	were	pretty	savvy	about
business.	They	saw	how	much	I	wanted	to	try	starting	a	software	company
and	they	were	supportive.	My	plan	was	to	take	time	off,	start	the	company,
and	then	go	back	later	and	finish	college.	I	never	really	made	a	conscious

decision	to	forgo	a	degree.	Technically,	I'm	just	on	a	really	long	leave.	Unlike
some	students,	I	loved	college.	I	thought	it	was	fun	to	sit	around	and	talk	with
so	many	smart	people	my	own	age.	However,	I	felt	the	window	of
opportunity	to	start	a	software	company	might	not	open	again.	So	I	dove	into
the	world	of	business	when	I	was	nineteen	years	old.
From	the	start,	Paul	and	I	funded	everything	ourselves.	Each	of	us	had	saved
some	money.	Paul	had	been	well	paid	at	Honeywell,	and	some	of	the	money	I
had	came	from	late-night	poker	games	in	the	dorm.	Fortunately,	our	company
didn't	require	massive	funding.
People	often	ask	me	to	explain	Microsoft's	success.	They	want	to	know	the
secret	of	getting	from	a	two-man,	shoestring	operation	to	a	company	with
17,000	employees	and	more	than	$6	billion	a	year	in	sales.	Of	course,	there	is
no	simple	answer,	and	luck	played	a	role,	but	I	think	the	most	important
element	was	our	original	vision.
We	glimpsed	what	lay	beyond	that	Intel	8080	chip,	and	then	acted	on	it.	We
asked,	"What	if	computing	were	nearly	free?"	We	believed	there	would	be
computers	everywhere	because	of	cheap	computing	power	and	great	new
software	that	would	take	advantage	of	it.	We	set	up	shop	betting	on	the	former
and	producing	the	latter	when	no	one	else	was.	Our	initial	insight	made
everything	else	a	bit	easier.	We	were	in	the	right	place	at	the	right	time.	We
got	there	first	and	our	early	success	gave	us	the	chance	to	hire	many	smart
people.	We	built	a	worldwide	sales	force	and	used	the	revenue	it	generated	to
fund	new	products.	From	the	beginning	we	set	off	down	a	road	that	was
headed	in	the	right	direction.
Now	there	is	a	new	horizon,	and	the	relevant	question	is,	"What	if
communicating	were	almost	free?"	The	idea	of	interconnecting	all	homes	and
offices	to	a	high-speed	network	has	ignited	this	nation's	imagination	as
nothing	has	since	the	space	program.	And	not	just	this	nation's—imaginations
around	the	world	have	caught	fire.	Thousands	of	companies	are	committed	to
the	same	vision,	so	individual	focus,	understanding	of	the	intermediate	steps,
and	execution	will	determine	their	relative	successes.
I	spend	a	good	deal	of	time	thinking	about	business	because	I	enjoy	my	work
so	much.	Today,	a	lot	of	my	thoughts	are	about	the	highway.	Twenty	years
ago,	when	I	was	thinking	about	the	future	of	microchip	personal	computers,	I
couldn't	be	certain	where	they	were	leading	me	either.	I	kept	to	my	course,
however,	and	had	confidence	we	were	moving	in	the	right	direction	to	be
where	we	wanted	to	be	when	everything	became	clear.	There's	a	lot	more	at

stake	now,	but	I	feel	that	same	way	again.	It's	nerve-wracking,	but
exhilarating	too.
All	sorts	of	individuals	and	companies	are	betting	their	futures	on	building	the
elements	that	will	make	the	information	highway	a	reality.	At	Microsoft,
we're	working	hard	to	figure	out	how	to	evolve	from	where	we	are	today	to
the	point	where	we	can	unleash	the	full	potential	of	the	new	advances	in
technology.	These	are	exciting	times,	not	only	for	the	companies	involved	but
for	everyone	who	will	realize	the	benefits	of	this	revolution.

2
THE	BEGINNING	OF
THE	INFORMATION	AGE
The	first	time	I	heard	the	term	"Information	Age"	I	was	tantalized.	I	knew
about	the	Iron	Age	and	the	Bronze	Age,	periods	of	history	named	for	the	new
materials	men	used	to	make	their	tools	and	weapons.	Those	were	specific
eras.	Then	I	read	academics	predicting	that	countries	will	be	fighting	over	the
control	of	information,	not	natural	resources.	This	sounded	intriguing	too,	but
what	did	they	mean	by	information?
The	claim	that	information	would	define	the	future	reminded	me	of	the
famous	party	scene	in	the	1967	movie	The	Graduate.	A	businessman
buttonholes	Benjamin,	the	college	graduate	played	by	Dustin	Hoffman,	and
offers	him	a	single	word	of	unsolicited	career	advice:	"Plastics."	I	wondered
whether,	if	the	scene	had	been	written	a	few	decades	later,	the	businessman's
advice	would	have	been:	"One	word,	Benjamin.	'Information.'	"
I	imagined	nonsensical	conversations	around	a	future	office	watercooler:
"How	much	information	do	you	have?"	"Switzerland	is	a	great	country
because	of	all	the	information	they	have	there!"	"I	hear	the	Information	Price
Index	is	going	up!"
It	sounds	nonsensical	because	information	isn't	as	tangible	or	measurable	as
the	materials	that	defined	previous	ages,	but	information	has	become
increasingly	important	to	us.	The	information	revolution	is	just	beginning.
The	cost	of	communications	will	drop	as	precipitously	as	the	cost	of
computing	already	has.	When	it	gets	low	enough	and	is	combined	with	other
advances	in	technology,	"information	highway"	will	no	longer	be	just	a	phrase
for	eager	executives	and	excited	politicians.	It	will	be	as	real	and	as	far-
reaching	as	"electricity."	To	understand	why	information	is	going	to	be	so
central,	it's	important	to	know	how	technology	is	changing	the	ways	we
handle	information.
The	majority	of	this	chapter	is	devoted	to	such	an	explanation.	The	material
that	follows	is	to	give	less-informed	readers	without	a	background	in
computer	principles	and	history	sufficient	information	to	enjoy	the	rest	of	the
material	in	the	book.	If	you	understand	how	digital	computers	work,	you

probably	already	know	the	material	cold,	so	feel	free	to	skip	to	chapter	3.
The	most	fundamental	difference	we'll	see	in	future	information	is	that	almost
all	of	it	will	be	digital.	Whole	printed	libraries	are	already	being	scanned	and
stored	as	electronic	data	on	disks	and	CD-ROMs.	Newspapers	and	magazines
are	now	often	completely	composed	in	electronic	form	and	printed	on	paper
as	a	convenience	for	distribution.	The	electronic	information	is	stored
permanently—or	for	as	long	as	anyone	wants	it—in	computer	databases:
giant	banks	of	journalistic	data	accessible	through	on-line	services.
Photographs,	films,	and	videos	are	all	being	converted	into	digital
information.	Every	year,	better	methods	are	being	devised	to	quantify
information	and	distil======================================================== o	try	to	put	into
perspective	what's	going	on.
In	the	rush	to	build	the	information	highway,	no	one	has	seen	any	gold	yet,
and	there's	a	lot	of	investing	to	be	done	before	anyone	does.	The	investments
will	be	driven	by	faith	that	the	market	will	be	large.	Neither	the	full	highway
nor	the	market	will	exist	until	a	broadband	network	has	been	brought	to	most
homes	and	businesses.	Before	that	can	happen,	the	software	platforms,
applications,	networks,	servers,	and	information	appliances	that	will	make	up
the	highway	all	have	to	be	built	and	deployed.	Many	pieces	of	the	highway
won't	be	profitable	until	there	are	tens	of	millions	of	users.	Achieving	that

goal	will	require	hard	work,	technical	ingenuity,	and	money.	Today's	frenzy	is
helpful	in	this	regard,	because	it	encourages	investment	and	experimentation.
No	one	yet	knows	for	sure	what	the	public	wants	from	the	information
highway.	The	public	itself	can't	know,	because	it	hasn't	had	experience	with
video-capable	interactive	networks	and	applications.	Some	early	technology
has	been	tried,	but	there	have	been	only	a	few	such	trials.	They	have	offered
movies,	some	shopping,	and	a	lot	of	novelty,	which	soon	wears	off.	As	a
result,	all	that	has	really	been	learned	so	far	is	that	limited	interactive	systems
generate	limited	results.	It	will	be	impossible	to	get	much	of	a	sense	of	the
highway's	real	potential	until	dozens	of	new	applications	have	been	built.
However,	it's	tough	to	justify	building	applications	without	confidence	in	the
market.	Until	at	least	one	credible	trial	proves	that	the	revenue	generated	can
justify	the	fixed	costs	of	the	system,	everyone	who	insists	his	company	will
spend	billions	building	the	information	highway	to	connect	it	to	homes	is
posturing.	My	view	is	that	the	highway	won't	be	a	sudden,	revolutionary
creation	but	that	the	Internet,	along	with	evolution	in	the	PC	and	PC	software,
will	guide	us	step	by	step	to	the	full	system.
Some	posturing	is	unfairly	elevating	expectations	and	contributing	to	the
excesses	of	Information	Highway	Frenzy.	A	surprising	number	of	people	are
speculating	about	the	direction	technology	will	take.	Some	of	these
conjectures	ignore	practicality	or	preferences	the	public	has	already
demonstrated	or	are	unrealistic	about	how	soon	the	pieces	will	come	together.
Everyone	should	be	free	to	theorize,	but	speculation	suggesting	that	the	full
information	highway's	major	impact	on	consumers	will	come	before	the	turn
of	the	century	is	flat	wrong.
Companies	investing	now	in	the	information	highway	are,	at	best,	making
informed	guesses.	Skeptics	bring	up	good	reasons	why	they	think	it	won't	be
as	big	or	early	an	opportunity	as	I	think	it	will	be.	I	believe	in	this	business.
Microsoft	is	investing	more	than	$100	million	a	year	on	research	and
development	for	the	highway.	It	will	almost	certainly	take	five	years	or	more
of	this	kind	of	investing	before	the	results	of	the	R&D	bring	in	enough
revenue	to	make	the	money	back,	so	we're	making	a	$500	million	bet.	It	could
prove	to	be	a	half-billion-dollar	losing	bet.	Our	shareholders	are	allowing	us
to	make	it	on	the	basis	of	our	previous	successes,	but	that's	no	guarantee.
Naturally	we	expect	we'll	be	successful,	and	like	the	others	running	the	race,
we	have	a	rationale	for	why.	We	believe	our	software-development	skills	and
our	commitment	to	PC	evolution	will	allow	us	to	get	a	return	on	our
investment.

Comprehensive	trials	of	broadband	connections	to	PCs	and	television	sets
should	get	under	way	in	1996	in	North	America,	Europe,	and	Asia,	financed
by	companies	willing	to	take	a	risk	and	hoping	that	the	results	will	give	them
a	head	start.	Some	of	the	trials	will	be	"me	too"	efforts	aimed	at	showing	that
a	particular	network	operator	can	build	and	operate	a	high-bandwidth
network.	The	primary	goal	of	the	trials	should	be	to	make	available	a	platform
for	software	developers	to	build	and	explore	new	applications	on,	to	test	the
applications'	appeal	and	financial	viability.
When	Paul	Allen	and	I	saw	that	picture	of	the	first	Altair	computer,	we	could
only	guess	at	the	wealth	of	applications	it	would	inspire.	We	knew
applications	would	be	developed	but	we	didn't	know	what	they	would	be.
Some	were	predictable—for	example,	programs	that	would	let	a	PC	function
as	the	terminal	for	a	mainframe	computer—but	the	most	important
applications,	such	as	the	VisiCalc	spreadsheets,	were	unexpected.
These	forthcoming	trials	will	give	companies	the	opportunity	to	look	for	the
equivalents	of	the	spreadsheet—unexpected	killer	applications	and	services
that	will	capture	the	imagination	of	consumers—and	build	a	financial	case	for
rolling	out	the	highway.	It's	almost	impossible	to	guess	what	applications	will
or	won't	appeal	to	the	public.	Customers'	needs	and	desires	are	so	personal.
For	instance,	I	hope	to	be	able	to	use	the	highway	to	stay	up-to-date	on
medical	advances.	I'd	like	to	find	out	about	health	risks	for	someone	in	my
age	group,	and	ways	to	avoid	them.	So	I	want	fitness	and	medical	applications
as	well	as	ones	that	would	enable	me	to	continue	educating	myself	in	other
areas	I'm	interested	in.	But	that's	just	me.	Will	other	users	want	medical
advice?	New	kinds	of	games?	New	ways	of	meeting	people?	Home	shopping?
Or	just	a	few	more	movies?
The	trials	will	determine	which	are	the	most	popular	applications	and
services.	These	will	probably	include	simple	extensions	of	existing
communication	functions,	such	as	video-on-demand	and	high-speed
connections	between	personal	computers.	In	addition,	there	will	be	a	few	wild
new	services	that	catch	the	fancy	of	the	public	and	inspire	further	innovation,
investment,	and	entrepreneurship.	Those	are	what	I'm	looking	forward	to
seeing.	If	the	early	trials	don't	excite	consumers,	there	will	have	to	be	more
trials,	and	the	building	of	the	full	highway	will	be	delayed.	In	the	meantime,
the	Internet,	connected	PCs,	and	PC	software	will	continue	to	improve	and
become	an	even	better	foundation	to	build	on.	Hardware	and	software	prices
will	continue	to	come	down.
It's	interesting	to	watch	how	different	large	companies	respond	to	these

opportunities.	No	one	wants	to	admit	to	uncertainty.	Phone	and	cable
companies,	TV	stations	and	networks,	computer	hardware	and	software
companies,	newspapers,	magazines,	movie	studios,	and	even	individual
authors	are	all	formulating	strategies.	From	a	distance	their	plans	appear
similar,	but	the	details	are	really	quite	different.	It's	like	the	old	story	about
the	blind	men	and	the	elephant.	Each	one	has	a	hold	of	a	different	part	of	the
elephant	and	from	his	own	small	amount	of	information	is	drawing	sweeping
and	erroneous	conclusions	about	what	the	whole	animal	looks	like.	Here,
instead	of	trying	to	guess	the	appearance	of	a	large	beast,	we're	investing
billions	of	dollars	based	on	a	vague	understanding	of	the	true	shape	of	the
market.
Competition	is	a	boon	for	consumers,	but	it	can	be	tough	on	investors,
especially	those	who	invest	in	a	product	that	doesn't	exist	yet.	At	the	moment
there	is	a	nonexistent	business	being	called	the	"information	highway."	It	has
generated	zero	dollars	in	revenue.	The	building	of	the	highway	will	be	a
learning	process,	and	some	companies	will	lose	their	shirts.	What	seem	to	be
lucrative	niches	today	may	wind	up	as	highly	competitive	markets,	with	low
margins.	Or	they	may	prove	downright	unpopular.	Gold	rushes	tend	to
encourage	impetuous	investments.	A	few	will	pay	off,	but	when	the	frenzy	is
behind	us,	we	will	look	back	incredulously	at	the	wreckage	of	failed	ventures
and	wonder,	"Who	funded	those	companies?	What	was	going	on	in	their
minds?	Was	that	just	mania	at	work?"
Entrepreneurship	will	play	a	major	role	in	shaping	the	development	of	the
information	highway,	the	same	way	it	shaped	the	personal-computer	business.
Only	a	handful	of	companies	that	made	mainframe	software	managed	the
transition	to	personal	computers.	Most	successes	came	from	little	start-ups,
run	by	people	who	were	open	to	new	possibilities.	This	will	be	true	on	the
information	highway,	too.	For	every	large	existing	company	that	succeeds
with	a	new	application	or	service,	ten	start-ups	will	flourish	and	fifty	more
will	flash	into	existence	and	momentary	glory	before	slipping	into	obscurity.
This	is	a	hallmark	of	an	evolving	entrepreneurial	market;	rapid	innovation
occurs	on	many	fronts.	Most	of	it	will	be	unsuccessful,	regardless	of	whether
it's	attempted	by	a	large	or	a	small	company.	Large	companies	tend	to	take
fewer	risks,	but	when	they	crash	and	burn,	the	combination	of	their	sheer	ego
and	the	scale	of	their	resources	means	they	wind	up	digging	a	bigger	crater	in
the	ground.	By	comparison,	a	start-up	usually	fails	without	much	notice.	The
good	news	is	that	people	learn	from	both	the	successes	and	the	failures,	and
the	net	result	is	rapid	progress.

By	letting	the	marketplace	decide	which	companies	and	approaches	win	and
which	lose,	many	paths	are	explored	simultaneously.	Nowhere	is	the	benefit
of	a	market-driven	decision	more	apparent	than	in	an	unproven	market.	When
hundreds	of	companies	try	different	risk-taking	approaches	to	discover	the
level	of	demand,	society	gets	to	the	right	solution	a	lot	faster	than	it	would
with	any	form	of	central	planning.	The	range	of	uncertainties	about	the
information	highway	is	very	large,	but	the	marketplace	will	design	an
appropriate	system.
Governments	can	help	assure	a	strong	competitive	framework	and	should	be
willing,	though	not	overeager,	to	intercede	if	the	marketplace	fails	in	some
particular	area.	After	the	trials	have	yielded	sufficient	information,	they	can
determine	the	"rules	of	the	road"—the	basic	framework	guidelines	within
which	companies	can	compete.	But	they	should	not	attempt	to	design	or
dictate	the	nature	of	the	information	highway,	because	governments	cannot
outsmart	or	outmanage	the	competitive	marketplace,	particularly	while	there
are	still	questions	about	customer	preference	and	technological	development.
The	U.S.	government	is	deeply	involved	in	rule-making	for	comm======================================================== t	leaving	your	house.	Flexibility	is	going	to	be	increasingly
important	as	everyone	tries	to	balance	family	life	with	work	life.	You	won't
always	have	to	travel	to	see	friends	and	family	or	to	play	games.	Cultural
attractions	will	be	available	via	the	information	highway,	although	I'm	not
suggesting	that	a	Broadway	or	West	End	musical	will	be	the	same	experience
in	your	living	room	as	it	is	in	a	New	York	or	London	theater.	However,
improvements	in	screen	sizes	and	resolutions	will	enhance	all	video,
including	movies,	in	the	home.	Educational	programming	will	be	extensive.
All	of	this	will	liberate	those	who	would	like	to	abandon	city	living.
The	opening	of	the	interstate	highway	system	had	a	substantial	effect	on
where	in	the	United	States	people	chose	to	settle.	It	made	new	suburbs
accessible	and	contributed	to	the	culture	of	the	automobile.	There	will	be
significant	implications	for	city	planners,	real	estate	developers,	and	school
districts	if	the	opening	of	the	information	highway	also	encourages	people	to
move	away	from	city	centers.	If	large	pools	of	talent	disperse,	companies	will
feel	even	more	pressure	to	be	creative	about	how	to	work	with	consultants
and	employees	not	located	near	their	operations.	This	could	set	off	a	positive-
feedback	cycle,	encouraging	rural	living.
If	the	population	of	a	city	were	reduced	by	even	10	percent,	the	result	would
be	a	major	difference	in	property	values	and	wear	and	tear	on	transportation
and	other	urban	systems.	If	the	average	office	worker	in	any	major	city	stayed
home	one	or	two	days	a	week,	the	decreases	in	gasoline	consumption,	air
pollution,	and	traffic	congestion	would	be	significant.	The	net	effect,
however,	is	hard	to	foresee.	If	those	who	moved	out	of	cities	were	mostly	the
affluent	knowledge	workers,	the	urban	tax	base	would	be	reduced.	This	would
aggravate	the	inner	city's	woes	and	encourage	other	affluent	people	to	leave.
But	at	the	same	time,	the	urban	infrastructure	might	be	less	heavily	loaded.
Rents	would	fall,	creating	opportunities	for	a	better	standard	of	living	for
some	of	those	remaining	in	the	cities.

It	will	take	decades	to	implement	all	the	major	changes,	because	most	people
remain	comfortable	with	whatever	they	learn	early	and	are	reluctant	to	alter
familiar	patterns.	However,	new	generations	will	bring	new	perspectives.	Our
children	will	grow	up	comfortable	with	the	idea	of	working	with	information
tools	across	distances.	These	tools	will	be	as	natural	to	them	as	a	telephone	or
a	ballpoint	pen	is	to	us.	But	technology	isn't	going	to	wait	until	people	are
ready	for	it.	Within	the	next	ten	years	we	will	start	to	see	substantial	shifts	in
how	and	where	we	work,	the	companies	we	work	for,	and	the	places	we
choose	to	live.	My	advice	is	to	try	to	find	out	as	much	as	possible	about	the
technology	that	will	touch	you.	The	more	you	know	about	it,	the	less
disconcerting	it	will	seem.	Technology's	role	is	to	provide	more	flexibility	and
efficiency.	Forward-looking	business	managers	will	have	lots	of	opportunities
to	perform	better	in	the	years	ahead.

8
FRICTION-FREE
CAPITALISM
When	Adam	Smith	described	the	concept	of	markets	in	The	Wealth	of	Nations
in	1776,	he	theorized	that	if	every	buyer	knew	every	seller's	price,	and	every
seller	knew	what	every	buyer	was	willing	to	pay,	everyone	in	the	"market"
would	be	able	to	make	fully	informed	decisions	and	society's	resources	would
be	distributed	efficiently.	To	date	we	haven't	achieved	Smith's	ideal	because
would-be	buyers	and	would-be	sellers	seldom	have	complete	information
about	one	another.
Not	many	consumers	looking	to	buy	a	car	stereo	have	the	time	or	patience	to
canvass	every	dealer	and	thus	are	acting	on	imperfect	and	limited
information.	If	you've	bought	a	product	for	$500	and	see	it	advertised	in	the
paper	for	$300	a	week	or	two	later,	you	feel	foolish	for	overpaying.	But	you
feel	a	lot	worse	if	you	end	up	in	the	wrong	job	because	you	haven't	done
thorough	enough	research.
A	few	markets	are	already	working	fairly	close	to	Smith's	ideal.	Investors
buying	and	selling	currency	and	certain	other	commodities	participate	in
efficient	electronic	markets	that	provide	nearly	complete	instantaneous
information	about	worldwide	supply,	demand,	and	prices.	Everyone	gets
pretty	much	the	same	deal	because	news	about	all	offers,	bids,	and
transactions	speeds	across	wires	to	trading	desks	everywhere.	However,	most
marketplaces	are	very	inefficient.	For	instance,	if	you	are	trying	to	find	a
doctor,	lawyer,	accountant,	or	similar	professional,	or	are	buying	a	house,
information	is	incomplete	and	comparisons	are	difficult	to	make.
The	information	highway	will	extend	the	electronic	marketplace	and	make	it
the	ultimate	go-between,	the	universal	middleman.	Often	the	only	humans
involved	in	a	transaction	will	be	the	actual	buyer	and	seller.	All	the	goods	for
sale	in	the	world	will	be	available	for	you	to	examine,	compare,	and,	often,
customize.	When	you	want	to	buy	something	you'll	be	able	to	tell	your
computer	to	find	it	for	you	at	the	best	price	offered	by	any	acceptable	source
or	ask	your	computer	to	"haggle"	with	the	computers	of	various	sellers.
Information	about	vendors	and	their	products	and	services	will	be	available	to
any	computer	connected	to	the	highway.	Servers	distributed	worldwide	will

accept	bids,	resolve	offers	into	completed	transactions,	control	authentication
and	security,	and	handle	all	other	aspects	of	the	marketplace,	including	the
transfer	of	funds.	This	will	carry	us	into	a	new	world	of	low-friction,	low-
overhead	capitalism,	in	which	market	information	will	be	plentiful	and
transaction	costs	low.	It	will	be	a	shopper's	heaven.
Every	market,	from	a	bazaar	to	the	highway,	facilitates	competitive	pricing
and	allows	goods	to	move	from	seller	to	buyer	efficiently	with	modest
friction.	This	is	thanks	to	the	market	makers—those	whose	job	it	is	to	bring
buyers	and	sellers	together.	As	the	information	highway	assumes	the	role	of
market	maker	in	realm	after	realm,	traditional	middlemen	will	have	to
contribute	real	value	to	a	transaction	to	justify	a	commission.	For	example,
stores	and	services	that	until	now	have	profited	just	because	they	are
"there"—in	a	particular	geographic	location	may	find	they	have	lost	that
advantage.	But	those	who	provide	added	value	will	not	only	survive,	they	will
thrive,	because	the	information	highway	will	let	them	make	their	services
available	to	customers	everywhere.
This	idea	will	scare	a	lot	of	people.	Most	change	feels	a	bit	threatening,	and	I
expect	dramatic	changes	in	the	business	of	retailing	as	commerce	flows	across
the	highway.	But,	as	with	so	many	changes,	I	think	once	we	get	used	to	it
we'll	wonder	how	we	did	without	it.	The	consumer	will	get	not	only
competitive	cost	savings,	but	also	a	much	wider	variety	of	products	and
services	to	choose	from.	Although	there	may	be	fewer	stores,	if	people
continue	to	enjoy	shopping	in	today's	outlets,	as	many	stores	as	their	demand
justifies	will	remain	available.	And	because	the	highway	will	simplify	and
standardize	shopping,	it	will	also	save	time.	If	you	are	buying	a	gift	for	a
loved	one,	you	will	be	able	to	consider	more	choices	and	often	you	will	find
something	more	imaginative.	You	could	use	the	time	saved	from	shopping	to
think	up	a	fun	clue	to	put	on	the	package,	or	create	a	personalized	card.	Or
you	could	spend	the	time	you	save	with	the	recipient.
We	all	recognize	the	value	of	a	knowledgeable	salesperson	when	we	are
shopping	for	insurance,	clothes,	investments,	jewelry,	a	camera,	a	home
appliance,	or	a	home.	We	also	know	the	salesperson's	advice	is	sometimes
biased	because	he	or	she	is	ultimately	hoping	to	make	a	sale	from	a	particular
inventory.
On	the	information	highway	lots	of	product	information	will	be	available
directly	from	manufacturers.	As	they	do	today,	vendors	will	use	a	variety	of
entertaining	and	provocative	techniques	to	attract	us.	Advertising	will	evolve
into	a	hybrid,	combining	today's	television	commercials,	magazine	ads,	and	a

detailed	sales	brochure.	If	an	ad	catches	your	attention,	you'll	be	able	to
request	additional	information	directly	and	very	easily.	Links	will	let	you
navigate	through	whatever	information	the	advertiser	has	made	available,
which	might	be	product	manuals	consisting	of	video,	audio,	and	text.	Vendors
will	make	getting	information	about	their	products	as	simple	as	possible.
At	Microsoft,	we're	looking	forward	to	using	the	highway	to	get	information
out	about	our	products.	Today	we	print	millions	of	pages	of	product	brochures
and	data	sheets,	and	mail	them	out	to	people	who	ask	for	them.	But	we	never
know	how	much	information	to	put	onto	a	data	sheet;	we	don't	want	to
intimidate	casual	inquirers,	and	yet	there	are	people	out	there	who	want	to
know	all	the	detailed	product	specifications.	Also,	since	the	information
changes	fairly	rapidly,	we	are	often	in	the	position	of	having	just	printed	tens
of	thousands	of	copies	of	some	brochure,	and	then	having	to	throw	them	out
because	they	describe	a	version	of	a	product	we're	replacing.	We	expect	a
high	percentage	of	our	information	dissemination	will	shift	to	electronic
inquiry,	particularly	because	we	serve	computer	users.	We	have	already
eliminated	the	printing	of	millions	of	pages	of	paper	by	sending	quarterly	CD-
ROMs	and	using	on-line	services	to	reach	professional	software	developers,
some	of	Microsoft's	most	sophisticated	customers.
But	you	won't	have	to	depend	only	on	what	we	or	any	other	manufacturer
tells	you.	You'll	be	able	to	examine	product	reviews	in	search	of	less	biased
information.	After	you've	seen	the	advertising,	reviews,	and	multi-media
manuals,	you	might	ask	for	relevant	government	regulatory	data.	You'll	check
to	see	if	the	vendor	has	surveyed	owners.	Then	you	might	dig	deeper	into	one
area	of	particular	interest	to	you—for	instance,	durability.	Or	you	could	seek
the	advice	of	sales	consultants,	human	or	electronic,	who	will	create	and
publish	specialized	reviews	for	all	kinds	of	products,	from	drill	bits	t======================================================== rted	by	posts	of	Douglas	fir.	The	house	has	lots	of	exposed
horizontal	beams	and	vertical	supports.	You'll	have	a	great	view	of	the	lake.
My	hope	is	that	the	view	and	the	Douglas	fir,	rather	than	the	electronic	pin,

will	be	what	interest	you	most	as	you	descend	toward	the	ground	floor.	Most
of	the	wood	came	from	an	eighty-year-old	Weyerhaeuser	lumber	mill	that	was
being	torn	down	out	on	the	Columbia	River.	This	wood,	harvested	nearly	a
hundred	years	ago,	came	from	trees	that	were	as	much	as	350	feet	tall,
between	8	and	15	feet	in	diameter.	Douglas	fir	is	one	of	the	strongest	woods
in	the	world	for	its	weight.	Unfortunately,	new-growth	Douglas	fir	tends	to
split	if	you	try	to	mill	it	into	beams,	because	the	grain	is	not	as	tight	in	a
seventy-year-old	tree	as	it	is	in	a	five-hundred-year-old	one.	Almost	all	of	the
old-growth	Douglas	fir	has	been	harvested	now,	and	any	that	remains	should
be	preserved.	I	was	lucky	to	find	old-growth	timbers	that	could	be	reused.
The	fir	beams	support	the	two	floors	of	private	living	spaces	you'll	be
descending	past.	Privacy	is	important.	I	want	a	house	that	will	still	feel	like
home	even	when	guests	are	enjoying	other	parts	of	it.
At	the	bottom	of	the	stairs,	the	theater	will	be	on	the	right,	and	to	the	left,	on
the	south	side,	will	be	the	reception	hall.	As	you	step	into	the	reception	hall,
on	your	right	will	be	a	series	of	sliding	glass	doors	that	open	onto	a	terrace
leading	to	the	lake.	Recessed	into	the	east	wall	will	be	twenty-four	video
monitors,	each	with	a	40-inch	picture	tube,	stacked	four	high	and	six	across.
These	monitors	will	work	cooperatively	to	display	large	images	for	artistic,
entertainment,	or	business	purposes.	I	had	hoped	that	when	the	monitors
weren't	in	use	they	could	literally	disappear	into	the	woodwork.	I	wanted	the
screens	to	display	woodgrain	patterns	that	matched	their	surroundings.
Unfortunately	I	could	never	achieve	anything	convincing	with	current
technology,	because	a	monitor	emits	light	while	real	wood	reflects	it.	So	I
settled	for	having	the	monitors	disappear	behind	wood	panels	when	they're
not	in	use.
The	electronic	pin	you	wear	will	tell	the	house	who	and	where	you	are,	and
the	house	will	use	this	information	to	try	to	meet	and	even	anticipate	your
needs—all	as	unobtrusively	as	possible.	Someday,	instead	of	needing	the	pin,
it	might	be	possible	to	have	a	camera	system	with	visual-recognition
capabilities,	but	that's	beyond	current	technology.	When	it's	dark	outside,	the
pin	will	cause	a	moving	zone	of	light	to	accompany	you	through	the	house.
Unoccupied	rooms	will	be	unlit.	As	you	walk	down	a	hallway,	you	might	not
notice	the	lights	ahead	of	you	gradually	coming	up	to	full	brightness	and	the
lights	behind	you	fading.	Music	will	move	with	you,	too.	It	will	seem	to	be
everywhere,	although,	in	fact,	other	people	in	the	house	will	be	hearing
entirely	different	music	or	nothing	at	all.	A	movie	or	the	news	will	be	able	to
follow	you	around	the	house,	too.	If	you	get	a	phone	call,	only	the	handset

nearest	you	will	ring.
Computer	rendering	of	the	Gateses'	future	home,	showing	the	staircase	and
formal	dining	room
You	won't	be	confronted	by	the	technology,	but	it	will	be	readily	and	easily
available.	Handheld	remote	controls	will	put	you	in	charge	of	your	immediate
environment	and	of	the	house's	entertainment	system.	The	remote	will	extend
the	capabilities	of	the	pin.	It	will	not	only	let	the	house	identify	and	locate
you,	it	will	also	allow	you	to	give	instructions.	You'll	use	the	controls	to	tell
the	monitors	in	a	room	to	become	visible	and	what	to	display.	You'll	be	able
to	choose	from	among	thousands	of	pictures,	recordings,	movies,	and
television	programs,	and	you'll	have	all	sorts	of	options	available	for	selecting
information.
A	console,	which	will	be	the	equivalent	of	a	keyboard	that	lets	you	give	very
specific	instructions,	will	be	discreetly	visible	in	each	room.	I	want	consoles
that	are	noticeable	to	those	who	need	them,	but	that	don't	invite	attention.	A
characteristic,	easy-to-identify	feature	will	alert	the	user	to	the	identity	and
whereabouts	of	the	consoles.	The	telephone	has	already	made	this	transition.
It	doesn't	attract	particular	attention	to	itself;	most	of	us	are	comfortable
putting	a	nondescript	phone	on	an	end	table.
Every	computerized	system	should	be	made	so	simple	and	natural	to	use	that
people	don't	give	it	a	second	thought.	But	simple	is	difficult.	Still,	computers
get	easier	to	use	every	year,	and	trial-and-error	in	my	house	will	help	us	learn
how	to	create	a	really	simple	system.	You	will	be	able	to	be	indirect	about
your	instructions	and	requests.	For	example,	you	won't	have	to	ask	for	a	song
by	name.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	the	house	to	play	the	latest	hits,	or	songs	by
a	particular	artist,	or	songs	that	were	performed	at	Woodstock,	or	music
composed	in	eighteenth-century	Vienna,	or	songs	with	the	word	"yellow"	in
their	titles.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	for	songs	that	you	have	categorized	with	a
certain	adjective,	or	songs	that	haven't	been	played	before	when	a	particular

person	was	visiting	the	house.	I	might	program	classical	music	as	background
for	contemplating	and	something	more	modern	and	energetic	to	play	while
I'm	exercising.	If	you	want	to	watch	the	movie	that	won	the	1957	Academy
Award	for	best	picture,	you	can	ask	for	it	that	way—and	see	The	Bridge	on
the	River	Kwai.	You	could	find	the	same	movie	by	asking	for	films	starring
Alec	Guinness	or	William	Holden	or	ones	about	prison	camps.
Prototype	of	a	home	control	console
If	you're	planning	to	visit	Hong	Kong	soon,	you	might	ask	the	screen	in	your
room	to	show	you	pictures	of	the	city.	It	will	seem	to	you	as	if	the
photographs	are	displayed	everywhere,	although	actually	the	images	will
materialize	on	the	walls	of	rooms	just	before	you	walk	in	and	vanish	after	you
leave.	If	you	and	I	are	enjoying	different	things	and	one	of	us	walks	into	a
room	where	the	other	is	sitting,	the	house	will	follow	predetermined	rules
about	what	to	do.	For	example,	the	house	might	continue	the	audio	and	visual
imagery	for	the	person	who	was	in	the	room	first,	or	it	might	change
programming	to	something	it	knows	both	of	us	like.
A	house	that	tracks	its	occupants	in	order	to	meet	their	particular	needs
combines	two	traditions.	The	first	is	the	tradition	of	unobtrusive	service,	and
the	other	is	that	an	object	we	carry	entitles	us	to	be	treated	in	a	certain	way.
You're	already	used	to	the	idea	that	an	object	can	authenticate	you.	It	can
inform	people	or	machinery	that	you	have	permission	to	do	something	such	as
open	a	locked	door,	get	on	an	airplane,	or	use	a	specific	line	of	credit—yours
—to	make	a	purchase.	Keys,	electronic	entry	cards,	driver's	licenses,
passports,	name	badges,	credit	cards,	and	tickets	are	all	forms	of
authentication.	If	I	give	you	the	key	to	my	car,	the	car	allows	you	to	get	in,
start	the	engine,	and	drive	away.	You	might	say	that	the	car	trusts	you	because
you	carry	its	keys.	If	I	give	a	parking	attendant	a	key	that	fits	my	automobile's
ignition	but	not	its	trunk,	the	car	lets	him	drive	but	not	open	the	trunk.	It's	no
different	with	my	house,	which	will	make	various	amenities	available	to	you
based	on	the	electronic	key	you	carry.

None	of	this	is	really	so	radical.	Some	visionaries	are	predicting	that	within
the	next	ten	years	there	will	be	lots	of	robots	wandering	around	helping	us	out
with	various	household	chores.	I	am	certainly	not	preparing	for	that,	because	I
think	it	will	be	many	decades	before	robots	are	practical.	The	only	ones	I
expect	to	see	in	widespread	use	soon	are	intelligent	toys.	Kids	will	be	able	to
program	them	to	respond	to	different	situations	and	even	to	speak	in	the
voices	of	favorite	characters.	These	toy	robots	will	be	able	to	be	programmed
in	a	limited	number	of	ways.	They	will	have	limited	vision,	know	the	distance
to	the	wall	in	each	direction,	the	time,	the	lighting	conditions,	and	accept
limited	speech	input.	I	think	it	would	have	been	cool	to	have	had	a	toy-size
car	I	could	have	talked	to	and	programmed	to	respond	to	my	instructions.
Other	than	toys,	the	other	major	uses	for	robotic	devices	I	see	are	for	military
applications.	The	reason	I	doubt	intelligent	robots	will	provide	much	help	in
actual	housework	in	the	foreseeable	future	is	that	it	takes	a	great	deal	of	visual
intelligence	and	dexterity	to	prepare	food	or	change	diapers.	Pool	cleaning,
lawn	mowing,	and	perhaps	even	vacuum	cleaning	can	be	done	with	a
relatively	dumb	system,	but	once	we	get	beyond	tasks	where	you	just	push
something	around,	it	is	very	hard	to	design	a	machine	that	would	be	able	to
recognize	and	respond	to	all	of	the	contingencies	that	come	along.
The	systems	I	am	building	into	the	house	are	designed	to	make	it	easier	to	live
in,	but	I	won't	know	for	sure	if	they	are	worthwhile	until	I	move	in.	I'm
experimenting	and	learning	all	the	time.	The	design	team	used	my	guest
cottage,	which	was	built	before	the	house,	as	a	sort	of	test	laboratory	for	home
instrumentation.	Because	some	people	like	the	temperature	warmer	than
others	do,	the	cottage's	software	sets	its	temperature	in	reaction	to	who	is
inside,	and	the	time	of	day.	The	cottage	knows	to	make	the	temperature	toasty
on	a	cold	morning	before	a	guest	is	out	of	bed.	In	the	evening,	when	it's	dark
outside,	the	cottage's	lights	dim	if	a	television	is	on.	If	someone	is	in	the
cottage	during	the	day,	the	cottage	matches	its	inside	brightness	to	that	of	the
outdoors.	Of	course	the	occupant	can	always	give	explicit	directions	to
overrule	the	settings.
This	sort	of	instrumentation	can	provide	significant	energy	savings.	A	number
of	electric	utilities	are	testing	a	network	to	monitor	the	use	of	energy	in
individual	homes.	This	would	end	the	expensive	practice	of	having	meter
readers	come	to	each	home	every	month	or	two,	but	more	important,
computers	in	the	home	and	at	the	utility	company	will	be	able	to	manage	the
minute-by-minute	demand	for	power	at	various	times	of	the	day.	Energy-
demand	management	can	save	a	lot======================================================== o	try	to	put	into
perspective	what's	going	on.
In	the	rush	to	build	the	information	highway,	no	one	has	seen	any	gold	yet,
and	there's	a	lot	of	investing	to	be	done	before	anyone	does.	The	investments
will	be	driven	by	faith	that	the	market	will	be	large.	Neither	the	full	highway
nor	the	market	will	exist	until	a	broadband	network	has	been	brought	to	most
homes	and	businesses.	Before	that	can	happen,	the	software	platforms,
applications,	networks,	servers,	and	information	appliances	that	will	make	up
the	highway	all	have	to	be	built	and	deployed.	Many	pieces	of	the	highway
won't	be	profitable	until	there	are	tens	of	millions	of	users.	Achieving	that

goal	will	require	hard	work,	technical	ingenuity,	and	money.	Today's	frenzy	is
helpful	in	this	regard,	because	it	encourages	investment	and	experimentation.
No	one	yet	knows	for	sure	what	the	public	wants	from	the	information
highway.	The	public	itself	can't	know,	because	it	hasn't	had	experience	with
video-capable	interactive	networks	and	applications.	Some	early	technology
has	been	tried,	but	there	have	been	only	a	few	such	trials.	They	have	offered
movies,	some	shopping,	and	a	lot	of	novelty,	which	soon	wears	off.	As	a
result,	all	that	has	really	been	learned	so	far	is	that	limited	interactive	systems
generate	limited	results.	It	will	be	impossible	to	get	much	of	a	sense	of	the
highway's	real	potential	until	dozens	of	new	applications	have	been	built.
However,	it's	tough	to	justify	building	applications	without	confidence	in	the
market.	Until	at	least	one	credible	trial	proves	that	the	revenue	generated	can
justify	the	fixed	costs	of	the	system,	everyone	who	insists	his	company	will
spend	billions	building	the	information	highway	to	connect	it	to	homes	is
posturing.	My	view	is	that	the	highway	won't	be	a	sudden,	revolutionary
creation	but	that	the	Internet,	along	with	evolution	in	the	PC	and	PC	software,
will	guide	us	step	by	step	to	the	full	system.
Some	posturing	is	unfairly	elevating	expectations	and	contributing	to	the
excesses	of	Information	Highway	Frenzy.	A	surprising	number	of	people	are
speculating	about	the	direction	technology	will	take.	Some	of	these
conjectures	ignore	practicality	or	preferences	the	public	has	already
demonstrated	or	are	unrealistic	about	how	soon	the	pieces	will	come	together.
Everyone	should	be	free	to	theorize,	but	speculation	suggesting	that	the	full
information	highway's	major	impact	on	consumers	will	come	before	the	turn
of	the	century	is	flat	wrong.
Companies	investing	now	in	the	information	highway	are,	at	best,	making
informed	guesses.	Skeptics	bring	up	good	reasons	why	they	think	it	won't	be
as	big	or	early	an	opportunity	as	I	think	it	will	be.	I	believe	in	this	business.
Microsoft	is	investing	more	than	$100	million	a	year	on	research	and
development	for	the	highway.	It	will	almost	certainly	take	five	years	or	more
of	this	kind	of	investing	before	the	results	of	the	R&D	bring	in	enough
revenue	to	make	the	money	back,	so	we're	making	a	$500	million	bet.	It	could
prove	to	be	a	half-billion-dollar	losing	bet.	Our	shareholders	are	allowing	us
to	make	it	on	the	basis	of	our	previous	successes,	but	that's	no	guarantee.
Naturally	we	expect	we'll	be	successful,	and	like	the	others	running	the	race,
we	have	a	rationale	for	why.	We	believe	our	software-development	skills	and
our	commitment	to	PC	evolution	will	allow	us	to	get	a	return	on	our
investment.

Comprehensive	trials	of	broadband	connections	to	PCs	and	television	sets
should	get	under	way	in	1996	in	North	America,	Europe,	and	Asia,	financed
by	companies	willing	to	take	a	risk	and	hoping	that	the	results	will	give	them
a	head	start.	Some	of	the	trials	will	be	"me	too"	efforts	aimed	at	showing	that
a	particular	network	operator	can	build	and	operate	a	high-bandwidth
network.	The	primary	goal	of	the	trials	should	be	to	make	available	a	platform
for	software	developers	to	build	and	explore	new	applications	on,	to	test	the
applications'	appeal	and	financial	viability.
When	Paul	Allen	and	I	saw	that	picture	of	the	first	Altair	computer,	we	could
only	guess	at	the	wealth	of	applications	it	would	inspire.	We	knew
applications	would	be	developed	but	we	didn't	know	what	they	would	be.
Some	were	predictable—for	example,	programs	that	would	let	a	PC	function
as	the	terminal	for	a	mainframe	computer—but	the	most	important
applications,	such	as	the	VisiCalc	spreadsheets,	were	unexpected.
These	forthcoming	trials	will	give	companies	the	opportunity	to	look	for	the
equivalents	of	the	spreadsheet—unexpected	killer	applications	and	services
that	will	capture	the	imagination	of	consumers—and	build	a	financial	case	for
rolling	out	the	highway.	It's	almost	impossible	to	guess	what	applications	will
or	won't	appeal	to	the	public.	Customers'	needs	and	desires	are	so	personal.
For	instance,	I	hope	to	be	able	to	use	the	highway	to	stay	up-to-date	on
medical	advances.	I'd	like	to	find	out	about	health	risks	for	someone	in	my
age	group,	and	ways	to	avoid	them.	So	I	want	fitness	and	medical	applications
as	well	as	ones	that	would	enable	me	to	continue	educating	myself	in	other
areas	I'm	interested	in.	But	that's	just	me.	Will	other	users	want	medical
advice?	New	kinds	of	games?	New	ways	of	meeting	people?	Home	shopping?
Or	just	a	few	more	movies?
The	trials	will	determine	which	are	the	most	popular	applications	and
services.	These	will	probably	include	simple	extensions	of	existing
communication	functions,	such	as	video-on-demand	and	high-speed
connections	between	personal	computers.	In	addition,	there	will	be	a	few	wild
new	services	that	catch	the	fancy	of	the	public	and	inspire	further	innovation,
investment,	and	entrepreneurship.	Those	are	what	I'm	looking	forward	to
seeing.	If	the	early	trials	don't	excite	consumers,	there	will	have	to	be	more
trials,	and	the	building	of	the	full	highway	will	be	delayed.	In	the	meantime,
the	Internet,	connected	PCs,	and	PC	software	will	continue	to	improve	and
become	an	even	better	foundation	to	build	on.	Hardware	and	software	prices
will	continue	to	come	down.
It's	interesting	to	watch	how	different	large	companies	respond	to	these

opportunities.	No	one	wants	to	admit	to	uncertainty.	Phone	and	cable
companies,	TV	stations	and	networks,	computer	hardware	and	software
companies,	newspapers,	magazines,	movie	studios,	and	even	individual
authors	are	all	formulating	strategies.	From	a	distance	their	plans	appear
similar,	but	the	details	are	really	quite	different.	It's	like	the	old	story	about
the	blind	men	and	the	elephant.	Each	one	has	a	hold	of	a	different	part	of	the
elephant	and	from	his	own	small	amount	of	information	is	drawing	sweeping
and	erroneous	conclusions	about	what	the	whole	animal	looks	like.	Here,
instead	of	trying	to	guess	the	appearance	of	a	large	beast,	we're	investing
billions	of	dollars	based	on	a	vague	understanding	of	the	true	shape	of	the
market.
Competition	is	a	boon	for	consumers,	but	it	can	be	tough	on	investors,
especially	those	who	invest	in	a	product	that	doesn't	exist	yet.	At	the	moment
there	is	a	nonexistent	business	being	called	the	"information	highway."	It	has
generated	zero	dollars	in	revenue.	The	building	of	the	highway	will	be	a
learning	process,	and	some	companies	will	lose	their	shirts.	What	seem	to	be
lucrative	niches	today	may	wind	up	as	highly	competitive	markets,	with	low
margins.	Or	they	may	prove	downright	unpopular.	Gold	rushes	tend	to
encourage	impetuous	investments.	A	few	will	pay	off,	but	when	the	frenzy	is
behind	us,	we	will	look	back	incredulously	at	the	wreckage	of	failed	ventures
and	wonder,	"Who	funded	those	companies?	What	was	going	on	in	their
minds?	Was	that	just	mania	at	work?"
Entrepreneurship	will	play	a	major	role	in	shaping	the	development	of	the
information	highway,	the	same	way	it	shaped	the	personal-computer	business.
Only	a	handful	of	companies	that	made	mainframe	software	managed	the
transition	to	personal	computers.	Most	successes	came	from	little	start-ups,
run	by	people	who	were	open	to	new	possibilities.	This	will	be	true	on	the
information	highway,	too.	For	every	large	existing	company	that	succeeds
with	a	new	application	or	service,	ten	start-ups	will	flourish	and	fifty	more
will	flash	into	existence	and	momentary	glory	before	slipping	into	obscurity.
This	is	a	hallmark	of	an	evolving	entrepreneurial	market;	rapid	innovation
occurs	on	many	fronts.	Most	of	it	will	be	unsuccessful,	regardless	of	whether
it's	attempted	by	a	large	or	a	small	company.	Large	companies	tend	to	take
fewer	risks,	but	when	they	crash	and	burn,	the	combination	of	their	sheer	ego
and	the	scale	of	their	resources	means	they	wind	up	digging	a	bigger	crater	in
the	ground.	By	comparison,	a	start-up	usually	fails	without	much	notice.	The
good	news	is	that	people	learn	from	both	the	successes	and	the	failures,	and
the	net	result	is	rapid	progress.

By	letting	the	marketplace	decide	which	companies	and	approaches	win	and
which	lose,	many	paths	are	explored	simultaneously.	Nowhere	is	the	benefit
of	a	market-driven	decision	more	apparent	than	in	an	unproven	market.	When
hundreds	of	companies	try	different	risk-taking	approaches	to	discover	the
level	of	demand,	society	gets	to	the	right	solution	a	lot	faster	than	it	would
with	any	form	of	central	planning.	The	range	of	uncertainties	about	the
information	highway	is	very	large,	but	the	marketplace	will	design	an
appropriate	system.
Governments	can	help	assure	a	strong	competitive	framework	and	should	be
willing,	though	not	overeager,	to	intercede	if	the	marketplace	fails	in	some
particular	area.	After	the	trials	have	yielded	sufficient	information,	they	can
determine	the	"rules	of	the	road"—the	basic	framework	guidelines	within
which	companies	can	compete.	But	they	should	not	attempt	to	design	or
dictate	the	nature	of	the	information	highway,	because	governments	cannot
outsmart	or	outmanage	the	competitive	marketplace,	particularly	while	there
are	still	questions	about	customer	preference	and	technological	development.
The	U.S.	government	is	deeply	involved	in	rule-making	for	comm======================================================== omputers	at	an	early
age	we	can	ensure	that	they	play	their	rightful	role	in	all	the	work	that	benefits
from	computer	expertise.
My	own	experience	as	a	child,	and	that	of	my	friends	raising	children	today,
is	that	once	a	kid	is	exposed	to	computing,	he	or	she	is	hooked.	But	we	have
to	create	the	opportunity	for	that	exposure.	Schools	should	have	low-cost
access	to	computers	connected	to	the	information	highway,	and	teachers	need
to	become	comfortable	with	the	new	tools.
One	of	the	wonderful	things	about	the	information	highway	is	that	virtual
equity	is	far	easier	to	achieve	than	real-world	equity.	It	would	take	a	massive
amount	of	money	to	give	every	grammar	school	in	every	poor	area	the	same
library	resources	as	the	schools	in	Beverly	Hills.	However,	when	you	put
schools	on-line	they	all	get	the	same	access	to	information,	wherever	it	might
be	stored.	We	are	all	created	equal	in	the	virtual	world,	and	we	can	use	this
equality	to	help	address	some	of	the	sociological	problems	that	society	has	yet
to	solve	in	the	physical	world.	The	network	will	not	eliminate	barriers	of
prejudice	or	inequality,	but	it	will	be	a	powerful	force	in	that	direction.
The	question	of	how	to	price	intellectual	property,	such	as	entertainment	and
educational	materials,	is	fascinating.	Economists	understand	a	lot	about	how
the	pricing	of	classical	manufactured	goods	works.	They	can	show	how
rational	pricing	should	reflect	cost	structure	in	a	very	direct	manner.	In	a
market	with	multiple	competing	qualified	manufacturers,	prices	tend	to	drop
to	the	marginal	cost	of	making	one	more	of	whatever	they	are	selling.	But	this
model	doesn't	work	when	applied	to	intellectual	property.
A	basic	economics	course	describes	the	curves	of	supply	and	demand,	which
intersect	at	the	price	appropriate	for	a	product.	But	supply-and-demand
economics	gets	into	trouble	when	it	comes	to	intellectual	property,	because
ordinary	rules	regarding	manufacturing	costs	don't	apply.	Typically	there	are
huge	up-front	development	costs	for	intellectual	property.	These	fixed	costs
are	the	same	regardless	of	whether	one	copy	or	a	million	copies	of	the	work
are	sold.	George	Lucas's	next	movie	in	the	Star	Wars	series	will	cost	millions
to	make,	regardless	of	how	many	people	pay	to	see	it	in	theaters.

The	pricing	of	intellectual	property	is	more	complicated	than	most	pricing
because	today	it	is	relatively	inexpensive	to	manufacture	copies	of	most
intellectual	property.	Tomorrow,	on	the	information	highway,	the	cost	of
delivering	a	copy	of	a	work—which	will	amount	to	the	same	thing	as
manufacturing	it—will	be	even	lower,	and	dropping	every	year	because	of
Moore's	Law.	When	you	buy	a	new	medicine,	you're	paying	mostly	for	what
the	drug	company	spent	for	research,	development,	and	testing.	Even	if	the
marginal	cost	of	making	each	pill	is	minimal,	the	pharmaceutical	company
still	may	have	to	charge	quite	a	bit	for	each,	especially	if	the	market	is	not
huge.	The	revenue	from	the	average	patient	has	to	cover	a	sufficient	share	of
the	development	expenses	and	generate	enough	profit	to	make	investors	glad
they	took	the	substantial	financial	risks	involved	in	developing	a	new	drug.
When	a	poor	country	wants	the	medicine,	the	manufacturer	faces	a	moral
dilemma.	If	the	pharmaceutical	company	doesn't	waive	or	drastically	reduce
its	patent-licensing	fees,	the	medicine	won't	be	available	to	poor	countries.
However,	if	a	manufacturer	is	to	be	able	to	invest	in	R&D,	some	users	must
pay	more	than	the	marginal	cost.	Prices	for	drugs	vary	greatly	from	country	to
country	and	discriminate	against	poor	people	in	rich	countries	except	where
governments	cover	medical	costs.
One	possible	solution,	a	scheme	whereby	a	rich	person	pays	more	to	buy	a
new	medicine,	to	see	a	movie	or	to	read	a	book,	may	seem	inequitable;
however,	it	is	identical	to	a	system	already	in	place	today—taxation.	Through
the	income	tax	and	other	taxes,	people	with	high	incomes	pay	more	for	roads,
schools,	the	army,	and	every	other	government	facility	than	the	average
person	does.	It	cost	me	more	than	$100	million	last	year	to	get	those	services
because	I	paid	a	significant	capital	gains	tax	after	selling	some	Microsoft
shares.	I	have	no	complaint,	but	it	is	an	example	of	the	same	services	being
provided	at	vastly	different	prices.
The	pricing	for	highway	access	may	be	set	politically	rather	than	on	the	basis
of	costs.	It	is	going	to	be	expensive	to	enfranchise	people	in	remote	locations
because	the	cost	of	bringing	wiring	to	far-flung	homes	and	even	small
communities	is	very	high.	Companies	may	not	be	eager	to	make	the	necessary
investment,	and	the	geographically	disenfranchised	may	not	be	in	a	position
to	make	the	investment	on	their	own	behalf.	We	should	expect	heated	debate
about	whether	the	government	should	subsidize	connections	to	rural	areas,	or
impose	regulations	that	cause	urban	users	to	subsidize	rural	ones.	The
precedent	for	this	is	a	doctrine	known	as	"universal	service"	which	was
created	to	subsidize	rural	mail,	phone,	and	electrical	services	in	the	United
States.	It	dictates	a	single	price	for	the	delivery	of	a	letter,	a	phone	call,	or
electrical	power	regardless	of	where	you	live.	It	applies	even	though	it	is

more	expensive	to	deliver	services	in	rural	areas,	where	homes	and	businesses
are	farther	apart	than	in	areas	of	concentrated	population.
There	was	no	equivalent	policy	for	the	delivery	of	newspapers	or	radio	or
television	reception.	Nonetheless,	these	services	are	widely	available,	so
clearly	under	some	circumstances	government	intervention	isn't	necessary	to
ensure	high	availability.	The	U.S.	Postal	Service	was	founded	as	part	of	the
government	on	the	assumption	that	that	was	the	only	way	to	provide	truly
universal	service.	UPS	and	Federal	Express	might	disagree	on	this	point,
however,	because	they	have	managed	to	provide	broad	coverage	and	make
money.	The	debate	as	to	whether,	or	to	what	degree,	government	needs	to	be
involved	to	guarantee	broad	access	to	the	information	highway	is	certain	to
rage	on	for	many	years.
The	highway	will	let	those	who	live	in	remote	places	consult,	collaborate,	and
be	involved	with	the	rest	of	the	world.	Because	many	people	will	find	the
combination	of	rural	lifestyle	and	urban	information	attractive,	network
companies	will	have	an	incentive	to	run	fiber-optic	lines	to	high-income
remote	areas.	It	is	likely	that	some	states,	or	communities,	or	even	private	real
estate	developers	will	promote	their	areas	by	providing	great	connectivity.
This	will	lead	to	what	one	might	call	the	"Aspen-ization"	of	parts	of	the
country.	Interesting	rural	communities	with	high	marks	for	quality	of	life	will
deliberately	set	out	to	attract	a	new	class	of	sophisticated	urban	citizen.	Taken
as	a	whole,	urban	areas	will	tend	to	get	their	connections	before	rural	ones.
The	highway	will	spread	information	and	opportunity	across	borders	to
developing	nations,	too.	Cheap	global	communications	can	bring	people
anywhere	into	the	mainstream	of	the	world	economy.	An	English-speaking
Ph.D.	in	China	will	be	able	to	bid	against	colleagues	in	London	for	consulting
work.	Knowledge	workers	in	industrialized	countries	will,	in	a	sense,	face
new	competition—just	as	some	manufacturing	workers	in	industrialized
countries	have	experienced	competition	from	developing	nations	over	the	past
decade.	This	will	make	the	information	highway	a	powerful	force	for
international	trade	in	intellectual	goods	and	services,	just	as	the	availability	of
relatively	inexpensive	air	cargo	and	containerized	shipping	helped	propel
international	trade	in	physical	goods.
The	net	effect	will	be	a	wealthier	world,	which	should	be	stabilizing.
Developed	nations,	and	workers	in	those	nations,	are	likely	to	maintain	a
sizable	economic	lead.	However,	the	gap	between	the	have	and	have-not
nations	will	diminish.	Starting	out	behind	is	sometimes	an	advantage.	It	lets
those	who	adopt	late	skip	steps,	and	avoid	the	mistakes	of	the	trailblazers.

Some	countries	will	never	have	industrialization.	They	will	move	directly	into
the	Information	Age.	Europe	didn't	adopt	television	until	several	years	after
the	United	States.	The	result	was	higher	picture
quality,	because	by	the	time	Europe	set	its	standard	a	better	choice	was
available.	As	a	result,	Europeans	have	enjoyed	better-looking	television
pictures	for	decades.
Telephone	systems	are	another	example	of	how	starting	late	can	provide	an
advantage.	In	Africa,	China,	and	other	parts	of	the	developing	world,	many
citizens	who	have	phones	use	cellular	instruments.	Cellular	telephone	service
is	spreading	rapidly	in	Asia,	Latin	America,	and	other	developing	regions,
because	it	does	not	require	that	copper	wires	be	strung.	Many	people	in	the
cellular	industry	predict	that	improvements	in	technology	will	mean	that	these
areas	may	never	get	a	conventional	copper	wire-based	telephone	system.
These	countries	will	never	have	to	cut	down	a	million	trees	for	telephone
poles	or	string	a	hundred	thousand	miles	of	telephone	lines	only	to	rip	them
all	down	and	bury	the	entire	network.	The	wireless	telephone	system	will	be
their	first	telephone	system.	They	will	get	increasingly	better	cellular	systems
wherever	they	can't	afford	a	full	broadband	connection.
The	presence	of	advanced	communications	systems	promises	to	make	nations
more	alike	and	reduce	the	importance	of	national	boundaries.	The	fax
machine,	the	portable	videocamera,	and	Cable	News	Network	are	among	the
forces	that	brought	about	the	end	of	communist	regimes	and	the	Cold	War,
because	they	allowed	news	to	pass	both	ways	through	what	was	called	the
Iron	Curtain.
Now,	commercial	satellite	broadcasts	to	nations	such	as	China	and	Iran	offer
citizens	glimpses	of	the	outside	world	that	are	not	necessarily	sanctioned	by
their	governments.	This	new	access	to	information	can	draw	people	together
by	increasing	their	understanding	of	other	cultures.	Some	believe	it	will	cause
discontent	and	worse,	a	"Revolution	of	Expectations,"	when	disenfranchised
people	get	enough	data	a======================================================== re	limited,
Minitel's	success	has	fostered	innovations	and	provided	lessons.	France
Telecom	is	investing	in	a	packet	switch	data	network.
In	Germany,	Deutsche	Telekom	lowered	the	price	of	ISDN	service
dramatically	in	1995.	This	has	led	to	a	significant	increase	in	the	number	of
users	connecting	personal	computers.	Bringing	down	ISDN	prices	was	clever,
because	lower	prices	will	foster	the	development	of	applications	that	will	help
hasten	the	arrival	of	a	broadband	system.
The	level	of	PC	penetration	in	business	is	even	higher	in	the	Nordic	countries
than	in	the	United	States.	These	countries	understand	that	their	highly
educated	workforces	will	benefit	from	having	high-speed	connections	to	the
rest	of	the	world.
Although	the	interest	in	high-tech	communications	systems	is	probably
greater	in	Japan	than	in	any	other	country,	it	is	very	difficult	to	predict	the	fate
of	the	information	highway	there.	The	use	of	personal	computers	in
businesses,	schools,	and	homes	is	significantly	less	widespread	in	Japan	than
in	other	developed	countries.	This	is	partly	because	of	the	difficulty	of
entering	kanji	characters	on	a	keyboard,	but	also	because	of	Japan's	large	and
entrenched	market	for	dedicated	word-processing	machines.
Japan	is	second	only	to	the	United	States	in	the	number	of	companies
investing	in	developing	both	highway	building	blocks	and	the	highway's
content.	Many	large	Japanese	companies	have	excellent	technology	and	a
record	of	taking	long-term	approaches	to	their	investments.	Sony	owns	Sony
Music	and	Sony	Pictures,	which	includes	Columbia	Records	and	Columbia
Studios.	Toshiba	has	a	large	investment	in	Time	Warner.	NEC's	corporate
slogan,	"Computers	&	Communication,"	coined	in	1984,	anticipating	the
highway,	is	an	indication	of	its	commitment.
The	cable	industry	in	Japan	was	overregulated	until	quite	recently,	but	the	rate
of	change	is	impressive.	The	Japanese	phone	company,	NTT,	has	the	largest
valuation	of	any	public	company	in	the	world	and	will	play	a	leadership	role
in	every	aspect	of	the	highway	system.
In	South	Korea,	although	significantly	fewer	PCs	per	capita	are	being	sold
there	than	in	the	United	States,	more	than	25	percent	of	the	machines	are
going	into	homes.	This	statistic	demonstrates	how	countries	with	a	strong
family	structure	that	put	great	emphasis	on	getting	ahead	by	educating

children	will	be	fertile	ground	for	products	that	provide	educational
advantages.	One	appropriate	use	of	governmental	authority	will	be	the
creation	of	incentives	to	encourage	low-cost	connections	for	schools	and	to
ensure	that	the	highway	reaches	rural	areas	and	low-income	areas	too.
Australia	and	New	Zealand	are	also	interested	in	the	highway,	partly	because
of	the	great	geographic	distance	between	them	and	other	developed	countries.
The	phone	companies	in	Australia	are	being	privatized	and	the	market	opened
to	competitors,	encouraging	forward-looking	plans.	New	Zealand	has	the
most	open	telecommunications	market	in	the	world,	and	its	newly	privatized
phone	company	has	set	an	example	of	how	effective	privatization	can	be.
I	doubt	that	any	of	the	developed	countries,	including	all	of	Western	Europe,
North	America,	Australia,	New	Zealand,	and	Japan,	will	end	up	more	than	a
year	or	two	ahead	of	or	behind	the	others	unless	poor	political	decisions	are
made.	Within	each	country	some	communities	will	get	service	earlier	than
others	because	of	their	economic	demographics.	Networks	will	go	into	richer
neighborhoods	first	because	that's	where	residents	are	likely	to	spend	more.
Local	regulators	may	even	find	themselves	competing	to	create	favorable
environments	for	the	early	deployment	of	the	highway.	No	taxpayer	money
will	be	needed	to	build	the	highway	in	industrialized	countries	with	pro-
competition	regulations.	The	speed	with	which	the	highway	is	brought
directly	into	homes	will	correlate	in	large	part	with	the	per	capita	gross
domestic	product	(GDP)	of	a	country.	Despite	this,	even	in	developing
countries	the	connections	into	businesses	and	schools	will	have	a	huge	impact
and	reduce	the	income	gap	between	these	countries	and	developed	ones.
Areas	such	as	Bangalore	in	India,	or	Shanghai	and	Guangzhou	in	China,	will
install	highway	connections	to	businesses	that	they	will	use	to	offer	the
services	of	their	highly	educated	workers	to	the	global	market.
In	many	countries	nowadays,	the	top	political	leaders	are	making	plans	to
encourage	highway	investment.	The	competition	among	nations	trying	either
to	take	the	lead	in	development	or	to	make	sure	they	don't	fall	behind	is
creating	a	very	positive	dynamic.	As	different	countries	try	different
approaches,	everyone	will	watch	to	see	what	works	best.	Some	national
governments	may	rationalize	that	if	they	decide	they	must	have	a	network
right	away	and	private	enterprise	is	not	willing	to	build	it,	they	will	have	to
help	build	or	fund	pieces	of	their	information	highway.	A	government
bootstrap	could,	in	principle,	cause	an	information	highway	to	be	built	sooner
than	might	happen	otherwise,	but	the	very	real	possibility	of	an	unattractive
outcome	has	to	be	considered	carefully.	Such	a	country	might	end	up	with	a
boondoggle,	white-elephant	information	highway	built	by	engineers	out	of

touch	with	the	rapid	pace	of	technological	development.
Something	like	this	happened	in	Japan	with	the	Hi-Vision	high-definition
television	project.	MITI,	the	powerful	Ministry	of	International	Trade	and
Industry,	and	broadcasting	company,	and	NHK,	the	government-run	TV
broadcasting	company,	coordinated	an	effort	among	Japanese	consumer-
electronics	companies	to	build	a	new	analog	HDTV	system.	NHK	committed
to	broadcasting	shows	a	few	hours	a	day	in	the	new	format.	Unfortunately,	the
system	was	rendered	obsolete	before	it	was	ever	deployed,	when	it	became
clear	that	digital	technology	was	superior.	Many	Japanese	companies	found
themselves	in	a	difficult	position.	Privately,	they	knew	the	system	was	not	a
good	investment,	but	they	had	to	maintain	their	public	commitments	to	the
government-sponsored	format.	As	I	write	this,	the	"plan	of	record"	in	Japan
remains	to	move	to	this	analog	system,	although	nobody	actually	expects	it	to
happen.	Japan	will,	however,	benefit	from	the	investment	in	developing	high-
definition	cameras	and	displays	that	the	Hi-Vision	project	encouraged.
Building	the	information	highway	will	not	be	as	simple	as	saying	"Run	fiber
everywhere."	Any	government	or	company	getting	involved	will	need	to	track
new	developments	and	be	prepared	to	shift	directions.	Such	flexibility
requires	technological	expertise	that,	with	the	attendant	risks,	is	better
covered	by	industry.
Competition	in	the	private	sector	will	be	fierce	on	many	fronts.	Cable,	phone,
and	other	companies	will	compete	to	provide	the	fiber,	wireless,	and	satellite
infrastructure.	Hardware	companies	will	fight	to	sell	servers,	ATM	switches,
and	set-top	boxes	to	network	companies,	and	PCs,	digital	TVs,	telephones,
and	other	information	appliances	to	consumers.	At	the	same	time	companies
in	the	software	business,	including	Apple,	AT&T,	IBM,	Microsoft,	Oracle,
and	Sun	Microsystems,	will	be	offering	software	components	to	network
providers.	Eventually,	millions	of	companies	and	individuals	will	be	selling
software	applications	and	information,	including	entertainment,	across	the
network	that	springs	up.
I've	discussed	at	some	length	how	critical	it	is	that	the	physical	infrastructure
be	built	out	to	provide	broadband	connections	to	homes.	I	described	the
competition	in	the	United	States,	and	the	strategies	of	the	telephone	and	cable
industries,	the	major	players.	The	cable	companies	are	younger	and	smaller
than	the	big	telephone	companies	and	tend	to	be	more	entrepreneurial.	Cable
television	networks	provide	customers	with	one-way	broadband	video
through	a	web	of	coaxial,	and	sometimes	fiber-optic,	cable.	Although	the
penetration	rate	worldwide	is	quite	low—189	million	subscribers—cable

systems	run	past	nearly	70	percent	of	all	American	homes,	and	into	63	million
of	them.	Already,	cable	systems	are	gradually	being	converted	to	carry	a
digital	signal,	and	a	number	of	cable	companies	are	working	to	provide	PC
users	with	connections	to	the	Internet	and	on-line	services.	They're	gambling
that	many	PC	users	accustomed	to	downloading	information	on	a	telephone
line	at	28,800	bits	per	second	will	be	willing	to	pay	more	to	download
information	through	their	television	cable	at	3	million	bits	per	second.
As	for	the	phone	companies,	they	are	much	stronger	financially.	The
American	telephone	system	is	the	world's	largest	switched-distributed
network	providing	point-to-point	connections.	The	combined	local	telephone
exchange	market,	with	annual	revenues	of	about	$100	billion,	is	far	more
profitable	than	the	$20	billion	U.S.	cable	business.	The	seven	regional	Bell
operating	companies	(RBOCs)	will	compete	with	their	former	parent,	AT&T,
to	provide	long-distance,	cellular,	and	new	services.	But,	like	phone
companies	around	the	world,	the	RBOCs	are	new	to	the	competitive	world,
just	emerging	from	their	heritage	as	heavily	regulated	utilities.
The	local	phone	companies	will	be	motivated	by	increased	competition.	They
are	in	a	defensive	position.	Other	phone	companies	and	cable	companies	are
going	to	want	to	offer	telephone	as	well	as	other	communications	services	in
their	areas.	New	regulations	will	unleash	this	competition	and,	as	I've	already
noted,	the	cost	of	long-distance	voice-telephone	service	will	drop
dramatically.	If	that	happens,	phone	companies	will	be	deprived	of	much	of
their	current	profitable	revenue.
The	companies	providing	local	service	have	slowly	been	introducing
advanced	digital	transmission	capabilities	into	their	networks.	They	haven't
felt	pressure	to	hurry,	because	until	now	it	seemed	they	were	protected	from
competition	by	the	large	financial	barriers	to	market	entry.	They	knew	a
potential	rival	would	have	to	make	a	duplicate	investment	of,	say,	$100
million	in	equipment	in	order	to	compete	in	a	given	community.	But======================================================== rted	by	posts	of	Douglas	fir.	The	house	has	lots	of	exposed
horizontal	beams	and	vertical	supports.	You'll	have	a	great	view	of	the	lake.
My	hope	is	that	the	view	and	the	Douglas	fir,	rather	than	the	electronic	pin,

will	be	what	interest	you	most	as	you	descend	toward	the	ground	floor.	Most
of	the	wood	came	from	an	eighty-year-old	Weyerhaeuser	lumber	mill	that	was
being	torn	down	out	on	the	Columbia	River.	This	wood,	harvested	nearly	a
hundred	years	ago,	came	from	trees	that	were	as	much	as	350	feet	tall,
between	8	and	15	feet	in	diameter.	Douglas	fir	is	one	of	the	strongest	woods
in	the	world	for	its	weight.	Unfortunately,	new-growth	Douglas	fir	tends	to
split	if	you	try	to	mill	it	into	beams,	because	the	grain	is	not	as	tight	in	a
seventy-year-old	tree	as	it	is	in	a	five-hundred-year-old	one.	Almost	all	of	the
old-growth	Douglas	fir	has	been	harvested	now,	and	any	that	remains	should
be	preserved.	I	was	lucky	to	find	old-growth	timbers	that	could	be	reused.
The	fir	beams	support	the	two	floors	of	private	living	spaces	you'll	be
descending	past.	Privacy	is	important.	I	want	a	house	that	will	still	feel	like
home	even	when	guests	are	enjoying	other	parts	of	it.
At	the	bottom	of	the	stairs,	the	theater	will	be	on	the	right,	and	to	the	left,	on
the	south	side,	will	be	the	reception	hall.	As	you	step	into	the	reception	hall,
on	your	right	will	be	a	series	of	sliding	glass	doors	that	open	onto	a	terrace
leading	to	the	lake.	Recessed	into	the	east	wall	will	be	twenty-four	video
monitors,	each	with	a	40-inch	picture	tube,	stacked	four	high	and	six	across.
These	monitors	will	work	cooperatively	to	display	large	images	for	artistic,
entertainment,	or	business	purposes.	I	had	hoped	that	when	the	monitors
weren't	in	use	they	could	literally	disappear	into	the	woodwork.	I	wanted	the
screens	to	display	woodgrain	patterns	that	matched	their	surroundings.
Unfortunately	I	could	never	achieve	anything	convincing	with	current
technology,	because	a	monitor	emits	light	while	real	wood	reflects	it.	So	I
settled	for	having	the	monitors	disappear	behind	wood	panels	when	they're
not	in	use.
The	electronic	pin	you	wear	will	tell	the	house	who	and	where	you	are,	and
the	house	will	use	this	information	to	try	to	meet	and	even	anticipate	your
needs—all	as	unobtrusively	as	possible.	Someday,	instead	of	needing	the	pin,
it	might	be	possible	to	have	a	camera	system	with	visual-recognition
capabilities,	but	that's	beyond	current	technology.	When	it's	dark	outside,	the
pin	will	cause	a	moving	zone	of	light	to	accompany	you	through	the	house.
Unoccupied	rooms	will	be	unlit.	As	you	walk	down	a	hallway,	you	might	not
notice	the	lights	ahead	of	you	gradually	coming	up	to	full	brightness	and	the
lights	behind	you	fading.	Music	will	move	with	you,	too.	It	will	seem	to	be
everywhere,	although,	in	fact,	other	people	in	the	house	will	be	hearing
entirely	different	music	or	nothing	at	all.	A	movie	or	the	news	will	be	able	to
follow	you	around	the	house,	too.	If	you	get	a	phone	call,	only	the	handset

nearest	you	will	ring.
Computer	rendering	of	the	Gateses'	future	home,	showing	the	staircase	and
formal	dining	room
You	won't	be	confronted	by	the	technology,	but	it	will	be	readily	and	easily
available.	Handheld	remote	controls	will	put	you	in	charge	of	your	immediate
environment	and	of	the	house's	entertainment	system.	The	remote	will	extend
the	capabilities	of	the	pin.	It	will	not	only	let	the	house	identify	and	locate
you,	it	will	also	allow	you	to	give	instructions.	You'll	use	the	controls	to	tell
the	monitors	in	a	room	to	become	visible	and	what	to	display.	You'll	be	able
to	choose	from	among	thousands	of	pictures,	recordings,	movies,	and
television	programs,	and	you'll	have	all	sorts	of	options	available	for	selecting
information.
A	console,	which	will	be	the	equivalent	of	a	keyboard	that	lets	you	give	very
specific	instructions,	will	be	discreetly	visible	in	each	room.	I	want	consoles
that	are	noticeable	to	those	who	need	them,	but	that	don't	invite	attention.	A
characteristic,	easy-to-identify	feature	will	alert	the	user	to	the	identity	and
whereabouts	of	the	consoles.	The	telephone	has	already	made	this	transition.
It	doesn't	attract	particular	attention	to	itself;	most	of	us	are	comfortable
putting	a	nondescript	phone	on	an	end	table.
Every	computerized	system	should	be	made	so	simple	and	natural	to	use	that
people	don't	give	it	a	second	thought.	But	simple	is	difficult.	Still,	computers
get	easier	to	use	every	year,	and	trial-and-error	in	my	house	will	help	us	learn
how	to	create	a	really	simple	system.	You	will	be	able	to	be	indirect	about
your	instructions	and	requests.	For	example,	you	won't	have	to	ask	for	a	song
by	name.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	the	house	to	play	the	latest	hits,	or	songs	by
a	particular	artist,	or	songs	that	were	performed	at	Woodstock,	or	music
composed	in	eighteenth-century	Vienna,	or	songs	with	the	word	"yellow"	in
their	titles.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	for	songs	that	you	have	categorized	with	a
certain	adjective,	or	songs	that	haven't	been	played	before	when	a	particular

person	was	visiting	the	house.	I	might	program	classical	music	as	background
for	contemplating	and	something	more	modern	and	energetic	to	play	while
I'm	exercising.	If	you	want	to	watch	the	movie	that	won	the	1957	Academy
Award	for	best	picture,	you	can	ask	for	it	that	way—and	see	The	Bridge	on
the	River	Kwai.	You	could	find	the	same	movie	by	asking	for	films	starring
Alec	Guinness	or	William	Holden	or	ones	about	prison	camps.
Prototype	of	a	home	control	console
If	you're	planning	to	visit	Hong	Kong	soon,	you	might	ask	the	screen	in	your
room	to	show	you	pictures	of	the	city.	It	will	seem	to	you	as	if	the
photographs	are	displayed	everywhere,	although	actually	the	images	will
materialize	on	the	walls	of	rooms	just	before	you	walk	in	and	vanish	after	you
leave.	If	you	and	I	are	enjoying	different	things	and	one	of	us	walks	into	a
room	where	the	other	is	sitting,	the	house	will	follow	predetermined	rules
about	what	to	do.	For	example,	the	house	might	continue	the	audio	and	visual
imagery	for	the	person	who	was	in	the	room	first,	or	it	might	change
programming	to	something	it	knows	both	of	us	like.
A	house	that	tracks	its	occupants	in	order	to	meet	their	particular	needs
combines	two	traditions.	The	first	is	the	tradition	of	unobtrusive	service,	and
the	other	is	that	an	object	we	carry	entitles	us	to	be	treated	in	a	certain	way.
You're	already	used	to	the	idea	that	an	object	can	authenticate	you.	It	can
inform	people	or	machinery	that	you	have	permission	to	do	something	such	as
open	a	locked	door,	get	on	an	airplane,	or	use	a	specific	line	of	credit—yours
—to	make	a	purchase.	Keys,	electronic	entry	cards,	driver's	licenses,
passports,	name	badges,	credit	cards,	and	tickets	are	all	forms	of
authentication.	If	I	give	you	the	key	to	my	car,	the	car	allows	you	to	get	in,
start	the	engine,	and	drive	away.	You	might	say	that	the	car	trusts	you	because
you	carry	its	keys.	If	I	give	a	parking	attendant	a	key	that	fits	my	automobile's
ignition	but	not	its	trunk,	the	car	lets	him	drive	but	not	open	the	trunk.	It's	no
different	with	my	house,	which	will	make	various	amenities	available	to	you
based	on	the	electronic	key	you	carry.

None	of	this	is	really	so	radical.	Some	visionaries	are	predicting	that	within
the	next	ten	years	there	will	be	lots	of	robots	wandering	around	helping	us	out
with	various	household	chores.	I	am	certainly	not	preparing	for	that,	because	I
think	it	will	be	many	decades	before	robots	are	practical.	The	only	ones	I
expect	to	see	in	widespread	use	soon	are	intelligent	toys.	Kids	will	be	able	to
program	them	to	respond	to	different	situations	and	even	to	speak	in	the
voices	of	favorite	characters.	These	toy	robots	will	be	able	to	be	programmed
in	a	limited	number	of	ways.	They	will	have	limited	vision,	know	the	distance
to	the	wall	in	each	direction,	the	time,	the	lighting	conditions,	and	accept
limited	speech	input.	I	think	it	would	have	been	cool	to	have	had	a	toy-size
car	I	could	have	talked	to	and	programmed	to	respond	to	my	instructions.
Other	than	toys,	the	other	major	uses	for	robotic	devices	I	see	are	for	military
applications.	The	reason	I	doubt	intelligent	robots	will	provide	much	help	in
actual	housework	in	the	foreseeable	future	is	that	it	takes	a	great	deal	of	visual
intelligence	and	dexterity	to	prepare	food	or	change	diapers.	Pool	cleaning,
lawn	mowing,	and	perhaps	even	vacuum	cleaning	can	be	done	with	a
relatively	dumb	system,	but	once	we	get	beyond	tasks	where	you	just	push
something	around,	it	is	very	hard	to	design	a	machine	that	would	be	able	to
recognize	and	respond	to	all	of	the	contingencies	that	come	along.
The	systems	I	am	building	into	the	house	are	designed	to	make	it	easier	to	live
in,	but	I	won't	know	for	sure	if	they	are	worthwhile	until	I	move	in.	I'm
experimenting	and	learning	all	the	time.	The	design	team	used	my	guest
cottage,	which	was	built	before	the	house,	as	a	sort	of	test	laboratory	for	home
instrumentation.	Because	some	people	like	the	temperature	warmer	than
others	do,	the	cottage's	software	sets	its	temperature	in	reaction	to	who	is
inside,	and	the	time	of	day.	The	cottage	knows	to	make	the	temperature	toasty
on	a	cold	morning	before	a	guest	is	out	of	bed.	In	the	evening,	when	it's	dark
outside,	the	cottage's	lights	dim	if	a	television	is	on.	If	someone	is	in	the
cottage	during	the	day,	the	cottage	matches	its	inside	brightness	to	that	of	the
outdoors.	Of	course	the	occupant	can	always	give	explicit	directions	to
overrule	the	settings.
This	sort	of	instrumentation	can	provide	significant	energy	savings.	A	number
of	electric	utilities	are	testing	a	network	to	monitor	the	use	of	energy	in
individual	homes.	This	would	end	the	expensive	practice	of	having	meter
readers	come	to	each	home	every	month	or	two,	but	more	important,
computers	in	the	home	and	at	the	utility	company	will	be	able	to	manage	the
minute-by-minute	demand	for	power	at	various	times	of	the	day.	Energy-
demand	management	can	save	a	lot======================================================== verhead	projectors	represent	the	state	of	the	art.
Reed	Hundt,	chairman	of	the	U.S.	Federal	Communications	Commission,
commented	on	this.	"There	are	thousands	of	buildings	in	this	country	with
millions	of	people	in	them	who	have	no	telephones,	no	cable	television	and
no	reasonable	prospect	of	broadband	services,"	he	said.	"They	are	called
schools"
Despite	these	constraints,	genuine	change	is	going	to	come.	It	won't	happen
abruptly.	On	the	face	of	it,	the	basic	patterns	of	education	will	remain	the
same.	Students	will	continue	to	attend	classes,	listen	to	teachers,	ask
questions,	participate	in	individual	and	group	work	(including	hands-on
experiments),	and	do	homework.
There	seems	to	be	a	universal	commitment	to	having	more	computers	in
schools,	but	the	rate	at	which	they	are	being	supplied	varies	from	country	to
country.	Only	a	few	countries,	such	as	the	Netherlands,	already	have
computers	in	nearly	every	school.	In	France	and	many	other	places,	although
few	installations	have	taken	place,	governments	have
pledged	to	equip	all	their	classrooms	with	computers.	Britain,	Japan,	and	the
People's	Republic	of	China	have	begun	the	process	of	incorporating
information	technology	into	their	national	curricula,	with	a	focus	on
vocational	training.	I	believe	most	countries	will	decide	to	make	increased
investments	in	education,	and	computer	use	in	schools	will	catch	up	to	its	use
in	homes	and	businesses.	Over	time—longer	in	less	developed	countries—we
are	likely	to	see	computers	installed	in	every	classroom	in	the	world.
The	cost	of	computer	hardware	gets	cheaper	almost	by	the	month,	and
educational	software	will	become	quite	affordable	when	purchased	in
quantity.	Already	many	cable	and	telephone	companies	in	the	United	States
have	promised	free	or	reduced-price	network	connections	to	schools	and
libraries	in	their	areas.	For	example,	Pacific	Bell	has	announced	a	plan	to
provide	free	ISDN	service	to	every	school	in	California	for	one	year,	and	TCI
and	Viacom	offer	free	cable	to	schools	in	every	community	they	serve.
Although	a	classroom	will	still	be	a	classroom,	technology	will	transform	a
lot	of	the	details.	Classroom	learning	will	include	multi-media	presentations,
and	homework	will	involve	exploring	electronic	documents	as	much	as
textbooks,	perhaps	even	more.	Students	will	be	encouraged	to	pursue	areas	of
particular	interest,	and	it	will	be	easy	for	them	to	do	so.	Each	pupil	will	be
able	to	have	his	own	question	answered	simultaneously	with	the	other
students'	queries.	A	class	will	spend	part	of	a	day	at	a	personal	computer

exploring	information	individually	or	in	groups.	Then	the	students	will	bring
back	their	thoughts	and	questions	about	the	information	they	have	discovered
to	the	teacher,	who	will	be	able	to	decide	which	questions	should	be	brought
to	the	attention	of	the	full	class.	While	students	are	at	their	computers,	the
teacher	will	be	free	to	work	with	individuals	or	small	groups	and	focus	less	on
lecturing	and	more	on	problem	solving.
Educators,	like	so	many	in	today's	economy,	are,	among	other	things,
facilitators.	Like	many	other,	similar	workers,	they	will	have	to	adapt	and
readapt	to	changing	conditions.	Unlike	some	professions,	however,	the	future
of	teaching	looks	extremely	bright.	As	innovation	has	improved	the	standard
of	living,	there	has	always	been	an	increase	in	the	portion	of	the	workforce
dedicated	to	education.	Educators	who	bring	energy	and	creativity	to	a
classroom	will	thrive.	So	will	teachers	who	build	strong	relationships	with
children,	because	kids	love	classes	taught	by	adults	they	know	genuinely	care
about	them.
We've	all	had	teachers	who	made	a	difference.	I	had	a	great	chemistry	teacher
in	high	school	who	made	his	subject	immensely	interesting.	Chemistry
seemed	enthralling	compared	to	biology.	In	biology,	we	were	dissecting	frogs
—just	hacking	them	to	pieces,	actually—and	our	teacher	didn't	explain	why.
My	chemistry	teacher	sensationalized	his	subject	a	bit	and	promised	that	it
would	help	us	understand	the	world.	When	I	was	in	my	twenties,	I	read	James
D.	Watson's	Molecular	Biology	of	the	Gene	and	decided	my	high	school
experience	had	misled	me.	The	understanding	of	life	is	a	great	subject.
Biological	information	is	the	most	important	information	we	can	discover,
because	over	the	next	several	decades	it	will	revolutionize	medicine.	Human
DNA	is	like	a	computer	program	but	far,	far	more	advanced	than	any	software
ever	created.	It	seems	amazing	to	me	now	that	one	great	teacher	made
chemistry	endlessly	fascinating	while	I	found	biology	totally	boring.
When	teachers	do	excellent	work	and	prepare	wonderful	materials,	only	their
few	dozen	students	benefit	each	year.	It's	difficult	for	teachers	in	different
locations	to	build	on	one	another's	work.	The	network	will	enable	teachers	to
share	lessons	and	materials,	so	that	the	best	educational	practices	can	spread.
In	most	cases	watching	a	lecture	on	video	is	much	less	interesting	than
actually	being	in	the	room	with	the	teacher.	But	sometimes	the	value	of	being
able	to	hear	a	particular	teacher	outweighs	the	loss	of	interactivity.	A	few
years	ago,	a	friend	and	I	discovered	in	the	University	of	Washington's	catalog
videotapes	of	a	series	of	lectures	by	the	distinguished	physicist	Richard
Feynman.	We	were	able	to	watch	the	lectures	on	vacation	ten	years	after
Feynman	gave	the	talks	at	Cornell.	We	might	have	gotten	more	from	the

lectures	if	we	had	been	in	the	lecture	hall	or	been	able	to	ask	him	questions
via	a	videoconference.	But	the	clarity	of	his	thinking	explained	many	of	the
concepts	of	physics	better	than	any	book	or	any	instructor	I've	ever	had.	He
brought	the	subject	to	life.	I	think	anyone	studying	physics	should	have	these
lectures	easily	accessible.	With	the	information	highway	there	will	be	lots	of
such	uniquely	valuable	resources	available	to	teachers	and	students.
If	a	teacher	in	Providence,	Rhode	Island,	happened	to	have	a	particularly
good	way	of	explaining	photosynthesis,	her	lecture	notes	and	multi-media
demonstrations	could	be	obtained	by	educators	around	the	world.	Some
teachers	will	use	material	exactly	as	it	comes	off	the	highway,	but	others	will
take	advantage	of	easy-to-use	authoring	software	to	adapt	and	combine	bits
and	pieces	of	what	they	find.	Feedback	from	other	interested	instructors	will
be	easy	to	get	and	will	help	refine	the	lesson.	In	a	short	time	the	improved
material	could	be	in	thousands	of	classrooms	all	over	the	world.	It	will	be
easy	to	tell	what	materials	are	popular,	because	the	network	will	be	able	to
count	the	number	of	times	they	are	accessed,	or	to	poll	teachers	electronically.
Corporations	wanting	to	help	with	education	could	provide	recognition	and
cash	awards	to	teachers	whose	materials	are	making	a	difference.
It	is	hard	for	a	teacher	to	prepare	in-depth,	interesting	material	for	twenty-five
students,	six	hours	a	day,	180	days	a	year.	This	is	particularly	true	if	students'
extensive	television	watching	has	raised	their	entertainment	expectations.	I
can	imagine	a	middle-school	science	teacher	a	decade	or	so	from	now,
working	on	a	lecture	about	the	sun,	explaining	not	only	the	science	but	also
the	history	of	discoveries	that	made	it	possible.	When	a	teacher	wants	to
select	a	picture,	still	or	video,	whether	it's	a	piece	of	art	or	a	portrait	of	a	great
solar	scientist,	the	highway	will	allow	her	to	select	from	a	comprehensive
catalog	of	images.	Snippets	of	video	and	narrated	animations	from	countless
sources	will	be	available.	It	will	only	take	minutes	to	pull	together	a	visual
show	that	would	now	require	days	of	work	to	organize.	As	she	lectures	about
the	sun,	she	will	have	images	and	diagrams	appear	at	appropriate	times.	If	a
student	asks	her	about	the	source	of	the	sun's	power,	she	can	answer	using
animated	graphics	of	hydrogen	and	helium	atoms,	she'll	be	able	to	show	solar
flares	or	sunspots	or	other	phenomena,	or	she	might	call	up	a	brief	video	on
fusion	energy	to	the	white	board.	The	teacher	will	have	organized	the	links	to
servers	on	the	information	highway	in	advance.	She	will	make	the	list	of	links
available	to	her	students,	so	that	during	study	times	in	the	library	or	at	home,
they	will	be	able	to	review	the	material	from	as	many	perspectives	as	they
find	helpful.
Think	of	a	high	school	art	teacher	using	a	digital	white	board	to	display	a

high-quality	digital	reproduction	of	Seurat's	Bathers	at	Asnières,	which	shows
young	men	relaxing	on	the	bank	of	the	Seine	River	in	the	1880s	against	a
background	of	sailboats	and	smokestacks.	The	white	board	will	pronounce	the
name	of	the	painting	in	the	original	French—Une	Baignade	à	Asnières	and
show	a	map	of	the	outskirts	of	Paris,	with	the	town	of	Asnières	highlighted.
The	teacher	might	use	the	painting,	which	presaged	Pointillism,	to	illustrate
the	end	of	Impressionism.	Or	she	will	use	it	to	get	into	broader	topics,	such	as
life	in	France	at	the	end	of	the	nineteenth	century,	the	Industrial	Revolution,
or	even	the	way	the	eye	sees	complementary	colors.
She	might	point	to	the	orangish-red	hat	of	a	figure	standing	on	the	far	right
side	of	the	composition	and	say:	"Look	at	the	vibrancy	of	the	hat.	Seurat	has
tricked	the	eye.	The	hat	is	red,	but	he	has	added	tiny	dots	of	orange	and	blue.
You	don't	really	notice	the	blue	unless	you	look	closely."	As	the	teacher	says
this,	the	picture	will	zoom	in	on	the	hat,	until	the	texture	of	the	canvas	is
apparent.	At	this	magnification,	specks	of	blue	will	be	obvious,	and	the
teacher	will	explain	that	blue	is	the	complement	of	orange.	A	color	wheel	will
appear	on	the	white	board,	and	either	the	teacher	or	the	multi-media	document
itself	will	explain:	"Every	color	on	this	wheel	is	arranged	opposite	its
complement.	Red	is	opposite	green,	yellow	is	opposite	purple,	and	blue	is
opposite	orange.	It	is	a	quirk	of	the	eye	that	staring	at	a	color	creates	an
afterimage	of	its	complementary	color.	Seurat	used	this	trick	to	make	the	red
and	orange	hues	of	the	hat	more	vivid	by	sneaking	in	dots	of	blue."
Computers	conn======================================================== means	to	be
"educated"	will	be	transformed,	perhaps	almost	beyond	recognition.	Your
sense	of	identity,	of	who	you	are	and	where	you	belong,	may	open	up
considerably.	In	short,	just	about	everything	will	be	done	differently.	I	can
hardly	wait	for	this	tomorrow,	and	I'm	doing	what	I	can	to	help	make	it

happen.
You	aren't	sure	you	believe	this?	Or	want	to	believe	it?	Perhaps	you'll	decline
to	participate.	People	commonly	make	this	vow	when	some	new	technology
threatens	to	change	what	they're	familiar	and	comfortable	with.	At	first,	the
bicycle	was	a	silly	contraption;	the	automobile,	a	noisy	intruder;	the	pocket
calculator,	a	threat	to	the	study	of	mathematics;	and	the	radio,	the	end	of
literacy.
But	then	something	happens.	Over	time,	these	machines	find	a	place	in	our
everyday	lives	because	they	not	only	offer	convenience	and	save	labor,	they
can	also	inspire	us	to	new	creative	heights.	We	warm	to	them.	They	assume	a
trusted	place	beside	our	other	tools.	A	new	generation	grows	up	with	them,
changing	and	humanizing	them.	In	short,	playing	with	them.
The	telephone	was	a	major	advance	in	two-way	communication.	But	at	first,
even	it	was	denounced	as	nothing	more	than	a	nuisance.	People	were	made
uncomfortable	and	awkward	by	this	mechanical	invader	in	their	homes.
Eventually,	though,	men	and	women	realized	they	were	not	just	getting	a	new
machine,	they	were	learning	a	new	kind	of	communication.	A	chat	on	the
telephone	wasn't	as	long	or	as	formal	as	a	face-to-face	conversation.	There
was	an	unfamiliar	and,	for	many,	an	off-putting	efficiency	to	it.	Before	the
phone,	any	good	talk	entailed	a	visit	and	probably	a	meal,	and	one	could
expect	to	spend	a	full	afternoon	or	evening.	Once	most	businesses	and
households	had	telephones,	users	created	ways	to	take	advantage	of	the
unique	characteristics	of	this	means	of	communicating.	As	it	flourished,	its
own	special	expressions,	tricks,	etiquette,	and	culture	developed.	Alexander
Graham	Bell	certainly	wouldn't	have	anticipated	the	silly	executive	game	of
"Have	My	Secretary	Get	Him	Onto	the	Line	Before	Me."	As	I	write,	a	newer
form	of	communication—electronic	mail,	or	e-mail—is	undergoing	the	same
sort	of	process:	establishing	its	own	rules	and	habits.
"Little	by	little,	the	machine	will	become	a	part	of	humanity,"	the	French
aviator	and	author	Antoine	de	Saint-Exupéry	wrote	in	his	1939	memoir,	Wind,
Sand,	and	Stars.	He	was	writing	about	the	way	people	tend	to	react	to	new
technology	and	using	the	slow	embrace	of	the	railroad	in	the	nineteenth
century	as	an	example.	He	described	the	way	the	smoke-belching,
demonically	loud	engines	of	the	primitive	locomotives	were	decried	at	first	as
iron	monsters.	Then	as	more	tracks	were	laid,	towns	built	train	stations.
Goods	and	services	flowed.	Interesting	new	jobs	became	available.	A	culture
grew	up	around	this	novel	form	of	transportation,	and	disdain	became
acceptance,	even	approval.	What	had	once	been	the	iron	monster	became	the

mighty	bearer	of	life's	best	products.	Again,	the	change	in	our	perception	was
reflected	in	the	language	we	used.	We	began	calling	it	"the	iron	horse."	"What
is	it	today	for	the	villager	except	a	humble	friend	who	calls	every	evening	at
six?"	Saint-Exupéry	asked.
The	only	other	single	shift	that	has	had	as	great	an	effect	on	the	history	of
communication	took	place	in	about	1450,	when	Johann	Gutenberg,	a
goldsmith	from	Mainz,	Germany,	invented	movable	type	and	introduced	the
first	printing	press	to	Europe	(China	and	Korea	already	had	presses).	That
event	changed	Western	culture	forever.	It	took	Gutenberg	two	years	to
compose	the	type	for	his	first	Bible,	but	once	that	was	done,	he	could	print
multiple	copies.	Before	Gutenberg,	all	books	were	copied	by	hand.	Monks,
who	usually	did	the	copying,	seldom	managed	more	than	one	text	a	year.
Gutenberg's	press	was	a	high-speed	laser	printer	by	comparison.
The	printing	press	did	more	than	just	give	the	West	a	faster	way	to	reproduce
a	book.	Until	that	time,	despite	the	passing	generations,	life	had	been
communal	and	nearly	unchanging.	Most	people	knew	only	about	what	they
had	seen	themselves	or	been	told.	Few	strayed	far	from	their	villages,	in	part
because	without	reliable	maps	it	was	often	nearly	impossible	to	find	the	way
home.	As	James	Burke,	a	favorite	author	of	mine,	put	it:	"In	this	world	all
experience	was	personal:	horizons	were	small,	the	community	was	inward-
looking.	What	existed	in	the	outside	world	was	a	matter	of	hearsay."
The	printed	word	changed	all	that.	It	was	the	first	mass	medium—the	first
time	that	knowledge,	opinions,	and	experiences	could	be	passed	on	in	a
portable,	durable,	and	available	form.	As	the	written	word	extended	the
population's	reach	far	beyond	a	village,	people	began	to	care	about	what	was
happening	elsewhere.	Printing	shops	quickly	sprang	up	in	commercial	cities
and	became	centers	of	intellectual	exchange.	Literacy	became	an	important
skill	that	revolutionized	education	and	altered	social	structures.
Before	Gutenberg,	there	were	only	about	30,000	books	on	the	entire	continent
of	Europe,	nearly	all	Bibles	or	biblical	commentary.	By	1500,	there	were
more	than	9	million,	on	all	sorts	of	topics.	Handbills	and	other	printed	matter
affected	politics,	religion,	science,	and	literature.	For	the	first	time,	those
outside	the	canonical	elite	had	access	to	written	information.
The	information	highway	will	transform	our	culture	as	dramatically	as
Gutenberg's	press	did	the	Middle	Ages.
Personal	computers	have	already	altered	work	habits,	but	they	haven't	really
changed	our	lives	much	yet.	When	tomorrow's	powerful	information

machines	are	connected	on	the	highway,	people,	machines,	entertainment,	and
information	services	will	all	be	accessible.	You	will	be	able	to	stay	in	touch
with	anyone,	anywhere,	who	wants	to	stay	in	touch	with	you;	to	browse
through	any	of	thousands	of	libraries,	day	or	night.	Your	misplaced	or	stolen
camera	will	send	you	a	message	telling	you	exactly	where	it	is,	even	if	it's	in	a
different	city.	You'll	be	able	to	answer	your	apartment	intercom	from	your
office,	or	answer	any	mail	from	your	home.	Information	that	today	is	difficult
to	retrieve	will	be	easy	to	find:
Is	your	bus	running	on	time?
Are	there	any	accidents	right	now	on	the	route	you	usually	take
to	the	office?
Does	anyone	want	to	trade	his	or	her	Thursday	theater	tickets	for
your	Wednesday	tickets?
What	is	your	child's	school-attendance	record?
What's	a,	good	recipe	for	halibut?
Which	store,	anywhere,	can	deliver	by	tomorrow	morning	for	the	lowest
price	a	wristwatch	that	takes	your	pulse?
What	would	someone	pay	for	my	old	Mustang	convertible?
How	is	the	hole	in	a	needle	manufactured?
Are	your	shirts	ready	yet	at	the	laundry?
What's	the	cheapest	way	to	subscribe	to	The	Wall	Street	Journal?
What	are	the	symptoms	of	a	heart	attack?
Was	there	any	interesting	testimony	at	the	county	courthouse
today?
Do	fish	see	in	color?
What	does	the	Champs-Elysées	look	like	right	now?

Where	were	you	at	9:02	P.M.	last	Thursday?
Let's	say	you're	thinking	about	trying	a	new	restaurant	and	want	to	see	its
menu,	wine	list,	and	specials	of	the	day.	Maybe	you're	wondering	what	your
favorite	food	reviewer	said	about	it.	You	may	also	want	to	know	what
sanitation	score	the	health	department	gave	the	place.	If	you're	leery	of	the
restaurant's	neighborhood,	perhaps	you'll	want	to	see	a	safety	rating	based	on
police	reports.	Still	interested	in	going?	You'll	want	reservations,	a	map,	and
driving	instructions	based	on	current	traffic	conditions.	Take	the	instructions
in	printed	form	or	have	them	read	to	you—and	updated—as	you	drive.
All	of	this	information	will	be	readily	accessible	and	completely	personal,
because	you'll	be	able	to	explore	whatever	parts	of	it	interest	you	in	whatever
ways	and	for	however	long	you	want.	You'll	watch	a	program	when	it's
convenient	for	you,	instead	of	when	a	broadcaster	chooses	to	air	it.	You'll
shop,	order	food,	contact	fellow	hobbyists,	or	publish	information	for	others
to	use	when	and	as	you	want	to.	Your	nightly	newscast	will	start	at	a	time	you
determine	and	last	exactly	as	long	as	you	want	it	to.	It	will	cover	subjects
selected	by	you	or	by	a	service	that	knows	your	interests.	You'll	be	able	to	ask
for	reports	from	Tokyo	or	Boston	or	Seattle,	request	more	detail	on	a	news
item,	or	inquire	whether	your	favorite	columnist	has	commented	on	an	event.
And	if	you	prefer,	your	news	will	be	delivered	to	you	on	paper.
Change	of	this	magnitude	makes	people	nervous.	Every	day,	all	over	the
world,	people	are	asking	about	the	implications	of	the	network,	often	with
terrible	apprehension.	What	will	happen	to	our	jobs?	Will	people	withdraw
from	the	physical	world	and	live	vicariously	through	their	computers?	Will
the	gulf	between	the	haves	and	have-nots	widen	irreparably?	Will	a	computer
be	able	to	help	the	disenfranchised	in	East	St.	Louis	or	the	starving	in
Ethiopia?	There	are	some	major	challenges	that	will	come	with	the	network
and	the	changes	it	will	bring.	In	chapter	12,	I	talk	at	length	about	the	many
legitimate	concerns	I	hear	expressed	again	and	again.
I've	thought	about	the	difficulties	and	find	that,	on	balance,	I'm	confident	and
optimistic.	Partly	this	is	just	the	way	I	am,	and	partly	it's	because	I'm
enthusiastic	about	what	my	generation,	which	came	of	age	the	same	time	the
computer	did,	will	be	able	to	do.	We'll	be	giving	people	tools	to	use	to	reach
out	in	new	ways.	I'm	someone	who	believes	that	because	progress	will	come
no	matter	what,	we	need	to	make	the	best	of	it.	I'm	still	thrilled	by	the	feeling
that	I'm	squinting	into	the	future	and	catching	that	first	revealing	hint	of
revolutionary	possibilities.	I	feel	incredibly	lucky	that	I	am	getting	the	chance
to	play	a	part	in	the	beginning	of	an	epochal	change	for	a	second	time.

I	first	experienced	this	particular	euphoria	as	a	teenager	when	I	understood
how	inexpensive	and	powerful	computers	would	become.	The	computer	we
played	tic-tac-toe	on	in	1968	and	most	computers	at	that	time	were
mainframes:	temp======================================================== of	the	board	and	CEO	of	Bell	Atlantic,
comments,	"I	believe	a	combination	of	a	school	system	ready	for	fundamental
change	in	teaching	methods,	a	parent	body	that	was	supportive	and	wanted	to
be	involved,	and	the	careful	but	intensive	integration	of	technology	into	both
the	homes	and	classrooms	.	.	.	created	a	true	learning	community	in	which	the
home	and	school	reinforce	and	support	each	other."
At	Lester	B.	Pearson	School,	a	Canadian	high	school	serving	an	ethnically
diverse	neighborhood,	computers	are	an	integral	part	of	every	course	in	the
daily	curriculum.	For	the	1,200	students	there	are	more	than	300	personal
computers,	and	more	than	100	different	software	titles	are	in	use.	The	school
says	its	dropout	rate,	4	percent,	when	compared	with	a	national	average	of	30
percent,	is	Canada's	lowest.	Thirty-five	hundred	people	a	year	visit	to	see	how
a	high	school	can	"incorporate	technology	in	every	aspect	of	school	life."
When	the	information	highway	is	in	operation,	the	texts	of	millions	of	books
will	be	available.	A	reader	will	be	able	to	ask	questions,	print	the	text,	read	it
on-screen,	or	even	have	it	read	in	his	choice	of	voices.	He'll	be	able	to	ask
questions.	It	will	be	his	tutor.
Computers	with	social	interfaces	will	figure	out	how	to	present	information	so
that	it	is	customized	for	the	particular	user.	Many	educational	software
programs	will	have	distinct	personalities,	and	the	student	and	the	computer
will	get	to	know	each	other.	A	student	will	ask,	perhaps	orally,	"What	caused
the	American	Civil	War?"	His	or	her	computer	will	reply,	describing	the
conflicting	contentions:	that	it	was	primarily	a	battle	over	economics	or
human	rights.	The	length	and	approach	of	the	answer	will	vary	depending	on
the	student	and	the	circumstances.	A	student	will	be	able	to	interrupt	at	any
time	to	ask	the	computer	for	more	or	less	detail	or	to	request	a	different

approach	altogether.	The	computer	will	know	what	information	the	student
has	read	or	watched	and	will	point	out	connections	or	correlations	and	offer
appropriate	links.	If	the	computer	knows	the	student	likes	historical	fiction,
war	stories,	folk	music,	or	sports,	it	may	try	to	use	that	knowledge	to	present
the	information.	But	this	will	be	only	an	attention-getting	device.	The
machine,	like	a	good	human	teacher,	won't	give	in	to	a	child	who	has	lopsided
interests.	Instead	it	will	use	the	child's	predilections	to	teach	a	broader
curriculum.
Different	learning	rates	will	be	accommodated,	because	computers	will	be
able	to	pay	individual	attention	to	independent	learners.	Children	with
learning	disabilities	will	be	particularly	well	served.	Regardless	of	his	or	her
ability	or	disability,	every	student	will	be	able	to	work	at	an	individual	pace.
Another	benefit	of	computer-aided	learning	will	be	the	way	many	students
come	to	view	tests.	Today,	tests	are	pretty	depressing	for	many	kids.	They	are
associated	with	falling	short:	"I	got	a	bad	grade,"	or	"I	ran	out	of	time"	or	"I
wasn't	ready."	After	a	while,	many	kids	who	haven't	done	well	on	tests	may
think	to	themselves,	I'd	better	pretend	tests	aren't	important	to	me,	because	I
can	never	succeed	at	them.	Tests	can	cause	a	student	to	develop	a	negative
attitude	toward	all	education.
The	interactive	network	will	allow	students	to	quiz	themselves	anytime,	in	a
risk-free	environment.	A	self-administered	quiz	is	a	form	of	self-exploration,
like	the	tests	Paul	Allen	and	I	used	to	give	each	other.	Testing	will	become	a
positive	part	of	the	learning	process.	A	mistake	won't	call	forth	a	reprimand;	it
will	trigger	the	system	to	help	the	student	overcome	his	misunderstanding.	If
someone	really	gets	stuck,	the	system	will	offer	to	explain	the	circumstances
to	a	teacher.	There	should	be	less	apprehension	about	formal	tests	and	fewer
surprises,	because	on-going	self-quizzing	will	give	each	student	a	better	sense
of	where	he	or	she	stands.
Many	educational	software	and	textbook	companies	are	already	delivering
interactive	computer	products	in	mathematics,	languages,	economics,	and
biology	that	build	basic	skills	this	way.	For	example,	Academic	Systems	of
Palo	Alto,	California,	is	working	on	an	interactive	multi-media	instructional
system	for	colleges,	to	help	teach	basic	math	and	English	courses.	The
concept	is	called	"mediated	learning,"	and	it	blends	traditional	instruction
with	computer-based	learning.	Each	student	begins	by	taking	a	placement	test
to	determine	which	topics	he	or	she	understands	and	where	instruction	is
required.	The	system	then	creates	a	personalized	lesson	plan	for	the	student.
Periodic	tests	monitor	the	student's	progress,	and	the	lesson	plan	can	be

modified	as	the	student	masters	concepts.	The	program	can	also	report
problems	to	the	instructor,	who	can	then	give	the	student	individual	help.	So
far,	the	company	has	found	that	students	in	pilot	programs	like	the	new
learning	materials,	but	the	most	successful	classes	are	those	in	which	an
instructor	is	more	available.	These	results	underscore	the	point	that	new
technology,	by	itself,	is	not	sufficient	to	improve	education.
Some	parents	resist	the	use	of	computers	because	they	believe	they	can't
monitor	what	their	child	is	doing	and	can't	exert	any	control.	Most	parents	are
delighted	when	a	child	curls	up	with	an	engrossing	book,	but	less	enthusiastic
when	he	spends	hours	at	the	computer.	They're	probably	thinking	of	video
games.	A	kid	can	spend	a	great	deal	of	time	using	a	video	game	without
learning	much.	So	far,	a	great	deal	more	has	been	invested	in	computer
software	meant	to	entertain	than	in	software	to	educate.	It's	easier	to	create	an
addictive	game	than	it	is	to	expose	a	child	to	a	world	of	information	in	an
appealing	way.
However,	as	textbook	budgets	and	parental	spending	shift	to	interactive
material,	there	will	be	thousands	of	new	software	companies	working	with
teachers	to	create	entertainment-quality	interactive	learning	materials.	The
Lightspan	Partnership,	for	example,	is	using	Hollywood	talent	to	create	live
action	and	animated	programs.	Lightspan	hopes	its	sophisticated	production
techniques	will	capture	and	retain	the	interest	of	the	young	viewers—ages
five	through	eleven—and	encourage	them	to	spend	more	hours	learning.
Animated	characters	lead	students	through	lessons	that	explain	basic
concepts,	then	into	games	that	put	them	to	use.	The	Lightspan	lessons	are
grouped	by	two-year	age	spans	and	organized	into	series	intended	to
complement	elementary	school	curricula	in	mathematics,	reading,	and
language	arts.	These	programs	will	be	available	on	televisions	in	homes	and
community	centers	as	well	as	in	classrooms.	Until	interactive	television	is
widely	available,	this	kind	of	programming	will	be	offered	on	CD-ROMs	or
across	the	Internet	to	PC	users.
All	this	information,	however,	is	not	going	to	solve	the	serious	problems
facing	many	public	schools	today:	budget	cuts,	violence,	drugs,	high	dropout
rates,	dangerous	neighborhoods,	teachers	more	concerned	about	survival	than
education.	Offering	new	technology	won't	suffice.	Society	will	also	have	to
fix	the	fundamental	problems.
But	while	some	public	schools	face	major	challenges,	they	are	also	our
greatest	hope.	Imagine	a	situation	in	which	most	of	the	kids	in	inner-city
public	schools	are	on	the	dole,	are	barely	able	to	speak	the	national	language,

have	few	skills	and	an	uncertain	future.	This	was	America	in	the	early	1900s,
when	tens	of	millions	of	immigrants	had	overwhelmed	the	schools	and	social
services	of	our	big	cities.
Yet	that	generation	and	the	next	achieved	a	standard	of	living	unequaled	in
the	world.	The	problems	of	America's	schools	are	not	insurmountable,	just
extremely	complicated.	Even	today,	for	every	disastrous	public	school	there
are	dozens	of	successful	ones	you	don't	read	about.	I've	mentioned	several
examples	here.	It	is	outside	the	scope	of	this	book	to	go	deeply	into	this
subject,	but	communities	can,	and	have,	won	back	their	streets	and	schools.
It's	always	taken	an	intense	local	effort.	One	street	at	a	time,	one	school	at	a
time.	Then	parents	must	insist	that	their	kids	come	to	school	ready	to	learn.	If
the	attitude	is	"Let	the	school	(or	government)	do	it"	kids	will	fail.
Once	even	the	most	modest	positive	atmosphere	for	education	is	established,
the	information	highway	will	help	raise	the	educational	standards	for
everyone	in	future	generations.	The	highway	will	allow	new	methods	of
teaching	and	much	more	choice.	Quality	curriculums	can	be	created	with
government	funding	and	made	available	for	free.	Private	vendors	will
compete	to	enhance	the	free	material.	The	new	vendors	might	be	other	public
schools;	public-school	teachers	or	retired	teachers	going	into	business	for
themselves;	or	some	privately	run,	highway-based	school	service	program
wanting	to	prove	its	capabilities.	The	highway	would	be	a	way	for	schools	to
try	out	new	teachers	or	use	their	services	at	a	distance.
The	highway	will	also	make	home	schooling	easier.	It	will	allow	parents	to
select	some	classes	from	a	range	of	quality	possibilities	and	still	maintain
control	over	content.
Learning	with	a	computer	will	be	a	springboard	for	learning	away	from	the
computer.	Young	children	will	still	need	to	touch	toys	and	tools	with	their
hands.	Seeing	chemical	reactions	on	a	computer	screen	can	be	a	good
supplement	to	hands-on	work	in	a	chemistry	lab,	but	it	can't	replace	the	real
experience.	Children	need	personal	interaction	with	each	other,	and	with
adults,	to	learn	social	and	interpersonal	skills,	such	as	how	to	work
cooperatively.
The	good	teachers	of	the	future	will	be	doing	much	more	than	showing	kids
where	to	find	information	on	the	highway.	They	will	still	have	to	understand
when	to	probe,	observe,	stimulate,	or	agitate.	They'll	still	have	to	build	kids'
skills	in	written	and	oral	communications,	and	will	use	technology	as	a
starting	point	or	an	aid.	Successful	teachers	will	act	as	coaches,	partners,

creative	outlets,	and	communications	bridges	to	the	world.
Computers	on	the	information	highway	will	be======================================================== up	when	we	could	or	making	the	games	more
difficult.	A	friend	at	Lakeside	developed	a	program	in	BASIC	that	simulated
the	play	of	Monopoly.	BASIC	(Beginner's	All-purpose	Symbolic	Instruction

Code)	is,	as	its	name	suggests,	a	relatively	easy-to-learn	programming
language	we	used	to	develop	increasingly	complex	programs.	He	figured	out
how	to	make	the	computer	play	hundreds	of	games	really	fast.	We	fed	it
instructions	to	test	out	various	methods	of	play.	We	wanted	to	discover	what
strategies	won	most.	And—chug-a-chug,	chug-a-chug—the	computer	told	us.
Like	all	kids,	we	not	only	fooled	around	with	our	toys,	we	changed	them.	If
you've	ever	watched	a	child	with	a	cardboard	carton	and	a	box	of	crayons
create	a	spaceship	with	cool	control	panels,	or	listened	to	their	improvised
rules,	such	as	"Red	cars	can	jump	all	others,"	then	you	know	that	this	impulse
to	make	a	toy	do	more	is	at	the	heart	of	innovative	childhood	play.	It	is	also
the	essence	of	creativity.
Of	course,	in	those	days	we	were	just	goofing	around,	or	so	we	thought.	But
the	toy	we	had—well,	it	turned	out	to	be	some	toy.	A	few	of	us	at	Lakeside
refused	to	quit	playing	with	it.	In	the	minds	of	a	lot	of	people	at	school	we
became	linked	with	the	computer,	and	it	with	us.	I	was	asked	by	a	teacher	to
help	teach	computer	programming,	and	that	seemed	to	be	OK	With	everyone.
But	when	I	got	the	lead	in	the	school	play,	Black	Comedy,	some	students	were
heard	muttering,	"Why	did	they	pick	the	computer	guy?"	That's	still	the	way	I
sometimes	get	identified.
1968:	Bill	Gates	(Standing)	and	Paul	Allen	working	at	the	computer	terminal
at	Lakeside	School.
It	seems	there	was	a	whole	generation	of	us,	all	over	the	world,	who	dragged
that	favorite	toy	with	us	into	adulthood.	In	doing	so,	we	caused	a	kind	of
revolution—peaceful,	mainly—and	now	the	computer	has	taken	up	residence
in	our	offices	and	homes.	Computers	shrank	in	size	and	grew	in	power,	as
they	dropped	dramatically	in	price.	And	it	all	happened	fairly	quickly.	Not	as
quickly	as	I	once	thought,	but	still	pretty	fast.	Inexpensive	computer	chips
now	show	up	in	engines,	watches,	antilock	brakes,	facsimile	machines,
elevators,	gasoline	pumps,	cameras,	thermostats,	treadmills,	vending

machines,	burglar	alarms,	and	even	talking	greeting	cards.	School	kids	today
are	doing	amazing	things	with	personal	computers	that	are	no	larger	than
textbooks	but	outperform	the	largest	computers	of	a	generation	ago.
Now	that	computing	is	astoundingly	inexpensive	and	computers	inhabit	every
part	of	our	lives,	we	stand	at	the	brink	of	another	revolution.	This	one	will
involve	unprecedentedly	inexpensive	communication;	all	the	computers	will
join	together	to	communicate	with	us	and	for	us.	Interconnected	globally,	they
will	form	a	network,	which	is	being	called	the	information	highway.	A	direct
precursor	is	the	present	Internet,	which	is	a	group	of	computers	joined	and
exchanging	information	using	current	technology.
The	reach	and	use	of	the	new	network,	its	promise	and	perils,	is	the	subject	of
this	book.
Every	aspect	of	what's	about	to	happen	seems	exciting.	When	I	was	nineteen	I
caught	a	look	at	the	future,	based	my	career	on	what	I	saw,	and	I	turned	out	to
have	been	right.	But	the	Bill	Gates	of	nineteen	was	in	a	very	different	position
from	the	one	I'm	in	now.	In	those	days,	not	only	did	I	have	all	the	self-
assurance	of	a	smart	teenager,	but	also	nobody	was	watching	me,	and	if	I
failed—so	what?	Today	I'm	much	more	in	the	position	of	the	computer	giants
of	the	seventies,	but	I	hope	I've	learned	some	lessons	from	them.
At	one	time	I	thought	I	might	want	to	major	in	economics	in	college.	I
eventually	changed	my	mind,	but	in	a	way	my	whole	experience	with	the
computer	industry	has	been	a	series	of	economics	lessons.	I	saw	firsthand	the
effects	of	positive	spirals	and	inflexible	business	models.	I	watched	the	way
industry	standards	evolved.	I	witnessed	the	importance	of	compatibility	in
technology,	of	feedback,	and	of	constant	innovation.	And	I	think	we	may	be
about	to	witness	the	realization	of	Adam	Smith's	ideal	market,	at	last.
But	I'm	not	using	those	lessons	just	for	theorizing	about	this	future—I'm
betting	on	it.	Back	when	I	was	a	teenager,	I	envisioned	the	impact	that	low-
cost	computers	could	have.	"A	computer	on	every	desk	and	in	every	home"
became	Microsoft's	corporate	mission,	and	we	have	worked	to	help	make	that
possible.	Now	those	computers	are	being	connected	to	one	another,	and	we're
building	software—the	instructions	that	tell	the	computer	hardware	what	to
do—that	will	help	individuals	get	the	benefits	of	this	connected
communication	power.	It	is	impossible	to	predict	exactly	what	it	will	be	like
to	use	the	network.	We'll	communicate	with	it	through	a	variety	of	devices,
including	some	that	look	like	television	sets,	some	like	today's	PCs;	some	will
look	like	telephones,	and	some	will	be	the	size	and	something	like	the	shape

of	a	wallet.	And	at	the	heart	of	each	will	be	a	powerful	computer,	invisibly
connected	to	millions	of	others.
There	will	be	a	day,	not	far	distant,	when	you	will	be	able	to	conduct
business,	study,	explore	the	world	and	its	cultures,	call	up	any	great
entertainment,	make	friends,	attend	neighborhood	markets,	and	show	pictures
to	distant	relatives—without	leaving	your	desk	or	armchair.	You	won't	leave
your	network	connection	behind	at	the	office	or	in	the	classroom.	It	will	be
more	than	an	object	you	carry	or	an	appliance	you	purchase.	It	will	be	your
passport	into	a	new,	mediated	way	of	life.
Firsthand	experiences	and	pleasures	are	personal	and	unmediated.	No	one,	in
the	name	of	progress,	will	take	away	from	you	the	experience	of	lying	on	a
beach,	walking	in	the	woods,	sitting	in	a	comedy	club,	or	shopping	at	a	flea
market.	But	firsthand	experiences	aren't	always	rewarding.	For	example,
waiting	in	line	is	a	firsthand	experience,	but	we	have	been	trying	to	invent
ways	to	avoid	it	ever	since	we	first	queued	up.
Much	of	human	progress	has	come	about	because	someone	invented	a	better
and	more	powerful	tool.	Physical	tools	speed	up	work	and	rescue	people	from
hard	labor.	The	plow	and	the	wheel,	the	crane	and	the	bulldozer,	amplify	the
physical	abilities	of	those	using	them.
Informational	tools	are	symbolic	mediators	that	amplify	the	intellect	rather
than	the	muscle	of	their	users.	You're	having	a	mediated	experience	as	you
read	this	book:	We're	not	actually	in	the	same	room,	but	you	are	still	able	to
find	out	what's	on	my	mind.	A	great	deal	of	work	now	involves	decision
making	and	knowledge,	so	information	tools	have	become,	and	will	continue
increasingly	to	be,	the	focus	of	inventors.	Just	as	any	text	could	be
represented	with	an	arrangement	of	letters,	these	tools	allow	information	of
all	types	to	be	represented	in	digital	form,	in	a	pattern	of	electrical	pulses	that
is	easy	for	computers	to	deal	with.	The	world	today	has	more	than	100	million
computers	whose	purpose	is	to	manipulate	information.	They	are	helping	us
now	by	making	it	much	easier	to	store	and	transmit	information	that	is	already
in	digital	form,	but	in	the	near	future	they	will	allow	us	access	to	almost	any
information	in	the	world.
In	the	United	States,	the	connecting	of	all	these	computers	has	been	compared
to	another	massive	project:	the	gridding	of	the	country	with	interstate
highways,	which	began	during	the	Eisenhower	era.	This	is	why	the	new
network	was	dubbed	the	"information	superhighway."	The	term	was
popularized	by	then-senator	Al	Gore,	whose	father	sponsored	the	1956

Federal	Aid	Highway	Act.
The	highway	metaphor	isn't	quite	right	though.	The	phrase	suggests	landscape
and	geography,	a	distance	between	points,	and	embodies	the	implication	that
you	have	to	travel	to	get	from	one	place	to	another.	In	fact,	one	of	the	most
remarkable	aspects	of	this	new	communications	technology	is	that	it	will
eliminate	distance.	It	won't	matter	if	someone	you're	contacting	is	in	the	next
room	or	on	another	continent,	because	this	highly	mediated	network	will	be
unconstrained	by	miles	and	kilometers.
The	term	"highway"	also	suggests	that	everyone	is	driving	and	following	the
same	route.	This	network	is	more	like	a	lot	of	country	lanes	where	everyone
can	look	at	or	do	whatever	his	individual	interests	suggest.	Another
implication	is	that	perhaps	it	should	be	built	by	the	government,	which	I	think
would	be	a	major	mistake	in	most	countries.	But	the	real	problem	is	that	the
metaphor	emphasizes	the	infrastructure	of	the	endeavor	rather	than	its
applications.	At	Microsoft	we	talk	about	"Information	At	Your	Fingertips,"
which	spotlights	a	benefit	rather	than	the	network	itself.	A	different	metaphor
that	I	think	comes	closer	to	describing	a	lot	of	the	activities	that	will	take
place	is	that	of	the	ultimate	market.	Markets	from	trading	floors	to	malls	are
fundamental	to	human	society,	and	I	believe	this	new	one	will	eventually	be
the	world's	central	department	store.	It	will	be	where	we	social	animals	will
sell,	trade,	invest,	haggle,	pick	stuff	up,	argue,	meet	new	people,	and	hang
out.	When	you	hear	the	phrase	"information	highway,"	rather	than	seeing	a
road,	imagine	a	marketplace	or	an	exchange.	Think	of	the	hustle	and	bustle	of
the	New	York	Stock	Exchange	or	a	farmers'	market	or	of	a	bookstore	full	of
people	looking	for	fascinating	stories	and	information.	All	manner	of	human
activity	takes	place,	from	billion-dollar	deals	to	flirtations.	Many	transactions
will	involve	money,	tendered	in	digital	form	rather	than	currency.	Digital
information	of	all	kinds,	not	just	as	money,	will	be	the	new	medium	of
exchange	in	this	market.
The	global	information	market	will	be	huge	and	will	combine	all	the	various
ways	human	goods,	services,	and	ideas	are	exchanged.	On	a	practical	level,
this	will	give	you	broader	choices	about	most	things,	including	how	you	earn
and	invest,	what	you	buy	and	how	much	you	pay	for	it,	who	your	friends	are
and	how	you	spend	your	time	with	them,	and	where	and	how	securely	you
and	your	family	live.	Your	workplace	and	your	idea	of	what	it======================================================== o	ballet
slippers.	Of	course	you	will	still	ask	people	you	know	for	recommendations,
but	efficiently,	by	electronic	mail.
If	you're	thinking	of	doing	business	with	a	company	or	buying	a	product,
you'll	be	able	to	check	what	others	say	about	it.	If	you	want	to	buy	a
refrigerator,	you	will	look	for	the	electronic	bulletin	boards	containing	formal
and	informal	reviews	of	refrigerators	and	their	manufacturers	and	retailers.
You'll	get	into	the	habit	of	checking	these	bulletin	boards	before	you	make
any	significant	purchase.	When	you	have	a	compliment	or	complaint	about	a
record	club,	a	doctor,	or	even	a	computer	chip,	it	will	be	easy	to	find	the	place
on	the	network	where	that	company	or	product	is	discussed	and	add	your
opinion.	Ultimately,	companies	that	don't	serve	their	customers	well	will	see
their	reputations	and	their	sales	decline,	while	those	that	do	a	great	job	will

attract	sizable	followings	through	this	new	form	of	word	of	"mouth."
But	the	various	endorsements	and	especially	the	negative	comments	will	have
to	be	examined	carefully.	They	may	be	motivated	more	by	fanaticism	than	a
genuine	desire	to	share	pertinent	information.
Let's	say	a	company	is	selling	an	air	conditioner	that	99.9	percent	of	its
customers	are	very	happy	with.	One	angry	consumer	in	the	remaining	0.1
percent	can	post	horrible	insults	about	a	brand	of	air	conditioner,	the	company
that	manufactures	it,	and	individuals	in	the	company,	and	keep	sending	the
messages	over	and	over	and	over.	The	effect	could	be	compared	to	sitting	in	a
meeting	where	everyone	has	a	volume	control	that	could	be	set	from	0	to
1,000,	and	the	normal	level	of	conversation	is,	say,	3.	Then	a	few	people
decide	to	crank	their	volume	up	to	1,000	and	start	shouting.	This	means	that	if
I	happen	to	look	in	on	the	bulletin	board	because	I'm	buying	an	air
conditioner,	my	visit	may	be	a	waste	of	time	because	all	I	find	there	is	the
shouting.	It	is	unfair	to	me	and	to	the	company	selling	the	air	conditioners.
Already,	a	network	etiquette,	or	"netiquette,"	is	evolving.	As	the	information
highway	becomes	society's	town	square,	we	will	come	to	expect	it	to	conform
to	our	culture's	mores.	There	are	vast	cultural	differences	around	the	world,	so
the	highway	will	be	divided	into	different	parts,	some	dedicated	to	various
cultures,	and	some	specified	for	global	usage.	So	far,	a	frontier	mentality	has
prevailed,	and	participants	in	electronic	forums	have	been	known	to	lapse	into
behavior	that	is	antisocial	and	even	illegal.	Illegal	copies	of	copyrighted
intellectual	property,	including	articles,	books,	and	software	applications,	are
distributed	freely.	Get-rich-quick	scams	pop	up	here	and	there.	Pornography
flourishes	within	the	easy	reach	of	children.	Single-minded	voices	rant,
sometimes	almost	incessantly,	about	products,	companies,	and	people	they
have	come	to	dislike.	Forum	participants	get	horrible	insults	hurled	at	them
because	of	some	comment	they	have	made.	The	ease	with	which	an
individual,	any	individual,	can	share	his	opinions	with	the	members	of	a	huge
electronic	community	is	unprecedented.	And	the	ones	who	are	yelling	are
able,	because	the	electronic	community	is	so	efficient,	to	take	a	piece	of	hate
mail	and	post	it	on	twenty	bulletin	boards.	I've	seen	bulletin	boards	collapse
into	foolishness	after	people	start	getting	shrill.	Other	participants	in	the
discussion	don't	know	what	to	do.	Some	people	yell	back;	a	few	try	to	say
rational	things.	But	the	shrill	comments	continue,	and	that	destroys	the	sense
of	community.
The	Internet,	true	to	its	roots	as	an	academic	cooperative,	has	relied	on	peer
pressure	for	regulation.	For	example,	if	someone	in	a	discussion	group	posts

an	extraneous	comment	or,	worse,	tries	to	sell	something	in	an	electronic
forum	that	is	seen	by	others	as	a	noncommercial	setting,	the	would-be
diverger	or	merchant	may	get	a	withering	barrage	of	insults.	The	enforcement
so	far	has	been	mostly	by	self-appointed	censors
who	"flame"	those	they	believe	have	crossed	the	line	into	antisocial	behavior.
The	commercial	on-line	services	employ	volunteers	and	professional
moderators	to	monitor	conduct	on	their	bulletin	boards.	Forums	that	have
moderators	can	filter	out	some	antisocial	behavior	by	refusing	to	allow	insults
or	copyrighted	information	to	remain	on	a	system's	servers.	Most	Internet
forums	remain	unmoderated,	however.	Anything	goes,	and	because	people
can	post	messages	and	information	anonymously,	little	accountability	exists.
We	need	a	more	sophisticated	process	to	gather	consensus	opinions	without
depending	on	the	Attorney	General's	Consumer	Complaints	Division	to	act	as
a	filter.	We	will	have	to	find	some	way	to	force	people	to	turn	their	volume
down	so	the	highway	doesn't	become	an	amplifier	for	libel	or	slander	or	an
outlet	for	venting	irritation.
Many	providers	of	Internet	access	are	beginning	to	restrict	entry	to	forums
containing	sexually	explicit	material,	and	there	has	been	a	crackdown	on	the
illegal	traffic	of	copyrighted	materials.	Some	universities	are	getting	students
and	staff	to	remove	objectionable	postings.	This	rubs	some	the	wrong	way,
because	they	see	cyberspace	as	a	place	where	anything	goes.	The	commercial
services	have	had	similar	problems.	There	have	been	complaints	about
restriction	of	free	speech.	And	parents	were	outraged	when	their	family
account	was	closed	after	their	eleven-year-old	made	an	objectionable
comment	to	a	moderator.	Companies	will	create	special	communities	on	the
Internet	and	will	"compete"	by	having	rules	about	how	they	are	going	to	deal
with	these	issues.
Politicians	are	already	wrestling	with	the	question	of	when	an	on-line	service
should	be	treated	as	a	common	carrier	and	when	it	should	be	treated	as	a
publisher.	Telephone	companies	are	legally	considered	common	carriers.
They	transport	messages	without	assuming	any	responsibility	for	them.	If	an
obscene	caller	bothers	you,	the	telephone	company	will	cooperate	with	the
police,	but	nobody	thinks	it	is	the	phone	company's	fault	that	some	creep	is
calling	you	and	talking	dirty.	Magazines	and	newspapers,	on	the	other	hand,
are	publishers.	They	are	legally	responsible	for	their	content	and	can	be	sued
for	libel.	They	also	have	a	strong	interest	in	maintaining	their	reputation	and
editorial	integrity	because	that	is	an	important	part	of	their	business.	Any
responsible	newspaper	checks	very	carefully	before	making	a	previously

unpublished	allegation	about	someone—in	part	because	it	doesn't	want	a	libel
suit,	but	also	because	inaccuracy	would	hurt	its	reputation.
On-line	services	function	simultaneously	as	common	carriers	and	publishers,
which	is	where	the	problem	lies.	When	they	act	as	publishers,	and	offer
content	they	have	acquired,	authored,	or	edited,	it	makes	sense	that	the	rules
of	libel	and	the	self-governing	incentive	of	editorial	reputation	would	apply.
But	we	also	expect	them	to	deliver	our	e-mail	like	a	common	carrier	without
examining	or	taking	responsibility	for	its	contents.	Likewise,	chat	lines,
bulletin	boards,	and	forums	that	encourage	users	to	interact	without	editorial
supervision	are	a	new	means	of	communication,	and	shouldn't	be	treated	the
same	way	as	material	published	on	the	service.	A	New	York	judge,	however,
recently	cleared	the	way	for	a	libel	lawsuit	by	ruling	that	the	on-line	service
involved	was	a	publisher	of	information,	not	just	a	distributor.	Perhaps	by	the
time	you	read	this	things	will	have	been	clarified.	The	stakes	in	the	resolution
of	this	issue	are	high.	If	network	providers	are	treated	entirely	as	publishers,
they	will	have	to	monitor	and	preapprove	the	content	of	all	information	they
transmit.	This	could	create	an	unwelcome	atmosphere	of	censorship	and
curtail	spontaneous	exchange,	so	important	in	the	electronic	world.
Ideally,	the	industry	will	develop	some	standards	so	that	when	you	go	into	a
bulletin	board	or	article,	you	get	an	indication	of	whether	or	not	some
"publisher"	has	looked	it	over,	edited	it,	and	stands	behind	its	content.	The
question	will	be	what	standards	and	who	will	oversee	them?	A	bulletin	board
for	lesbians	should	not	be	forced	to	accept	antilesbian	comments,	nor	should	a
bulletin	board	about	some	product	be	overwhelmed	by	messages	from	a
competitor.	It	would	be	a	shame	to	have	to	keep	children	away	from	all
bulletin	boards,	but	it	would	also	be	unrealistic,	and	possibly	an	abridgment
of	free	expression,	to	force	all	bulletin	boards	to	undergo	review	by	someone
willing	to	accept	liability	for	everything	they	contain.	What	we	will	most
likely	end	up	with	is	a	series	of	categories,	like	the	ratings	given	movies,	that
will	indicate	whether	shrill	voices	have	been	controlled	and	whether	an
"editor"	has	deleted	messages	he	thought	were	out	of	line	with	the	policies	of
the	group	involved.
The	bulletin	boards	I've	been	discussing	are	the	free,	public	ones,	but	there
will	also	be	places	where	professional	information	and	advice	will	be	offered
for	a	fee.	You	might	wonder	why	you	would	need	an	expert	when	so	much
information	will	be	available.	For	the	same	reasons	you	might	need	one	now.
All	sorts	of	consumer	data	can	be	had	now.	Consumer	Reports	offers
objective	evaluations	of	a	lot	of	products,	but	the	reviews	are	aimed	at	a	broad
audience—they	don't	necessarily	discuss	your	particular	requirements.	If	you

can't	find	exactly	the	advice	you	need	on	the	highway,	you	will	be	able	to	hire
a	knowledgeable	sales	consultant,	for	five	minutes	or	an	afternoon,	via
videoconference.	She	will	help	you	choose	products,	which	your	computer
will	then	buy	for	you	from	the	cheapest	reliable	source.
I	expect	the	traditional	binding	together	of	advice	and	sales	to	be	much	less
prevalent,	because	although	the	advice	appears	free	to	the	customer,	it	is	paid
for	by	the	stores	and	services	that	offer	it.	This	cost	then	gets	added	on	to	the
price	of	the	goods.	Stores	that	are	charging	more	because	they	offer	advice
will	have	increasing	difficulty	competing	with	the	discounters	who	will
operate	on	the	information	highway.	The======================================================== he	telegraph	and,	later,	ticker	services	was	to	deliver	racetrack
results.	Satellite	television	broadcasts	contributed	to	off-track	betting.	Slot
machine	designs	have	always	tracked	the	progress	in	mechanical	calculators
and,	more	recently,	computers.	The	information	highway	will	have	an	even
more	significant	effect	on	both	legal	and	illegal	gambling.	We	are	sure	to	see
current	odds	posted	on	servers,	and	e-mail	as	a	way	to	make	bets.	Electronic
currency	will	be	used	to	place	bets	and	make	payoffs.
Gambling	is	a	highly	regulated	business,	so	it's	difficult	to	predict	what	forms
will	be	allowed	on	the	highway.	Maybe	air	travelers	who	are	stuck	on	a	plane
with	nothing	else	to	do	will	be	able	to	gamble	with	each	other.	Perhaps
gambling	games	will	have	to	provide	full	disclosure	of	the	odds	against	you.
The	technology	will	allow	people	to	bet	on	anything	they	choose	to,	and	if	it's
legal	someone	is	sure	to	set	up	a	service.	It	will	be	possible	to	bring	horse
races,	dog	races,	or	any	other	kind	of	live	sports	event	into	your	home	in	real-
time,	so	some	of	the	excitement	of	the	track	or	stadium	will	be	made
available.	Many	governments	raise	revenue	with	lotteries	and	in	the	future
could	provide	plug-into	electronic	lotteries.	The	highway	will	make	gambling
far	more	difficult	to	control	than	it	is	today.
We	can	be	sure	we'll	use	the	highway's	unique	capabilities	to	help	us	find
communities	of	others	with	common	interests.	Today	you	may	belong	to	the
local	ski	club	so	you	can	meet	other	people	who	like	to	ski.	You	may	also

subscribe	to	Recreational	Skier	so	you	can	get	information	about	new	ski
products.	Tomorrow	you	will	be	able	to	join	such	a	community	on	the
information	highway.	It	will	not	only	provide	you	with	up-to-date	information
about	weather	conditions	instantly,	but	will	also	be	a	way	for	you	to	stay	in
touch	with	other	enthusiasts.
The	greater	the	number	of	people	who	join	an	electronic	community,	the	more
valuable	it	will	be	to	everyone	who	uses	it.	Most	of	the	world's	skiing
enthusiasts	will	participate,	at	least	occasionally.	In	time,	the	world's	best
information	about	skis	and	skiing	will	be	available	electronically.	If	you	join,
you	will	find	the	best	slopes	near	Munich,	the	lowest	price	anywhere	for	a
particular	set	of	poles,	and	the	latest	news	and	advertising	about	all	ski-related
products.	If	people	have	taken	photos	or	made	videos	of	a	race	or	a	trip,	they
can	share	them.	Books	about	skiing	will	be	reviewed	by	anyone	who	has	an
opinion.	Laws	and	safety	practices	will	be	debated.	Instructional	videos	will
be	available	on	a	moment's	notice.	These	multi-media	documents	will	be
available	free	or	for	a	charge,	to	one	person	or	to	hundreds	of	thousands.	This
community	on	the	information	highway	will	become	the	place	to	go	if	you	are
interested	in	skiing.
If	you	want	to	get	yourself	in	better	physical	condition	before	trying	a	hard
slope,	you	might	find	training	more	fun	if	you	are	in	close	electronic	touch
with	a	dozen	other	people	who	are	your	size,	weight,	and	age,	and	who	share
your	specific	goals	for	exercise	and	weight	reduction.	You	would	have	less	to
be	self-conscious	about	in	an	exercise	program	in	which	everyone	else	is	like
you.	And	if	you	still	were	uncomfortable,	you	could	turn	your	video	camera
off.	Members	of	this	community	could	get	together	to	encourage	each	other
and	even	work	out	at	the	same	time.
The	community	of	skiers	is	quite	large	and	easy	to	define.	On	the	information
highway	there	will	be	applications	to	help	you	find	people	and	information
that	intersect	with	your	interests,	no	matter	how	specific.	If	you're	thinking	of
visiting	Berlin,	the	highway	will	make	vast	amounts	of	historical,	touristic,
and	sociological	information	available.	But	there	will	also	be	applications	to
let	you	find	fellow	enthusiasts	there.	You'll	be	invited	to	register	your	interests
in	databases	that	can	be	analyzed	by	the	applications.	These	applications	will
even	suggest	people	you	might	like	to	meet.	If	you	have	a	collection	of
Venetian	glass	paperweights,	you'll	probably	choose	to	be	a	member	of	one	or
more	world	communities	of	people	who	share	this	interest.	Some	of	those
people	may	live	in	Berlin	and	have	collections	they'd	be	delighted	to	show
you.	If	you	have	a	ten-year-old	daughter	you'll	be	taking	with	you	to	Berlin,
you	might	query	whether	there	is	anyone	in	Berlin	who	has	a	ten-year-old,

shares	your	language,	and	is	willing	to	spend	time	with	you	during	your	visit.
If	you	find	two	or	three	suitable	people,	you	have	created	a	small—and
probably	temporary—community	of	interest.
I	recently	visited	Africa	and	took	a	lot	of	pictures	of	chimpanzees.	If	the
information	highway	were	available	now,	I	would	put	out	a	message	saying
that	if	anyone	else	from	the	safari	wanted	to	exchange	photographs,	he	or	she
should	put	them	on	the	same	bulletin	board	where	I	had	posted	my
chimpanzee	photos.	I	would	be	able	to	set	it	up	so	only	fellow	safari	members
could	have	access	to	that	bulletin	board.
Already,	thousands	of	newsgroups	on	the	Internet	and	countless	forums	on
commercial	on-line	services	have	been	set	up	as	locations	for	small
communities	to	share	information.	For	example,	on	the	Internet	there	are
lively	text-based	discussion	groups	with	such	names	as	alt.agriculture.fruit,
alt.animals.raccoons,	alt.asian-movies,	alt.coffee,	bionet.-
biology.cardiovascular,	soc.religion.islam,	and	talk.philosophy,	misc.	But
these	topics	aren't	nearly	so	specialized	as	some	of	the	subjects	I	expect
electronic	communities	will	address	in	the	future.	Some	communities	will	be
very	local,	and	some	will	be	global.	You	won't	be	overwhelmed	by	the
number	of	choices	of	communities	any	more	than	you	are	now	by	the
telephone	system.	You'll	look	for	a	group	that	interests	you	in	general,	and
then	you'll	search	through	it	for	the	small	segment	you	want	to	join.	I	can
imagine	the	administration	of	every	municipality,	for	example,	becoming	the
focus	of	an	electronic	community.
Sometimes	I	get	annoyed	by	a	traffic	light	near	my	office	that	always	stays
red	longer	than	I	think	it	should.	I	could	write	a	letter	to	the	city,	telling	the
folks	who	program	the	lights	that	the	timing	isn't	optimal,	but	that	would	just
be	one	cranky	letter.	On	the	other	hand,	if	I	could	find	the	"community"	of
people	who	drive	the	route	I	do,	we	could	send	a	strong	complaint	to	the	city.
I	could	find	these	others	by	sending	a	message	to	people	who	live	near	me	or
by	posting	a	message	on	a	community	affairs	bulletin	board	that	showed	a
map	of	the	intersection	accompanied	by	the	message:	"During	the	morning
rush	hours	hardly	anyone	goes	left	at	this	intersection.	Does	anyone	else	think
the	cycle	should	be	shortened?"	Anyone	who	agreed	with	me	could	add	to	my
message.	It	would	make	it	easier	to	fight	City	Hall.
As	on-line	communities	grow	in	importance,	they	will	increasingly	be	where
people	will	turn	to	find	out	what	the	public	is	really	thinking.	People	like	to
know	what's	popular,	which	movies	friends	are	watching,	and	what	news
others	think	is	interesting.	I	want	to	read	the	same	"newspaper	front	page"	as

those	I'm	going	to	meet	with	later	today,	so	we	can	have	something	in
common	to	talk	about.	You	will	be	able	to	see	what	places	on	the	network	are
being	looked	at	often.	There	will	be	all	sorts	of	"hot	lists"	of	the	coolest
places.
Electronic	communities,	with	all	the	information	they	reveal,	will	also	create
problems.	Some	institutions	will	have	to	make	big	changes	as	on-line
communities	gain	power.	Doctors	and	medical	researchers	are	already	having
to	contend	with	patients	who	explore	medical	literature	electronically	and
compare	notes	with	other	patients	who	have	the	same	serious	disease.	Word
of	unorthodox	or	unapproved	treatments	spreads	fast	in	these	communities.
Some	patients	in	drug	trials	have	been	able	to	figure	out,	by	communicating
with	other	patients	in	the	trial,	that	they	are	receiving	a	placebo	rather	than	the
real	medication.	The	discovery	has	prompted	some	of	them	to	drop	out	of	the
trials	or	to	seek	alternate,	simultaneous	remedies.	This	undermines	the
research,	but	it	is	hard	to	fault	patients	who	are	trying	to	save	their	lives.
It's	not	just	medical	researchers	who	will	be	affected	by	so	much	access	to
information.	One	of	the	biggest	concerns	is	parents	having	to	contend	with
children	who	can	find	out	about	almost	anything	they	want	to,	right	from	a
home	information	appliance.	Already,	rating	systems	are	being	designed	to
allow	parental	control	over	what	kids	have	access	to.	This	could	become	a
major	political	issue	if	the	information	publishers	don't	handle	it	properly.
On	balance,	the	advantages	will	greatly	outweigh	the	problems.	The	more
information	there	is	available,	the	more	choices	we	will	have.	Today,	devoted
fans	plan	their	evenings	around	the	broadcast	times	of	their	favorite	television
shows,	but	once	video-on-demand	gives	us	the	opportunity	to	watch	whatever
we	like	whenever	we	like,	family	or	social	activities,	rather	than	a
broadcaster's	time	slots,	will	control	our	entertainment	schedules.	Before	the
telephone,	people	thought	of	their	neighbors	as	their	only	community.	Almost
everything	was	done	with	others	who	lived	nearby.	The	telephone	and	the
automobile	allowed	us	to	stretch	out.	We	may	visit	face-to-face	less	often	than
we	did	a	century	ago	because	we	can	pick	up	the	telephone,	but	this	doesn't
mean	we	have	become	isolated.	It	has	made	it	easier	for	us	to	talk	to	each
other	and	stay	in	touch.	Sometimes	it	may	seem	too	easy	for	people	to	reach
you.
A	decade	from	now,	you	may	shake	your	head	that	there	was	ever	a	time
when	any	stranger	or	a	wrong	number	could	interrupt	you	at	home	with	a
phone	call.	Cellular	phones,	pagers,	and	fax	machines	have	already	made	it
necessary	for	businesspeople	to	make	explicit	decisions	that	used	to	be

implicit.	A	decade	ago	we	didn't	have	to	decide	whether	we	wanted	to	receive
documents	at	home	or	take	calls	on	the	road.	It	was	easy	to	withdraw	to	your
house,	or	certainly	to	you======================================================== udience	is	with	a	classified
ad.	Each	classification	represents	a	small	community	of	interest:	people	who
want	to	buy	or	sell	a	rug,	for	example.	Tomorrow,	the	classified	ad	won't	be
tied	to	paper	or	limited	to	text.	If	you're	looking	for	a	used	car,	you	will	send
out	a	query	specifying	the	price	range,	model,	and	features	that	interest	you
and	will	be	shown	a	list	of	the	available	cars	that	match	your	preferences.	Or
you	will	ask	a	software	agent	to	notify	you	when	a	suitable	car	comes	on	the
market.	Car	sellers'	ads	might	include	links	to	a	picture	or	a	video	of	the	car
or	even	the	car's	maintenance	records,	so	you	can	get	a	sense	of	what	shape	it
is	in.	You'll	be	able	to	learn	the	mileage	the	same	way,	and	whether	the	engine
has	ever	been	replaced,	and	if	the	car	has	air	bags.	Perhaps	you	will	want	to
cross-link	to	police	records,	which	are	public,	to	see	whether	it	has	been	in	a
wreck.

If	you	put	your	house	on	the	market,	you	will	be	able	to	describe	it	fully	and
include	photographs,	video,	floor	plans,	tax	records,	utility	and	repair	bills,
even	a	little	mood	music.	The	chances	that	a	potential	buyer	for	your	house
will	see	your	ad	are	improved	because	the	information	highway	will	make	it
easy	for	anyone	to	look	it	up.	The	whole	system	of	real	estate	agencies	and
commissions	may	be	changed	by	the	principals'	having	direct	access	to	so
much	information.
At	first,	on-line	classified	ads	won't	be	very	attractive,	because	not	many
people	will	be	using	them.	But	then	word-of-mouth	from	a	few	satisfied
customers	will	entice	more	and	more	users	to	the	service.	There	will	be	a
positive-feedback	loop	created	as	more	sellers	attract	more	buyers	and	vice
versa.	When	a	critical	mass	is	achieved,	which	might	be	only	a	year	or	two
after	the	service	is	first	offered,	the	information	highway's	classified
advertising	service	will	be	transformed	from	a	curiosity	to	the	primary	way
private	sellers	and	buyers	get	together.
Direct-response	advertising—the	junk-mail	business	is	in	for	even	bigger
changes.	Today,	a	lot	of	it	really	is	junk,	because	we	cut	down	a	lot	of	trees	in
order	to	mail	out	material,	much	of	which	is	discarded	unopened.	Direct-
response	advertising	on	the	information	highway	will	come	in	the	form	of	an
interactive	multi-media	document	rather	than	a	piece	of	paper.	Although	it
won't	waste	natural	resources,	there	will	have	to	be	some	way	to	make	sure
you	don't	get	thousands	of	these	almost-free	communications	a	day.
You	won't	be	drowned	by	the	deluge	of	unimportant	information	because
you'll	use	software	to	filter	incoming	advertising	and	other	extraneous
messages	and	spend	your	valuable	time	looking	at	those	messages	that
interest	you.	Most	people	will	block	e-mail	ads	except	for	those	about	product
areas	of	particular	concern.	One	way	for	the	advertiser	to	capture	your
attention	will	be	to	offer	a	small	amount	of	money—a	nickel	or	a	dollar,
perhaps—if	you	will	look	at	an	ad.	When	you	have	watched	it,	or	as	you're
interacting	with	it,	your	electronic	account	gets	credited	and	the	advertiser's
electronic	account	is	debited.	In	effect,	some	of	the	billions	of	dollars	now
spent	annually	on	media	advertising,	and	on	the	printing	and	postage	of
direct-mail	advertising,	will	instead	be	divvied	up	among	consumers	who
agree	to	watch	or	read	ads	sent	directly	to	them	as	messages.
Mailings	offering	this	sort	of	paying	advertisement	could	be	extremely
effective	because	they	can	be	carefully	targeted.	Advertisers	will	be	smart
about	sending	messages	worth	money	only	to	people	who	meet	appropriate
demographics.	A	company	such	as	Ferrari	or	Porsche	might	send	$1	messages

to	car	enthusiasts,	on	the	chance	that	seeing	a	cool	new	car	and	hearing	the
sound	of	its	engine	will	generate	interest.	If	the	ad	led	to	even	one	in	1,000
people's	buying	a	new	car	as	a	result,	it	would	be	worthwhile	to	the	company.
They	could	adjust	the	amount	they	offer	according	to	the	customer's	profile.
Such	ads	will	be	available	to	those	not	on	the	advertiser's	A-list.	For	instance,
if	a	sixteen-year-old	car-crazy	kid	wants	to	experience	a	Ferrari,	and	is	willing
to	do	it	for	nothing,	he'll	get	the	message	too.
This	may	sound	a	little	strange,	but	it	is	just	another	use	of	the	market
mechanism	for	friction-free	capitalism.	The	advertiser	decides	how	much
money	it	is	willing	to	bid	for	your	time,	and	you	decide	what	your	time	is
worth.
Advertising	messages,	like	the	rest	of	your	incoming	mail,	will	be	stored	in
various	folders.	You	will	instruct	your	computer	how	to	do	the	sorting	for
you.	Unread	mail	from	friends	and	family	members	might	be	in	one	folder.
Messages	and	documents	that	relate	to	a	personal	or	business	interest	would
be	in	other	folders.	And	advertisements	and	messages	from	unknown	people
could	be	sorted	by	how	much	money	was	attached	to	them.	There	would	be	a
group	of	1-cent	messages,	a	group	of	10-cent	messages,	and	so	forth.	If	there
was	no	fee	attached,	they	could	be	refused.	You	will	be	able	to	scan	each
message	and	dispose	of	it	if	it	isn't	of	interest.	Some	days	you	might	not	look
into	any	of	the	advertising	message	folders.	But	if	someone	sent	you	a	$10
message,	you	would	probably	take	a	look—if	not	for	the	money,	then	just	to
see	who	thought	reaching	you	was	worth	$10.
You	won't	have	to	take	the	money	someone	bids,	of	course.	When	you	accept
the	message,	you'll	be	able	to	cancel	the	payment,	so	it's	really	just	the
amount	the	person	puts	at	risk	to	get	your	attention.	The	sender's	credit	will
be	checked	in	advance.	If	a	man	sends	you	a	$100	message	suggesting	that	he
is	your	long-lost	brother,	you	might	forgive	him	the	money	if,	in	fact,	he
turned	out	to	be	your	brother.	On	the	other	hand,	if	he	was	just	someone
trying	to	get	your	attention	to	sell	you	something,	you	would	probably	keep
the	money,	thank	you	very	much.
In	the	United	States,	advertisers	currently	spend	more	than	$20	a	month	per
American	family	to	subsidize	free	broadcast	and	cable	television.	Ads	in
general	are	so	familiar	they	don't	really	bother	us	when	we	watch	television	or
listen	to	the	radio.	We	understand	that	programs	are	"free"	because	of	the
commercials.	Customers	pay	for	them	indirectly	because	advertising	costs	are
built	into	the	prices	of	cornflakes,	shampoo,	and	diamonds.	We	also	pay	for
entertainment	and	information	directly	when	we	buy	a	book	or	a	movie	ticket,

or	order	a	pay-per-view	movie.	The	average	American	household	pays	a	total
of	$100	a	month	for	movie	tickets,	subscriptions	to	newspapers	and
magazines,	books,	cable	television	fees,	compact	discs	and	tapes,	video
rentals,	and	the	like.
When	you	pay	for	entertainment	by	buying	a	tape	or	a	disc,	your	rights	to
reuse	or	resell	it	are	restricted.	If	you	buy	a	copy	of	Abbey	Road	by	the
Beatles,	you're	actually	purchasing	the	physical	disc	or	tape	and	a	license	to
replay,	any	number	of	times,	for	noncommercial	purposes,	the	music	stored
on	it.	If	you	buy	a	paperback	book,	what	you're	really	buying	is	the	paper	and
ink	and	the	right	to	read,	and	allow	others	to	read,	the	words	printed	on	that
particular	paper	with	that	particular	ink.	You	don't	own	the	words	and	you
can't	reprint	them,	except	in	narrowly	defined	circumstances.	When	you
watch	a	television	show,	you	don't	own	it,	either.	In	fact,	it	took	a	United
States	Supreme	Court	decision	to	confirm	that	people	in	this	country	can
legally	videotape	a	television	show	for	their	personal	use.
The	information	highway	will	enable	innovations	in	the	way	that	intellectual
property,	such	as	music	and	software,	is	licensed.	Record	companies,	or	even
individual	recording	artists,	might	choose	to	sell	music	a	new	way.	You,	the
consumer,	won't	need	compact	discs,	tapes,	or	any	other	kinds	of	physical
apparatus.	The	music	will	be	stored	as	bits	of	information	on	a	server	on	the
highway.	"Buying"	a	song	or	album	will	really	mean	buying	the	right	to
access	the	appropriate	bits.	You	will	be	able	to	listen	at	home,	at	work,	or	on
vacation,	without	carrying	around	a	collection	of	titles.	Anyplace	you	go
where	there	are	audio	speakers	connected	to	the	highway,	you'll	be	able	to
identify	yourself	and	take	advantage	of	your	rights.	You	won't	be	allowed	to
rent	a	concert	hall	and	play	that	recording	of	the	music	or	create	an
advertisement	that	incorporated	it.	But	in	any	noncommercial	setting,
anywhere	you	go,	you'll	have	the	right	to	play	the	song	without	additional
payment	to	the	copyright	holder.	In	the	same	way,	the	information	highway
could	keep	track	of	whether	you	had	bought	the	right	to	read	a	particular	book
or	see	a	movie.	If	you	had,	you'd	be	able	to	call	it	up	at	any	time,	from	any
information	appliance	anywhere.
This	personal,	lifetime	buyout	of	rights	is	similar	to	what	we	do	today	when
we	buy	a	music	disc	or	tape,	or	book,	except	that	there	is	no	physical	medium
involved.	It	sounds	comfortingly	familiar.	However,	there	are	lots	of	other
ways	to	sell	the	enjoyment	of	music	or	other	information.
For	example,	a	song	could	be	made	available	on	a	pay-per-hearing	basis.	Each
time	you	listened	to	it,	your	account	would	be	charged	some	small	amount,

such	as	5	cents.	At	that	rate,	it	would	cost	60	cents	to	listen	to	a	twelve-song
"album."	You	would	have	to	play	the	whole	album	twenty-five	times	to	spend
$15,	which	is	roughly	what	a	compact	disc	sells	for	today.	If	you	found	that
you	liked	only	one	song	on	the	album,	you	could	play	it	three	hundred	times,
at	a	nickel	each	time,	for	your	$15.	Because	digital	information	is	so	flexible,
as	the	audio	quality	improves	you	won't	have	to	pay	for	the	same	music	again
the	way	people	did	when	they	bought	CDs	to	replace	the	LPs	in	their	personal
libraries.
All	kinds	of	pricing	schemes	will	be	tried.	We	may	see	digital	entertainment
that	has	an	expiration	date	or	that	allows	only	a	certain	number	of	plays
before	it	has	to	be	purchased	again.	A	record	company	might	offer	a	very	low
price	for	a	song	but	let	you	play	it	only	ten	or	twenty	times.	Or	they	might	let
you	play	a	song—or	an	addictive	game—ten	times	free	be======================================================== re	will	continue	to	be	some	modest
price	variations	in	products	from	one	outlet	to	another.	These	will	reflect
differences	in	return	policies,	delivery	times,	and	whatever	limited	customer
assistance	is	available.
Some	merchants	will	offer	"consultants"	as	part	of	the	sales	price,	but	for
important	purchases	you	are	likely	to	welcome	a	truly	independent	guide.	The
cost	of	the	consultation	will	be	offset	to	an	extent	by	the	lower	price	you'll
end	up	paying	at	the	outlet	the	consultant	will	guide	you	to.	The	prices
consultants	charge	will	also	be	very	competitive.	Suppose	you	use	a	service
on	the	highway	to	obtain	information	about	where	to	buy	an	expensive	car	at
the	best	price,	and	then	you	buy	it.	The	price	for	using	the	service—which	has
acted	as	the	middleman	in	the	transaction—might	be	charged	at	a	low	hourly
rate,	or	it	could	be	a	small	percentage	of	the	purchase	price.	It	will	depend	on
the	uniqueness	of	the	service.	Electronic	competition	will	determine	the	fee.
Over	time,	more	advice	will	be	offered	by	software	applications	that	have
been	programmed	to	analyze	your	requirements	and	make	appropriate
suggestions.	A	number	of	large	banks	have	already	developed	"expert"
computer	systems	to	analyze	routine	loan	and	credit	applications,	with	great
success.	As	software	agents	become	common,	and	voice-simulation-and-
recognition	software	improves,	it	will	begin	to	feel	as	though	you're	talking	to
a	real	person	when	you	consult	a	multi-media	document	with	a	personality.
You'll	be	able	to	interrupt,	request	more	detail,	or	ask	to	have	an	explanation
repeated.	The	experience	will	be	like	chatting	with	a	personable	expert.
Eventually	it	won't	matter	much	whether	you	are	talking	to	a	human	being	or
a	very	good	simulation,	as	long	as	you	get	the	answers	you	need	to	make	an
appropriate	purchase.
A	step	toward	the	discount	electronic	commerce	of	the	highway	is	today's
home-shopping	television	networks.	In	1994	they	sold	nearly	$3	billion	worth
of	goods	despite	the	fact	that	they	are	synchronous,	which	means	you	may

have	to	sit	through	pitches	for	countless	other	items	until	they	offer	one	you're
interested	in.	On	the	information	highway	you'll	be	able	to	amble	globally	at
your	own	pace	among	goods	and	services.	If	you're	looking	for	sweaters,
you'll	choose	a	basic	style	and	see	as	many	variations	as	you	like,	in	every
price	range.	Perhaps	you'll	watch	a	fashion	show	or	a	product	demonstration.
Interactivity	will	marry	convenience	with	entertainment.
Today,	branded	products	often	appear	in	feature	films	and	television
programs.	A	character	who	once	would	have	ordered	a	beer	now	asks	for	a
Budweiser.	In	the	1993	movie	Demolition	Man,	Taco	Bell	restaurants	seem	to
be	the	only	fast-food	survivors.	Taco	Bell's	corporate	parent,	PepsiCo,	paid
for	the	privilege.	Microsoft	paid	a	fee	to	have	Arnold	Schwarzenegger
discover	the	Arabic	version	of	Windows	running	on	a	computer	screen	during
True	Lies.	In	the	future,	companies	may	pay	not	only	to	have	their	products
on-screen,	but	also	to	make	them	available	for	you	to	buy.	You	will	have	the
option	of	inquiring	about	any	image	you	see.	This	will	be	another	choice	the
highway	will	make	available	unobtrusively.	If	you	are	watching	the	movie
Top	Gun	and	think	Tom	Cruise's	aviator	sunglasses	look	really	cool,	you'll	be
able	to	pause	the	movie	and	learn	about	the	glasses	or	even	buy	them	on	the
spot—if	the	film	has	been	tagged	with	commercial	information.	Or	you	could
mark	the	scene	and	return	to	it	later.	If	a	movie	has	a	scene	filmed	in	a	resort
hotel,	you'll	be	able	to	find	out	where	it's	located,	check	room	rates,	and	make
reservations.	If	the	movie's	star	carries	a	handsome	leather	briefcase	or
handbag,	the	highway	will	let	you	browse	the	manufacturer's	entire	line	of
leather	goods	and	either	order	one	or	be	directed	to	a	convenient	retailer.
Because	the	information	highway	will	carry	video,	you'll	often	be	able	to	see
exactly	what	you've	ordered.	This	will	help	prevent	the	sort	of	mistake	my
grandmother	once	made.	I	was	at	summer	camp	and	she	ordered	lemon	drops
to	be	sent	to	me.	She	ordered	one	hundred,	thinking	I	would	get	one	hundred
pieces	of	candy.	Instead	I	got	one	hundred	bags.	I	gave	them	out	to	everyone
and	was	especially	popular	until	we	all	began	to	have	canker	sores.	On	the
highway	you	will	be	able	to	take	a	video	tour	of	that	hotel	before	you	make
your	reservation.	You	won't	have	to	wonder	whether	the	flowers	you	ordered
for	your	mother	by	telephone	really	were	as	stunning	as	you'd	hoped.	You'll
be	able	to	watch	the	florist	arrange	the	bouquet,	change	your	mind	if	you
want,	and	replace	wilting	roses	with	fresh	anemones.	When	you're	shopping
for	clothing,	it	will	be	displayed	in	your	size.	In	fact,	you'll	be	able	to	see	it
paired	with	other	items	you	have	purchased	or	are	considering.
Once	you	know	exactly	what	you	want,	you'll	be	able	to	get	it	just	that	way.
Computers	will	enable	goods	that	today	are	mass-produced	to	be	both	mass-

produced	and	custom	made	for	particular	customers.	Customization	will
become	an	important	way	for	a	manufacturer	to	add	value.	Increasing
numbers	of	products—from	shoes	to	chairs,	from	newspapers	and	magazines
to	music	albums—will	be	created	on	the	spot	to	match	the	exact	desires	of	a
particular	person.	And	often	the	item	will	cost	no	more	than	a	mass-produced
one	would.	In	many	product	categories	mass	customization	will	replace	mass
production,	just	as	a	few	generations	ago	mass	production	largely	replaced
made-to-order.
Before	mass	production,	everything	was	made	one	piece	at	a	time,	using
labor-intensive	methods	that	hampered	productivity	and	the	standard	of
living.	Until	the	first	practical	sewing	machine	was	built,	every	shirt	was
handmade	with	needle	and	thread.	The	average	person	didn't	have	many
shirts,	because	they	were	expensive.	In	the	1860s,	when	mass-production
techniques	began	to	be	used	to	make	clothing,	machines	turned	out	large
quantities	of	identical	shirts,	the	prices	dropped,	and	even	laborers	could
afford	to	own	a	number	of	them.
Soon	there	will	be	computerized	shirt-making	machines	that	will	obey	a
different	set	of	instructions	for	every	shirt.	When	you	order	you'll	indicate
your	measurements	as	well	as	your	choices	for	fabric,	fit,	collar,	and	every
other	variable.	The	information	will	be	communicated	across	the	information
highway	to	a	manufacturing	plant	that	will	produce	the	garment	for	prompt
delivery.	Delivering	goods	ordered	over	the	highway	will	become	a	big
business.	There	will	be	amazing	competition,	and	as	volume	becomes
enormous,	delivery	will	get	very	inexpensive	and	fast.
Levi	Strauss	&	Co.	is	already	experimenting	with	custom-made	jeans	for
women.	At	a	growing	number	of	their	outlets,	customers	pay	about	$10	extra
to	have	jeans	made	to	their	exact	specifications—any	of	8,448	different
combinations	of	hip,	waist,	inseam,	and	rise	measurements	and	styles.	The
information	is	relayed	from	a	PC	in	the	store	to	a	Levi's	factory	in	Tennessee,
where	the	denim	is	cut	by	computer-driven	machines,	tagged	with	bar	codes,
and	then	washed	and	sewn.	The	completed	jeans	are	sent	back	to	the	store
where	the	order	was	placed,	or	shipped	overnight	directly	to	the	customer.
It	is	conceivable	that	within	a	few	years	everyone	will	have	measurements
registered	electronically	so	it	will	be	easy	to	find	out	how	well	a	ready-made
item	will	fit,	or	to	place	a	custom	order.	If	you	give	friends	and	relatives
access	to	this	information,	they	will	find	it	a	lot	easier	to	buy	for	you.
Customized	information	is	a	natural	extension	of	the	tailored	consultation

capabilities	of	the	highway.	Individuals	who	have	achieved	eminence	in	some
field	may	publish	their	opinions,	recommendations,	or	even	worldview,	in
much	the	same	way	that	successful	investors	publish	newsletters.	Arnold
Palmer	or	Nancy	Lopez	might	offer	golfers	the	chance	to	read	or	look	at
whatever	golf	material	they	have	found	helpful.	An	editor	who	today	works	at
The	Economist	might	start	his	or	her	own	service,	and	offer	a	digest	of	the
news	with	links	to	text	and	video	news	accounts	from	a	variety	of	sources.
Someone	using	this	review	service,	instead	of	paying	60	cents	for	a
newspaper,	might	pay	the	expert	a	few	cents	a	day	for	performing	the
middleman	function	of	assembling	the	day's	news,	and	pay	the	publisher	of
each	story	selected	a	little	bit	too.	The	customer	would	decide	how	many
articles	he	wanted	to	read	and	how	much	to	spend.	For	your	own	daily	dose	of
news,	you	might	subscribe	to	several	review	services	and	let	a	software	agent
or	a	human	one	pick	and	choose	from	them	to	compile	your	completely
customized
"newspaper."
These	subscription	services,	whether	human	or	electronic,	will	gather
information	that	conforms	to	a	particular	philosophy	and	set	of	interests.	They
will	compete	on	the	basis	of	their	talents	and	reputations.	Magazines	fill	a
similar	role	today.	Many	are	narrowly	focused	and	serve	as	customized
realities	of	a	sort.	A	reader	who	is	politically	engaged	knows	that	what	he	or
she	is	reading	in	National	Review	is	not	"the	news."	It	is	a	bulletin	from	the
world	of	conservative	politics	where	little	of	what	the	reader	believes	is
challenged.	At	the	other	end	of	the	political	scale,	The	Nation	is	a	magazine
that	knows	its	readers'	liberal	views	and	biases	and	sets	out	to	confirm	and
massage	them.
In	the	same	ways	that	movie	studios	try	to	sell	you	their	newest	release	by
showing	previews	in	theaters,	print	advertising,	and	various	kinds	of
promotional	activities,	the	providers	of	information	will	use	all	sorts	of
techniques	to	convince	you	to	sample	their	wares.	A	lot	of	information	will	be
local—from	neighborhood	schools,	hospitals,	merchants,	and	even	pizza
joints.	Connecting	a	business	to	the	highway	won't	be	expensive.	Once	the
infrastructure	is	in	place	and	a	critical	number	of	users	adopt	it,	every
business	will	want	to	reach	out	to	its	customers	over	the	highway.
The	potential	for	electronic	efficiency	is	causing	some	people	to	worry	that	if
the======================================================== o	ballet
slippers.	Of	course	you	will	still	ask	people	you	know	for	recommendations,
but	efficiently,	by	electronic	mail.
If	you're	thinking	of	doing	business	with	a	company	or	buying	a	product,
you'll	be	able	to	check	what	others	say	about	it.	If	you	want	to	buy	a
refrigerator,	you	will	look	for	the	electronic	bulletin	boards	containing	formal
and	informal	reviews	of	refrigerators	and	their	manufacturers	and	retailers.
You'll	get	into	the	habit	of	checking	these	bulletin	boards	before	you	make
any	significant	purchase.	When	you	have	a	compliment	or	complaint	about	a
record	club,	a	doctor,	or	even	a	computer	chip,	it	will	be	easy	to	find	the	place
on	the	network	where	that	company	or	product	is	discussed	and	add	your
opinion.	Ultimately,	companies	that	don't	serve	their	customers	well	will	see
their	reputations	and	their	sales	decline,	while	those	that	do	a	great	job	will

attract	sizable	followings	through	this	new	form	of	word	of	"mouth."
But	the	various	endorsements	and	especially	the	negative	comments	will	have
to	be	examined	carefully.	They	may	be	motivated	more	by	fanaticism	than	a
genuine	desire	to	share	pertinent	information.
Let's	say	a	company	is	selling	an	air	conditioner	that	99.9	percent	of	its
customers	are	very	happy	with.	One	angry	consumer	in	the	remaining	0.1
percent	can	post	horrible	insults	about	a	brand	of	air	conditioner,	the	company
that	manufactures	it,	and	individuals	in	the	company,	and	keep	sending	the
messages	over	and	over	and	over.	The	effect	could	be	compared	to	sitting	in	a
meeting	where	everyone	has	a	volume	control	that	could	be	set	from	0	to
1,000,	and	the	normal	level	of	conversation	is,	say,	3.	Then	a	few	people
decide	to	crank	their	volume	up	to	1,000	and	start	shouting.	This	means	that	if
I	happen	to	look	in	on	the	bulletin	board	because	I'm	buying	an	air
conditioner,	my	visit	may	be	a	waste	of	time	because	all	I	find	there	is	the
shouting.	It	is	unfair	to	me	and	to	the	company	selling	the	air	conditioners.
Already,	a	network	etiquette,	or	"netiquette,"	is	evolving.	As	the	information
highway	becomes	society's	town	square,	we	will	come	to	expect	it	to	conform
to	our	culture's	mores.	There	are	vast	cultural	differences	around	the	world,	so
the	highway	will	be	divided	into	different	parts,	some	dedicated	to	various
cultures,	and	some	specified	for	global	usage.	So	far,	a	frontier	mentality	has
prevailed,	and	participants	in	electronic	forums	have	been	known	to	lapse	into
behavior	that	is	antisocial	and	even	illegal.	Illegal	copies	of	copyrighted
intellectual	property,	including	articles,	books,	and	software	applications,	are
distributed	freely.	Get-rich-quick	scams	pop	up	here	and	there.	Pornography
flourishes	within	the	easy	reach	of	children.	Single-minded	voices	rant,
sometimes	almost	incessantly,	about	products,	companies,	and	people	they
have	come	to	dislike.	Forum	participants	get	horrible	insults	hurled	at	them
because	of	some	comment	they	have	made.	The	ease	with	which	an
individual,	any	individual,	can	share	his	opinions	with	the	members	of	a	huge
electronic	community	is	unprecedented.	And	the	ones	who	are	yelling	are
able,	because	the	electronic	community	is	so	efficient,	to	take	a	piece	of	hate
mail	and	post	it	on	twenty	bulletin	boards.	I've	seen	bulletin	boards	collapse
into	foolishness	after	people	start	getting	shrill.	Other	participants	in	the
discussion	don't	know	what	to	do.	Some	people	yell	back;	a	few	try	to	say
rational	things.	But	the	shrill	comments	continue,	and	that	destroys	the	sense
of	community.
The	Internet,	true	to	its	roots	as	an	academic	cooperative,	has	relied	on	peer
pressure	for	regulation.	For	example,	if	someone	in	a	discussion	group	posts

an	extraneous	comment	or,	worse,	tries	to	sell	something	in	an	electronic
forum	that	is	seen	by	others	as	a	noncommercial	setting,	the	would-be
diverger	or	merchant	may	get	a	withering	barrage	of	insults.	The	enforcement
so	far	has	been	mostly	by	self-appointed	censors
who	"flame"	those	they	believe	have	crossed	the	line	into	antisocial	behavior.
The	commercial	on-line	services	employ	volunteers	and	professional
moderators	to	monitor	conduct	on	their	bulletin	boards.	Forums	that	have
moderators	can	filter	out	some	antisocial	behavior	by	refusing	to	allow	insults
or	copyrighted	information	to	remain	on	a	system's	servers.	Most	Internet
forums	remain	unmoderated,	however.	Anything	goes,	and	because	people
can	post	messages	and	information	anonymously,	little	accountability	exists.
We	need	a	more	sophisticated	process	to	gather	consensus	opinions	without
depending	on	the	Attorney	General's	Consumer	Complaints	Division	to	act	as
a	filter.	We	will	have	to	find	some	way	to	force	people	to	turn	their	volume
down	so	the	highway	doesn't	become	an	amplifier	for	libel	or	slander	or	an
outlet	for	venting	irritation.
Many	providers	of	Internet	access	are	beginning	to	restrict	entry	to	forums
containing	sexually	explicit	material,	and	there	has	been	a	crackdown	on	the
illegal	traffic	of	copyrighted	materials.	Some	universities	are	getting	students
and	staff	to	remove	objectionable	postings.	This	rubs	some	the	wrong	way,
because	they	see	cyberspace	as	a	place	where	anything	goes.	The	commercial
services	have	had	similar	problems.	There	have	been	complaints	about
restriction	of	free	speech.	And	parents	were	outraged	when	their	family
account	was	closed	after	their	eleven-year-old	made	an	objectionable
comment	to	a	moderator.	Companies	will	create	special	communities	on	the
Internet	and	will	"compete"	by	having	rules	about	how	they	are	going	to	deal
with	these	issues.
Politicians	are	already	wrestling	with	the	question	of	when	an	on-line	service
should	be	treated	as	a	common	carrier	and	when	it	should	be	treated	as	a
publisher.	Telephone	companies	are	legally	considered	common	carriers.
They	transport	messages	without	assuming	any	responsibility	for	them.	If	an
obscene	caller	bothers	you,	the	telephone	company	will	cooperate	with	the
police,	but	nobody	thinks	it	is	the	phone	company's	fault	that	some	creep	is
calling	you	and	talking	dirty.	Magazines	and	newspapers,	on	the	other	hand,
are	publishers.	They	are	legally	responsible	for	their	content	and	can	be	sued
for	libel.	They	also	have	a	strong	interest	in	maintaining	their	reputation	and
editorial	integrity	because	that	is	an	important	part	of	their	business.	Any
responsible	newspaper	checks	very	carefully	before	making	a	previously

unpublished	allegation	about	someone—in	part	because	it	doesn't	want	a	libel
suit,	but	also	because	inaccuracy	would	hurt	its	reputation.
On-line	services	function	simultaneously	as	common	carriers	and	publishers,
which	is	where	the	problem	lies.	When	they	act	as	publishers,	and	offer
content	they	have	acquired,	authored,	or	edited,	it	makes	sense	that	the	rules
of	libel	and	the	self-governing	incentive	of	editorial	reputation	would	apply.
But	we	also	expect	them	to	deliver	our	e-mail	like	a	common	carrier	without
examining	or	taking	responsibility	for	its	contents.	Likewise,	chat	lines,
bulletin	boards,	and	forums	that	encourage	users	to	interact	without	editorial
supervision	are	a	new	means	of	communication,	and	shouldn't	be	treated	the
same	way	as	material	published	on	the	service.	A	New	York	judge,	however,
recently	cleared	the	way	for	a	libel	lawsuit	by	ruling	that	the	on-line	service
involved	was	a	publisher	of	information,	not	just	a	distributor.	Perhaps	by	the
time	you	read	this	things	will	have	been	clarified.	The	stakes	in	the	resolution
of	this	issue	are	high.	If	network	providers	are	treated	entirely	as	publishers,
they	will	have	to	monitor	and	preapprove	the	content	of	all	information	they
transmit.	This	could	create	an	unwelcome	atmosphere	of	censorship	and
curtail	spontaneous	exchange,	so	important	in	the	electronic	world.
Ideally,	the	industry	will	develop	some	standards	so	that	when	you	go	into	a
bulletin	board	or	article,	you	get	an	indication	of	whether	or	not	some
"publisher"	has	looked	it	over,	edited	it,	and	stands	behind	its	content.	The
question	will	be	what	standards	and	who	will	oversee	them?	A	bulletin	board
for	lesbians	should	not	be	forced	to	accept	antilesbian	comments,	nor	should	a
bulletin	board	about	some	product	be	overwhelmed	by	messages	from	a
competitor.	It	would	be	a	shame	to	have	to	keep	children	away	from	all
bulletin	boards,	but	it	would	also	be	unrealistic,	and	possibly	an	abridgment
of	free	expression,	to	force	all	bulletin	boards	to	undergo	review	by	someone
willing	to	accept	liability	for	everything	they	contain.	What	we	will	most
likely	end	up	with	is	a	series	of	categories,	like	the	ratings	given	movies,	that
will	indicate	whether	shrill	voices	have	been	controlled	and	whether	an
"editor"	has	deleted	messages	he	thought	were	out	of	line	with	the	policies	of
the	group	involved.
The	bulletin	boards	I've	been	discussing	are	the	free,	public	ones,	but	there
will	also	be	places	where	professional	information	and	advice	will	be	offered
for	a	fee.	You	might	wonder	why	you	would	need	an	expert	when	so	much
information	will	be	available.	For	the	same	reasons	you	might	need	one	now.
All	sorts	of	consumer	data	can	be	had	now.	Consumer	Reports	offers
objective	evaluations	of	a	lot	of	products,	but	the	reviews	are	aimed	at	a	broad
audience—they	don't	necessarily	discuss	your	particular	requirements.	If	you

can't	find	exactly	the	advice	you	need	on	the	highway,	you	will	be	able	to	hire
a	knowledgeable	sales	consultant,	for	five	minutes	or	an	afternoon,	via
videoconference.	She	will	help	you	choose	products,	which	your	computer
will	then	buy	for	you	from	the	cheapest	reliable	source.
I	expect	the	traditional	binding	together	of	advice	and	sales	to	be	much	less
prevalent,	because	although	the	advice	appears	free	to	the	customer,	it	is	paid
for	by	the	stores	and	services	that	offer	it.	This	cost	then	gets	added	on	to	the
price	of	the	goods.	Stores	that	are	charging	more	because	they	offer	advice
will	have	increasing	difficulty	competing	with	the	discounters	who	will
operate	on	the	information	highway.	The======================================================== o	every	classroom?	Will	they	be	allowed	to
explore	independently	during	group	discussions?	If	so,	how	much	freedom
should	they	have?	Should	they	be	able	to	look	up	a	word	they	don't
understand?	Should	they	have	access	to	information	that	their	parents	find
objectionable	on	moral,	social,	or	political	grounds?	Be	allowed	to	do
homework	for	an	unrelated	class?	Be	permitted	to	send	notes	to	each	other
during	class?	Should	the	teacher	be	able	to	monitor	what	is	on	every	student's
screen	or	to	record	it	for	later	spot-checking?
Whatever	problems	direct	access	to	unlimited	information	may	cause,	the
benefits	it	will	bring	will	more	than	compensate.	I	enjoyed	school	but	I
pursued	my	strongest	interests	outside	the	classroom.	I	can	only	imagine	how
access	to	this	much	information	would	have	changed	my	own	school
experience.	The	highway	will	alter	the	focus	of	education	from	the	institution
to	the	individual.	The	ultimate	goal	will	be	changed	from	getting	a	diploma	to
enjoying	lifelong	learning.

10
PLUGGED	IN
AT	HOME
One	of	the	many	fears	expressed	about	the	information	highway	is	that	it	will
reduce	the	time	people	spend	socializing.	Some	worry	that	homes	will
become	such	cozy	entertainment	providers	that	we'll	never	leave	them,	and
that,	safe	in	our	private	sanctuaries,	we'll	become	isolated.	I	don't	think	that's
going	to	happen,	and	later	in	this	chapter,	when	I	describe	the	house	I'm
building,	I	think	I	make	my	case.
The	house,	which	has	been	under	construction	for	what	seems	like	most	of
my	life	(and	it	seems	I've	been	reading	about	the	construction	even	longer),	is
full	of	advanced	entertainment	equipment,	such	as	a	small	movie	theater	and	a
video-on-demand	system.	It	should	be	an	interesting	place	to	live,	but	I
certainly	don't	plan	to	stay	home	all	the	time.	Other	people,	when	they	have
entertainment	flowing	into	their	homes,	will	also	continue	to	go	to	theaters,
just	as	they'll	visit	parks,	museums,	and	shops.	As	behaviorists	keep
reminding	us,	we're	social	animals.	We	will	have	the	option	of	staying	home
more	because	the	highway	will	create	so	many	new	options	for	home-based
entertainment,	for	communications—both	personal	and	professional—and	for
employment.	Although	the	mix	of	activities	will	change,	I	think	people	will
decide	to	spend	almost	as	much	time	out	of	their	homes.
In	chapter	1,	I	mentioned	dire	anticultural	predictions	from	the	past	that	didn't
come	about.	More	recently,	in	the	1950s,	there	were	those	who	said	movie
theaters	would	disappear	and	everyone	would	stay	home	watching	the	new
invention,	television.	Pay	TV	and,	later,	movie	video	rentals	provoked	similar
fears.	Why	would	anyone	spend	money	for	parking	and	baby-sitters,	buy	the
most	expensive	soft	drinks	and	candy	bars	in	the	world,	to	sit	in	a	dark	room
with	strangers?	But	popular	movies	continue	to	fill	theaters.	Personally,	I	love
movies	and	enjoy	the	experience	of	going	out	to	see	them.	I	do	it	almost	every
week,	and	I	don't	think	the	information	highway	will	change	that.
The	new	communications	capabilities	will	make	it	far	easier	than	it	is	today	to
stay	in	touch	with	friends	and	relatives	who	are	geographically	distant.	Many
of	us	have	struggled	to	keep	alive	a	friendship	with	someone	far	away.	I	used

to	date	a	woman	who	lived	in	a	different	city.	We	spent	a	lot	of	time	together
on	e-mail.	And	we	figured	out	a	way	we	could	sort	of	go	to	the	movies
together.	We'd	find	a	film	that	was	playing	at	about	the	same	time	in	both	our
cities.	We'd	drive	to	our	respective	theaters,	chatting	on	our	cellular	phones.
We'd	watch	the	movie,	and	on	the	way	home	we'd	use	our	cellular	phones
again	to	discuss	the	show.	In	the	future	this	sort	of	"virtual	dating"	will	be
better	because	the	movie	watching	could	be	combined	with	a
videoconference.
I	already	play	bridge	on	an	on-line	system	that	allows	the	players	to	see	who
else	is	interested	in	joining	a	game	because	it	has	a	waiting	room.	Players
have	a	primitive	ability	to	choose	the	way	they	want	to	appear	to	the	other
players:	their	sex,	hairstyle,	body	build,	etc.	The	first	time	I	connected	to	the
system,	I	was	in	a	rush	to	keep	a	bridge	appointment,	and	I	didn't	spend	any
time	setting	up	my	electronic	appearance.	After	my	friends	and	I	had	started
playing,	they	all	began	to	send	me	messages	about	how	I	was	bald	and	naked
(from	the	waist	up,	the	only	part	of	the	body	it	showed).	Even	though	this
system	didn't	allow	video	or	voice	communication	the	way	future	systems
will,	the	ability	to	send	text	messages	to	each	other	while	we	were	playing
made	it	a	real	blast.
The	highway	will	not	only	make	it	easier	to	keep	up	with	distant	friends,	it
will	also	enable	us	to	find	new	companions.	Friendships	formed	across	the
network	will	lead	naturally	to	getting	together	in	person.	Right	now	our
methods	for	linking	up	with	people	we	might	like	are	pretty	limited,	but	the
network	will	change	that.	We	will	be	meeting	some	of	our	new	friends	in
different	ways	from	the	ones	we	use	today.	This	alone	will	make	life	more
interesting.	Suppose	you	want	to	reach	someone	to	play	bridge	with.	The
information	highway	will	let	you	find	cardplayers	with	the	right	skill	level
and	availability	in	your	neighborhood,	or	in	other	cities	or	nations.	The	idea
of	interactive	games	played	by	far-flung	participants	is	hardly	new.	Chess
players	have	been	carrying	on	games	by	mail,	one	move	at	a	time,	for
generations.	The	difference	will	be	that	applications	running	on	the	network
will	make	it	easy	to	find	others	who	share	similar	interests	and	also	to	play
together	at	the	same	pace	you	would	face-to-face.
Another	difference	will	be	that	while	you	are	playing	a	game—say,	bridge	or
Starfighter—you	will	be	able	to	chat	with	the	other	players.	The	new	DSVD
modems	I	discussed	earlier	will	let	you	use	a	normal	phone	line	to	carry	on	a
voice	conversation	with	the	other	players	while	watching	the	play	unfold	on
your	computer	screen.

The	experience	of	playing	a	friendly	group	game,	as	you	do	at	the	traditional
card	table,	is	pleasurable	as	much	for	the	fellowship	as	for	the	competition.
The	game	is	more	fun	when	you	are	enjoying	the	conversation.	A	number	of
companies	are	taking	this	multiplayer-game	concept	to	a	new	level.	You'll	be
able	to	play	alone,	with	a	few	friends,	or	with	thousands	of	people,	and	it	will
eventually	be	possible	to	see	the	people	you	are	playing	with—if	they	choose
to	permit	you	to.	It	will	be	easy	to	locate	an	expert	and	watch	him	play	or	take
lessons	from	him.	On	the	highway,	you	and	your	friends	will	not	only	be	able
to	gather	around	a	game	table,	you'll	also	be	able	to	"meet"	at	a	real	place,
such	as	Kensington	Gardens,	or	in	an	imaginary	setting.	You'll	be	able	to	play
a	conventional	game	in	a	remarkable	location,	or	play	a	new	kind	of	game	in
which	exploring	the	virtual	setting	is	part	of	the	action.
Warren	Buffett,	who	is	famous	for	his	investment	savvy,	is	a	good	friend	of
mine.	For	years	I	kept	trying	to	think	of	how	to	entice	him	to	use	a	personal
computer.	I	even	offered	to	fly	out	and	get	him	started.	He	wasn't	interested
until	he	found	out	he	could	play	bridge	with	friends	all	over	the	country
through	an	on-line	service.	For	the	first	six	months	he	would	come	home	and
play	for	hours	on	end.	Despite	the	fact	that	he	had	studiously	stayed	away
from	technology	and	technology	investing,	once	he	tried	the	computer,	he	was
hooked.	Now,	many	weeks	Warren	uses	on-line	services	more	than	I	do.	The
present	system	doesn't	require	you	to	enter	your	true	appearance,	or	name,
age,	or	sex.	However,	it	seems	that	most	of	the	users	are	either	kids	or	retirees
—neither	of	which	describes	Warren.	One	feature	that	had	to	be	added	into
the	system	was	a	limit	that	permits	parents	to	restrict	the	amount	of	time	(and
money)	their	kids	spend	on-line.
I	think	on-line	computer-game	playing	will	catch	on	in	a	big	way.	We'll	be
able	to	choose	from	a	rich	set	of	games,	including	all	the	classic	board	and
card	games	as	well	as	action	adventure	and	role-playing	games.	New	styles	of
games	will	be	invented	specifically	for	this	medium.	There	will	be	contests
with	prizes	awarded.	From	time	to	time,	celebrities	and	experts	will	come
onto	the	system	and	everyone	else	will	be	able	to	watch	as	the	celebrities	play,
or	sign	up	to	play	against	them.
TV	game	shows	will	evolve	to	a	new	level	when	viewer	feedback	is	added.
Viewers	will	be	able	to	vote	and	see	the	results	immediately—sort	of	like	the
applause	meter	used	on	the	live	audience	in	old	shows	such	as	Queen	for	a
Day.	This	format	will	also	allow	for	prizes	to	be	given	to	players.	Some
entrepreneurial	companies,	Answer	TV	for	one,	have	already	designed	and
tested	systems	specifically	for	interactive	TV	games,	but	because	the	system
has	only	one	application,	so	far	it	hasn't	caught	on	enough	to	make	money.	On

the	information	highway,	you	won't	have	to	buy	special	hardware	or	software
to	interact	with	a	television	show.	Imagine	the	future	Password	or	Jeopardy!
show	that	will	let	viewers	at	home	participate	and	win	either	cash	or	credits	of
some	sort.	Shows	will	even	be	able	to	keep	track	of	and	reward	their	regular
audience	members	by	giving	them	special	prizes	or	mentioning	them	by	name
if	they	choose	to	join	the	game.
Gambling	is	going	to	be	another	way	to	play	on	the	highway.	It's	a	huge
business	in	Las	Vegas,	Reno,	and	Atlantic	City,	and	it	nearly	supports
Monaco.	The	profits	garnered	by	the	casinos	are	incredible.	Gamblers
continue	to	believe	that	even	though	the	odds	are	against	them,	they're	going
to	win.	When	I	was	in	college	I	enjoyed	playing	poker.	I	think	of	poker	as
mostly	a	game	of	skill.	Although	I	play	blackjack	sometimes	when	I'm	in	Las
Vegas,	the	gambling	games	that	are	mostly	luck	don't	have	a	strong	appeal	for
me.	Perhaps	it's	because	I	am	so	much	more	limited	by	time	than	money.	If
they	had	a	form	of	gambling	that	would	award	the	winners	a	few	more	hours
in	the	day,	I	might	be	drawn	in.
Advances	in	technology	have	already	had	an	impact	on	gambling.	One	of	the
early	uses	of	t======================================================== a	dollar	to	print	and	mail	a	letter	and	on	average	about	that
much	for	a	long-distance	phone	call.	And	to	make	such	a	call	you	have	to
know	the	number	and	have	coordinated	a	time	to	talk.	So	it	takes	considerable
time	and	effort	to	contact	even	a	modest-size	group.	On	a	bulletin	board	all
you	have	to	do	is	type	your	message	in	once	and	it's	available	to	everyone.
Bulletin	boards	on	the	Internet	cover	a	wide	range	of	topics.	Some	postings
are	not	serious.	Somebody	will	send	a	message	with	something	humorous	in	it
to	a	mailing	list	or	post	it	somewhere.	If	it	seems	funny	enough,	it	starts	being
forwarded	as	e-mail.	In	late	1994	this	happened	with	a	phony	press	release
about	Microsoft	buying	the	Catholic	Church.	Thousands	of	copies	were
distributed	inside	Microsoft	on	our	e-mail	system.	I	was	sent	more	than
twenty	copies	as	various	friends	and	colleagues	inside	and	outside	the
company	chose	to	forward	them.
There	are	many	more	serious	examples	of	the	networks'	being	used	to
mobilize	those	who	share	a	common	concern	or	interest.	During	the	recent
political	conflict	in	Russia,	both	sides	were	able	to	contact	people	throughout
the	world	through	postings	on	electronic	bulletin	boards.	The	networks	let
you	contact	people	you	have	never	met	or	heard	from	who	happen	to	share	an
interest.
Information	published	by	electronic	posting	is	grouped	by	topic.	Each	bulletin
board	or	newsgroup	has	a	name,	and	anyone	interested	can	"hang	out"	there.
There	are	lists	of	interesting	newsgroups	or	you	can	browse	names	that	sound
interesting.	If	you	wanted	to	communicate	about	paranormal	phenomena,	you
would	go	to	the	newsgroup	alt.paranormal.	If	you	wanted	to	discuss	that	sort
of	thing	with	others	who	don't	believe	in	it,	you	would	go	to	sci.skeptic.	Or
you	could	connect	to	copernicus.bbn.com	and	look	in	National	School

Network	Testbed	for	a	set	of	lesson	plans	used	by	kindergarten	through
twelfth-grade	teachers.	Almost	any	topic	you	can	name	has	a	group
communicating	about	it	on	the	network.
We	have	seen	that	Gutenberg's	invention	started	mass	publishing,	but	the
literacy	it	engendered	ultimately	led	to	a	great	deal	more	person-to-person
correspondence.	Electronic	communication	developed	the	other	way	around.
It	started	out	as	electronic	mail,	a	way	to	communicate	to	small	groups.	Now
millions	of	people	are	taking	advantage	of	the	networks'	low-friction
distribution	to	communicate	on	a	wide	scale	via	various	forms	of	posting.
The	Internet	has	enormous	potential,	but	it's	important	for	its	continuing
credibility	that	expectations	aren't	cranked	too	high.	The	total	number	of	users
of	the	Internet,	and	of	commercial	on-line	services	such	as	Prodigy,
CompuServe,	and	America	Online,	is	still	a	very	small	portion	of	the
population.	Surveys	indicate	that	nearly	50	percent	of	all	PC	users	in	the
United	States	have	a	modem,	but	fewer	than	about	10	percent	of	those	users
subscribe	to	an	on-line	service.	And	the	attrition	rate	is	very	high—many
subscribers	drop	off	after	less	than	a	year.
Significant	investments	will	be	required	to	develop	great	on-line	content	that
will	delight	and	excite	PC	users	and	raise	the	number	on-line	from	10	percent
up	to	50	percent,	or	even	the	90	percent	I	believe	it	will	become.	Part	of	the
reason	this	sort	of	investment	isn't	happening	today	is	that	simple	mechanisms
for	authors	and	publishers	to	charge	their	users	or	to	be	paid	by	advertisers	are
just	being	developed.
Commercial	on-line	services	collect	revenue,	but	they	have	been	paying
information	providers	royalties	of	only	10	percent	to	30	percent	of	what
customers	pay.	Although	the	provider	probably	knows	the	customers	and
market	better,	pricing—the	way	the	customer	is	charged—and	marketing	are
both	controlled	by	the	service.	The	resulting	revenue	stream	is	simply	not
large	enough	to	encourage	the	information	providers	to	create	exciting	new
on-line	information.
Over	the	next	several	years	the	evolution	of	on-line	services	will	solve	these
problems	and	create	an	incentive	for	suppliers	to	furnish	great	material.	There
will	be	new	billing	options	monthly	subscriptions,	hourly	rates,	charges	per
item	accessed,	and	advertising	payments—so	that	more	revenue	flows	to	the
information	providers.	Once	that	happens	a	successful	new	mass	medium	will
come	into	existence.	This	might	take	several	years	and	a	new	generation	of
network	technology,	such	as	ISDN	and	cable	modems,	but	one	way	or	another

it	will	happen.	When	it	does,	it	will	open	tremendous	opportunities	for
authors,	editors,	directors—every	creator	of	intellectual	property.
Whenever	a	new	medium	is	created,	the	first	content	offered	is	brought	over
from	other	media.	But	to	take	best	advantage	of	the	capabilities	of	the
electronic	medium,	content	needs	to	be	specially	authored	with	it	in	mind.	So
far	the	vast	majority	of	content	on-line	has	been	"dumped"	from	another
source.	Magazine	or	newspaper	publishers	are	taking	text	already	created	for
paper	editions	and	simply	shoving	it	on-line,	often	minus	the	pictures,	charts,
and	graphics.	Plain-text	bulletin	boards	and	e-mail	are	interesting	but	cannot
really	compete	with	the	richer	forms	of	information	in	our	lives.	On-line
content	should	include	lots	of	graphics,	photos,	and	links	to	related
information.	As	communications	get	faster	and	the	commercial	opportunity
becomes	clear,	more	audio	and	video	elements	will	be	included.
The	development	of	CD-ROMs—multi-media	versions	of	audio	compact
discs—provides	some	lessons	that	can	be	applied	to	the	creation	of	on-line
content.	CD-ROM-based	multi-media	titles	can	integrate	different	types	of
information—text,	graphics,	photographic	images,	animation,	music,	and
video—into	a	single	document.	Much	of	these	titles'	value	today	is	in	the
"multi,"	not	in	the	"media."	They	are	the	best	approximations	of	what	the	rich
documents	of	the	future	will	be	like.
The	music	and	audio	on	CD-ROMs	are	clear,	but	rarely	as	good	as	on	a	music
CD.	You	could	store	CD-quality	sound	on	a	CD-ROM,	but	the	format	it	uses
is	very	bulky,	so	if	you	stored	too	much	CD-quality	sound,	you	wouldn't	have
room	for	data,	graphics,	and	other	material.
Motion	video	on	CD-ROMs	still	needs	improving.	If	you	compare	the	quality
of	video	a	PC	can	display	today	with	the	postage-stamp-size	displays	of	just	a
few	years	ago,	the	progress	is	amazing.	Longtime	computer	users	got	very
excited	when	they	first	encountered	video	on	their	computers.	On	the	other
hand,	the	grainy,	jerky	image	is	certainly	no	better	than	a	1950s	television
picture.	The	size	and	quality	of	images	will	improve	with	faster	processors
and	better	compression,	and	eventually	will	become	far	better	than	today's
television	picture.
CD-ROM	technology	has	enabled	a	new	category	of	applications.	Shopping
catalogs,	museum	tours,	and	textbooks	are	being	republished	in	this	new,
appealing	form.	Every	subject	is	being	covered.	Competition	and	technology
will	bring	rapid	improvements	in	the	quality	of	the	titles.	CD-ROMs	will	be
replaced	by	a	new	high-capacity	disc	that	will	look	like	today's	CD	but	will

hold	ten	times	as	much	data.	The	additional	capacity	of	these	extended	CDs
will	allow	for	more	than	two	hours	of	digital	video	on	a	single	disc,	which
means	they'll	be	capable	of	holding	a	whole	movie.	The	picture	and	sound
quality	will	be	much	higher	than	those	of	the	best	TV	signal	you	can	receive
on	a	home	set,	and	new	generations	of	graphics	chips	will	allow	multi-media
titles	to	include	Hollywood-quality	special	effects	under	the	interactive
control	of	the	user.
Multi-media	CD-ROMs	are	popular	today	because	they	offer	users
interactivity	rather	than	because	they	have	imitated	TV.	The	commercial
appeal	of	interactivity	has	already	been	demonstrated	by	the	popularity	of
CD-ROM	games	such	as	Brøderbund's	Myst	and	Virgin	Interactive
Entertainment's	Seventh	Guest,	which	are	whodunits,	a	blending	of	narrative
fiction	and	a	series	of	puzzles	that	allow	a	player	to	investigate	a	mystery,
collecting	clues	in	any	order.
The	success	of	these	games	has	encouraged	authors	to	begin	to	create
interactive	novels	and	movies	in	which	they	introduce	the	characters	and	the
general	outline	of	the	plot,	then	the	reader/player	makes	decisions	that	change
the	outcome	of	the	story.	No	one	suggests	that	every	book	or	movie	should
allow	the	reader	or	viewer	to	influence	its	outcome.	A	good	story	that	makes
you	just	want	to	sit	there	for	a	few	hours	and	enjoy	it	is	wonderful
entertainment.	I	don't	want	to	choose	an	ending	for	The	Great	Gatsby	or	La
Dolce	Vita.	F.	Scott	Fitzgerald	and	Federico	Fellini	have	done	that	for	me.
The	suspension	of	disbelief	essential	to	the	enjoyment	of	great	fiction	is
fragile	and	may	not	hold	up	under	the	heavy-handed	use	of	interactivity.	You
can't	simultaneously	control	the	plot	and	surrender	your	imagination	to	it.
Interactive	fiction	is	as	similar	to	and	different	from	the	older	forms	as	poetry
is	similar	to	and	different	from	drama.
There	will	be	interactive	stories	and	games	available	on	the	network	too.	Such
applications	can	share	content	with	CD-ROMs,	but	at	least	for	a	while	the
software	will	have	to	be	carefully	prepared	so	the	CD-ROMs	won't	be	slow
when	used	on	a	network.	This	is	because,	as	discussed	earlier,	bandwidth,	or
the	speed	at	which	bits	are	transferred	from	the	CD-ROM	to	the	computer,	is
far	greater	than	the	bandwidth	of	the	existing	telephone	network.	Over	time,
the	networks	will	meet—then	exceed—the	speed	of	the	CD-ROM.	And	when
that	happens,	the	content	being	created	for	the	two	forms	will	be	the	same.
But	this	will	take	a	number	of	years,	because	improvements	are	also	being
made	in	CD-ROM	technology.	In	the	meantime	the	bit	rate	will	differentiate
the	two	forms	enough	so	that	they	will	remain	separate	technologies.

The	technologies	underlying	the	CD-ROM	and	on-line	services	have
improved	dramatically,	but	very	few	computer	users	are	creating	multi-media
documents	yet.	Too	much	effort	is	still	required.	Millions	of	people	have
camcorders	and	make	videos	of	their	kids	or======================================================== verhead	projectors	represent	the	state	of	the	art.
Reed	Hundt,	chairman	of	the	U.S.	Federal	Communications	Commission,
commented	on	this.	"There	are	thousands	of	buildings	in	this	country	with
millions	of	people	in	them	who	have	no	telephones,	no	cable	television	and
no	reasonable	prospect	of	broadband	services,"	he	said.	"They	are	called
schools"
Despite	these	constraints,	genuine	change	is	going	to	come.	It	won't	happen
abruptly.	On	the	face	of	it,	the	basic	patterns	of	education	will	remain	the
same.	Students	will	continue	to	attend	classes,	listen	to	teachers,	ask
questions,	participate	in	individual	and	group	work	(including	hands-on
experiments),	and	do	homework.
There	seems	to	be	a	universal	commitment	to	having	more	computers	in
schools,	but	the	rate	at	which	they	are	being	supplied	varies	from	country	to
country.	Only	a	few	countries,	such	as	the	Netherlands,	already	have
computers	in	nearly	every	school.	In	France	and	many	other	places,	although
few	installations	have	taken	place,	governments	have
pledged	to	equip	all	their	classrooms	with	computers.	Britain,	Japan,	and	the
People's	Republic	of	China	have	begun	the	process	of	incorporating
information	technology	into	their	national	curricula,	with	a	focus	on
vocational	training.	I	believe	most	countries	will	decide	to	make	increased
investments	in	education,	and	computer	use	in	schools	will	catch	up	to	its	use
in	homes	and	businesses.	Over	time—longer	in	less	developed	countries—we
are	likely	to	see	computers	installed	in	every	classroom	in	the	world.
The	cost	of	computer	hardware	gets	cheaper	almost	by	the	month,	and
educational	software	will	become	quite	affordable	when	purchased	in
quantity.	Already	many	cable	and	telephone	companies	in	the	United	States
have	promised	free	or	reduced-price	network	connections	to	schools	and
libraries	in	their	areas.	For	example,	Pacific	Bell	has	announced	a	plan	to
provide	free	ISDN	service	to	every	school	in	California	for	one	year,	and	TCI
and	Viacom	offer	free	cable	to	schools	in	every	community	they	serve.
Although	a	classroom	will	still	be	a	classroom,	technology	will	transform	a
lot	of	the	details.	Classroom	learning	will	include	multi-media	presentations,
and	homework	will	involve	exploring	electronic	documents	as	much	as
textbooks,	perhaps	even	more.	Students	will	be	encouraged	to	pursue	areas	of
particular	interest,	and	it	will	be	easy	for	them	to	do	so.	Each	pupil	will	be
able	to	have	his	own	question	answered	simultaneously	with	the	other
students'	queries.	A	class	will	spend	part	of	a	day	at	a	personal	computer

exploring	information	individually	or	in	groups.	Then	the	students	will	bring
back	their	thoughts	and	questions	about	the	information	they	have	discovered
to	the	teacher,	who	will	be	able	to	decide	which	questions	should	be	brought
to	the	attention	of	the	full	class.	While	students	are	at	their	computers,	the
teacher	will	be	free	to	work	with	individuals	or	small	groups	and	focus	less	on
lecturing	and	more	on	problem	solving.
Educators,	like	so	many	in	today's	economy,	are,	among	other	things,
facilitators.	Like	many	other,	similar	workers,	they	will	have	to	adapt	and
readapt	to	changing	conditions.	Unlike	some	professions,	however,	the	future
of	teaching	looks	extremely	bright.	As	innovation	has	improved	the	standard
of	living,	there	has	always	been	an	increase	in	the	portion	of	the	workforce
dedicated	to	education.	Educators	who	bring	energy	and	creativity	to	a
classroom	will	thrive.	So	will	teachers	who	build	strong	relationships	with
children,	because	kids	love	classes	taught	by	adults	they	know	genuinely	care
about	them.
We've	all	had	teachers	who	made	a	difference.	I	had	a	great	chemistry	teacher
in	high	school	who	made	his	subject	immensely	interesting.	Chemistry
seemed	enthralling	compared	to	biology.	In	biology,	we	were	dissecting	frogs
—just	hacking	them	to	pieces,	actually—and	our	teacher	didn't	explain	why.
My	chemistry	teacher	sensationalized	his	subject	a	bit	and	promised	that	it
would	help	us	understand	the	world.	When	I	was	in	my	twenties,	I	read	James
D.	Watson's	Molecular	Biology	of	the	Gene	and	decided	my	high	school
experience	had	misled	me.	The	understanding	of	life	is	a	great	subject.
Biological	information	is	the	most	important	information	we	can	discover,
because	over	the	next	several	decades	it	will	revolutionize	medicine.	Human
DNA	is	like	a	computer	program	but	far,	far	more	advanced	than	any	software
ever	created.	It	seems	amazing	to	me	now	that	one	great	teacher	made
chemistry	endlessly	fascinating	while	I	found	biology	totally	boring.
When	teachers	do	excellent	work	and	prepare	wonderful	materials,	only	their
few	dozen	students	benefit	each	year.	It's	difficult	for	teachers	in	different
locations	to	build	on	one	another's	work.	The	network	will	enable	teachers	to
share	lessons	and	materials,	so	that	the	best	educational	practices	can	spread.
In	most	cases	watching	a	lecture	on	video	is	much	less	interesting	than
actually	being	in	the	room	with	the	teacher.	But	sometimes	the	value	of	being
able	to	hear	a	particular	teacher	outweighs	the	loss	of	interactivity.	A	few
years	ago,	a	friend	and	I	discovered	in	the	University	of	Washington's	catalog
videotapes	of	a	series	of	lectures	by	the	distinguished	physicist	Richard
Feynman.	We	were	able	to	watch	the	lectures	on	vacation	ten	years	after
Feynman	gave	the	talks	at	Cornell.	We	might	have	gotten	more	from	the

lectures	if	we	had	been	in	the	lecture	hall	or	been	able	to	ask	him	questions
via	a	videoconference.	But	the	clarity	of	his	thinking	explained	many	of	the
concepts	of	physics	better	than	any	book	or	any	instructor	I've	ever	had.	He
brought	the	subject	to	life.	I	think	anyone	studying	physics	should	have	these
lectures	easily	accessible.	With	the	information	highway	there	will	be	lots	of
such	uniquely	valuable	resources	available	to	teachers	and	students.
If	a	teacher	in	Providence,	Rhode	Island,	happened	to	have	a	particularly
good	way	of	explaining	photosynthesis,	her	lecture	notes	and	multi-media
demonstrations	could	be	obtained	by	educators	around	the	world.	Some
teachers	will	use	material	exactly	as	it	comes	off	the	highway,	but	others	will
take	advantage	of	easy-to-use	authoring	software	to	adapt	and	combine	bits
and	pieces	of	what	they	find.	Feedback	from	other	interested	instructors	will
be	easy	to	get	and	will	help	refine	the	lesson.	In	a	short	time	the	improved
material	could	be	in	thousands	of	classrooms	all	over	the	world.	It	will	be
easy	to	tell	what	materials	are	popular,	because	the	network	will	be	able	to
count	the	number	of	times	they	are	accessed,	or	to	poll	teachers	electronically.
Corporations	wanting	to	help	with	education	could	provide	recognition	and
cash	awards	to	teachers	whose	materials	are	making	a	difference.
It	is	hard	for	a	teacher	to	prepare	in-depth,	interesting	material	for	twenty-five
students,	six	hours	a	day,	180	days	a	year.	This	is	particularly	true	if	students'
extensive	television	watching	has	raised	their	entertainment	expectations.	I
can	imagine	a	middle-school	science	teacher	a	decade	or	so	from	now,
working	on	a	lecture	about	the	sun,	explaining	not	only	the	science	but	also
the	history	of	discoveries	that	made	it	possible.	When	a	teacher	wants	to
select	a	picture,	still	or	video,	whether	it's	a	piece	of	art	or	a	portrait	of	a	great
solar	scientist,	the	highway	will	allow	her	to	select	from	a	comprehensive
catalog	of	images.	Snippets	of	video	and	narrated	animations	from	countless
sources	will	be	available.	It	will	only	take	minutes	to	pull	together	a	visual
show	that	would	now	require	days	of	work	to	organize.	As	she	lectures	about
the	sun,	she	will	have	images	and	diagrams	appear	at	appropriate	times.	If	a
student	asks	her	about	the	source	of	the	sun's	power,	she	can	answer	using
animated	graphics	of	hydrogen	and	helium	atoms,	she'll	be	able	to	show	solar
flares	or	sunspots	or	other	phenomena,	or	she	might	call	up	a	brief	video	on
fusion	energy	to	the	white	board.	The	teacher	will	have	organized	the	links	to
servers	on	the	information	highway	in	advance.	She	will	make	the	list	of	links
available	to	her	students,	so	that	during	study	times	in	the	library	or	at	home,
they	will	be	able	to	review	the	material	from	as	many	perspectives	as	they
find	helpful.
Think	of	a	high	school	art	teacher	using	a	digital	white	board	to	display	a

high-quality	digital	reproduction	of	Seurat's	Bathers	at	Asnières,	which	shows
young	men	relaxing	on	the	bank	of	the	Seine	River	in	the	1880s	against	a
background	of	sailboats	and	smokestacks.	The	white	board	will	pronounce	the
name	of	the	painting	in	the	original	French—Une	Baignade	à	Asnières	and
show	a	map	of	the	outskirts	of	Paris,	with	the	town	of	Asnières	highlighted.
The	teacher	might	use	the	painting,	which	presaged	Pointillism,	to	illustrate
the	end	of	Impressionism.	Or	she	will	use	it	to	get	into	broader	topics,	such	as
life	in	France	at	the	end	of	the	nineteenth	century,	the	Industrial	Revolution,
or	even	the	way	the	eye	sees	complementary	colors.
She	might	point	to	the	orangish-red	hat	of	a	figure	standing	on	the	far	right
side	of	the	composition	and	say:	"Look	at	the	vibrancy	of	the	hat.	Seurat	has
tricked	the	eye.	The	hat	is	red,	but	he	has	added	tiny	dots	of	orange	and	blue.
You	don't	really	notice	the	blue	unless	you	look	closely."	As	the	teacher	says
this,	the	picture	will	zoom	in	on	the	hat,	until	the	texture	of	the	canvas	is
apparent.	At	this	magnification,	specks	of	blue	will	be	obvious,	and	the
teacher	will	explain	that	blue	is	the	complement	of	orange.	A	color	wheel	will
appear	on	the	white	board,	and	either	the	teacher	or	the	multi-media	document
itself	will	explain:	"Every	color	on	this	wheel	is	arranged	opposite	its
complement.	Red	is	opposite	green,	yellow	is	opposite	purple,	and	blue	is
opposite	orange.	It	is	a	quirk	of	the	eye	that	staring	at	a	color	creates	an
afterimage	of	its	complementary	color.	Seurat	used	this	trick	to	make	the	red
and	orange	hues	of	the	hat	more	vivid	by	sneaking	in	dots	of	blue."
Computers	conn======================================================== for	it,	but	also	because	we	wanted	the	public	to	accept	graphical
computing.
Mistakes	such	as	Apple's	decision	to	limit	the	sale	of	its	operating-system
software	for	its	own	hardware	will	be	repeated	often	in	the	years	ahead.	Some

telephone	and	cable	companies	are	already	talking	about	communicating	only
with	the	software	they	control.
1984:	the	Apple	macintosh	computer
It's	increasingly	important	to	be	able	to	compete	and	cooperate	at	the	same
time,	but	that	calls	for	a	lot	of	maturity.
The	separation	of	hardware	and	software	was	a	major	issue	in	the
collaboration	between	IBM	and	Microsoft	to	create	OS/2.	The	separation	of
hardware	and	software	standards	is	still	an	issue	today.	Software	standards
create	a	level	playing	field	for	the	hardware	companies,	but	many
manufacturers	use	the	tie	between	their	hardware	and	their	software	to
distinguish	their	systems.	Some	companies	treat	hardware	and	software	as
separate	businesses	and	some	don't.	These	different	approaches	will	be	played
out	again	on	the	highway.
Throughout	the	1980s,	IBM	was	awesome	by	every	measure	capitalism
knows.	In	1984,	it	set	the	record	for	the	most	money	ever	made	by	any	firm	in
a	single	year—$6.6	billion	of	profit.	In	that	banner	year	IBM	introduced	its
second-generation	personal	computer,	a	high-performance	machine	called	the
PC	AT,	which	incorporated	Intel's	80286	microprocessor	(colloquially	known
as	the	"286").	It	was	three	times	faster	than	the	original	IBM	PC.	The	AT	was
a	great	success,	and	within	a	year	had	more	than	70	percent	of	all	business	PC
sales.
When	IBM	launched	the	original	PC,	it	never	expected	the	machine	to
challenge	sales	of	the	company's	business	systems,	although	a	significant
percentage	of	the	PCs	were	bought	by	IBM's	traditional	customers.	Company
executives	thought	the	smaller	machines	would	find	their	place	only	at	the
low	end	of	the	market.	As	PCs	became	more	powerful,	to	avoid	having	them
cannibalize	its	higher-end	products,	IBM	held	back	on	PC	development.

In	its	mainframe	business,	IBM	had	always	been	able	to	control	the	adoption
of	new	standards.	For	example,	the	company	would	limit	the
price/performance	of	a	new	line	of	hardware	so	it	wouldn't	steal	business
from	existing,	more	expensive	products.	It	would	encourage	the	adoption	of
new	versions	of	its	operating	systems	by	releasing	hardware	that	required	the
new	software	or	vice	versa.	That	kind	of	strategy	might	have	worked	well	for
mainframes,	but	it	was	a	disaster	in	the	fast-moving	personal-computer
market.	IBM	could	still	command	somewhat	higher	prices	for	equivalent
performance,	but	the	world	had	discovered	that	lots	of	companies	made
compatible	hardware,	and	that	if	IBM	couldn't	deliver	the	right	value,
someone	else	would.
Three	engineers	who	appreciated	the	potential	offered	by	IBM's	entry	into	the
personal-computer	business	left	their	jobs	at	Texas	Instruments	and	formed	a
new	company—Compaq	Computer.	They	built	hardware	that	would	accept
the	same	accessory	cards	as	the	IBM	PC	and	licensed	MS-DOS	so	their
computers	were	able	to	run	the	same	applications	as	the	IBM	PC.	The
company	produced	machines	that	did	everything	the	IBM	PCs	did	and	were
more	portable.	Compaq	quickly	became	one	of	the	all-time	success	stories	in
American	business,	selling	more	than	$100	million	worth	of	computers	its
first	year	in	business.	IBM	was	able	to	collect	royalties	by	licensing	its	patent
portfolio,	but	its	share	of	market	declined	as	compatible	systems	came	to
market	and	IBM's	hardware	was	not	competitive.
The	company	delayed	the	release	of	its	PCs	with	the	powerful	Intel	386	chip,
Intel's	successor	to	the	286.	This	was	done	to	protect	the	sales	of	its	low-end
minicomputers,	which	weren't	much	more	powerful	than	a	386-based	PC.
IBM's	delay	allowed	Compaq	to	become	the	first	company	to	introduce	a
386-based	computer	in	1986.	This	gave	Compaq	an	aura	of	prestige	and
leadership	that	previously	had	been	IBM's	alone.
IBM	planned	to	recover	with	a	one-two	punch,	the	first	in	hardware	and	the
second	in	software.	It	wanted	to	build	computers	and	write	operating	systems,
each	of	which	would	depend	exclusively	on	the	other	for	its	new	features	so
competitors	would	either	be	frozen	out	or	forced	to	pay	hefty	licensing	fees.
The	strategy	was	to	make	everyone	else's	"IBM-compatible"	personal
computer	obsolete.
The	IBM	strategy	included	some	good	ideas.	One	was	to	simplify	the	design
of	the	PC	by	taking	many	applications	that	had	formerly	been	selectable
options	and	building	them	into	the	machine.	This	would	both	reduce	costs	and
increase	the	percentage	of	IBM	components	in	the	ultimate	sale.	The	plan	also

called	for	substantial	changes	in	the	hardware	architecture:	new	connectors
and	standards	for	accessory	cards,	keyboards,	mice,	and	even	displays.	To
give	itself	a	further	advantage	IBM	didn't	release	specifications	on	any	of
these	connectors	until	it	had	shipped	the	first	systems.	This	was	supposed	to
redefine	compatibility	standards.	Other	PC	manufacturers	and	the	makers	of
peripherals	would	have	to	start	over—IBM	would	have	the	lead	again.
By	1984,	a	significant	part	of	Microsoft's	business	was	providing	MS-DOS	to
manufacturers	that	built	PCs	compatible	with	IBM's	systems.	We	began
working	with	IBM	on	a	replacement	for	MS-DOS,	eventually	named	OS/2.
Our	agreement	allowed	Microsoft	to	sell	other	manufacturers	the	same
operating	system	that	IBM	was	shipping	with	its	machines.	We	each	were
allowed	to	extend	the	operating	system	beyond	what	we	developed	together.
This	time	it	wasn't	like	when	we	did	MS-DOS.	IBM	wanted	to	control	the
standard	to	help	its	PC	hardware	and	mainframe	businesses.	IBM	became
directly	involved	in	the	design	and	implementation	of	OS/2.
OS/2	was	central	to	IBM's	corporate	software	plans.	It	was	to	be	the	first
implementation	of	IBM's	Systems	Application	Architecture,	which	the
company	ultimately	intended	to	have	as	a	common	development	environment
across	its	full	line	of	computers	from	mainframe	to	midrange	to	PC.	IBM
executives	believed	that	using	the	company's	mainframe	technology	on	the
PC	would	prove	irresistible	to	corporate	customers	who	were	moving	more
and	more	capabilities	from	mainframe	and	mini-computers	to	PCs.	They	also
thought	that	it	would	give	IBM	a	huge	advantage	over	PC	competitors	who
would	not	have	access	to	mainframe	technology.	IBM's	proprietary	extensions
of	OS/2—called	Extended	Edition—included	communications	and	database
services.	And	it	planned	to	build	a	full	set	of	office	applications—to	be	called
OfficeVision—to	work	on	top	of	Extended	Edition.	The	plan	predicted	these
applications,	including	word	processing,	would	allow	IBM	to	become	a	major
player	in	PC-application	software,	and	compete	with	Lotus	and	WordPerfect.
The	development	of	OfficeVision	required	another	team	of	thousands.	OS/2
was	not	just	an	operating	system,	it	was	part	of	a	corporate	crusade.
The	development	work	was	burdened	by	demands	that	the	project	meet	a
variety	of	conflicting	feature	requirements	as	well	as	by	IBM's	schedule
commitments	for	Extended	Edition	and	OfficeVision.	Microsoft	went	ahead
and	developed	OS/2	applications	to	help	get	the	market	going,	but	as	time
went	on,	our	confidence	in	OS/2	eroded.	We	had	entered	into	the	project	with
the	belief	that	IBM	would	allow	OS/2	to	be	enough	like	Windows	that	a
software	developer	would	have	to	make	at	most	only	minor	modifications	to
get	an	application	running	on	both	platforms.	But	after	IBM's	insistence	that

the	applications	be	compatible	with	its	mainframe	and	midrange	systems,
what	we	were	left	with	was	more	like	an	unwieldy	mainframe	operating
system	than	a	PC	one.
Our	business	relationship	with	IBM	was	vital	to	us.	That	year,	1986,	we	had
taken	Microsoft	public	to	provide	liquidity	for	the	employees	who	had	been
given	stock	options.	It	was	about	that	time	Steve	Ballmer	and	I	proposed	to
IBM	that	they	buy	up	to	30	percent	of	Microsoft—at	a	bargain	price—so	it
would	share	in	our	fortune,	good	or	bad.	We	thought	this	might	help	the
companies	work	together	more	amicably	and	productively.	IBM	was	not
interested.
We	worked	extremely	hard	to	make	sure	our	operating-system	work	with
IBM	succeeded.	I	felt	the	project	would	be	a	ticket	to	the	future	for	both
companies.	Instead,	it	eventually	created	an	enormous	rift	between	us.	A	new
operating	system	is	a	big	project.	We	had	our	team	working	outside	Seattle.
IBM	had	teams	in	Boca	Raton,	Florida;	Hursley	Park,	England;	and	later
Austin,	Texas.
But	the	geographical	problems	were	not	as	bad	as	those	that	came	from	IBM's
mainframe	legacy.	IBM's	previous	software	projects	almost	never	caught	on
with	PC	customers	precisely	because	they	were	designed	with	a	mainframe
customer	in	mind.	For	instance,	it	took	three	minutes	for	one	version	of	OS/2
to	"boot"	(to	make	itself	ready	for	use	after	it	was	turned	on).	That	didn't	seem
bad	to	them,	because	in	the	mainframe	world,	booting	could	take	fifteen
minutes.
IBM,	with	more	than	300,000	employees,	was	also	stymied	by	its
commitment	to	company-wide	consensus.	Every	part	of	IBM	was	invited	to
submit	Design	Change	Requests,	which	usually	turned	out	to	be	demands	that
the	personal-computer-system	software	be	changed	to	fit	the	needs	of
mainframe	products	better.	We	got	more	than	10,000	such	requests,	and
talented	people	from	IBM	and	Microsoft	would	sit	and	discuss	them	for	days.
I	remember	change	request	#221:	"Remove	fonts	from	product.	Reason:
Enhancement	to	product's	substance."	Someone	at	IBM	didn't	want	the	PC
operating	system	to	offer	multiple	typefaces	because	a	particular	IBM
mainframe	printer	couldn't	handle	them.
Finally	it	became	clear	that	joint	development	wasn't	going	to	work.	We	asked
IBM	to	let	us	develop	the	new	operating	system	on	our	own	and	license	it	to
them	cheaply.	We'd	make	our	profit	by	selling	the	same	thing	to	other
computer	companies.	But	IBM	had	declared	that	its	own	programmers	had	to

be	involved	in	the	creation	of	any	software	it	considered	strategic.	And
operating-system	software	clearly	wa======================================================== up	when	we	could	or	making	the	games	more
difficult.	A	friend	at	Lakeside	developed	a	program	in	BASIC	that	simulated
the	play	of	Monopoly.	BASIC	(Beginner's	All-purpose	Symbolic	Instruction

Code)	is,	as	its	name	suggests,	a	relatively	easy-to-learn	programming
language	we	used	to	develop	increasingly	complex	programs.	He	figured	out
how	to	make	the	computer	play	hundreds	of	games	really	fast.	We	fed	it
instructions	to	test	out	various	methods	of	play.	We	wanted	to	discover	what
strategies	won	most.	And—chug-a-chug,	chug-a-chug—the	computer	told	us.
Like	all	kids,	we	not	only	fooled	around	with	our	toys,	we	changed	them.	If
you've	ever	watched	a	child	with	a	cardboard	carton	and	a	box	of	crayons
create	a	spaceship	with	cool	control	panels,	or	listened	to	their	improvised
rules,	such	as	"Red	cars	can	jump	all	others,"	then	you	know	that	this	impulse
to	make	a	toy	do	more	is	at	the	heart	of	innovative	childhood	play.	It	is	also
the	essence	of	creativity.
Of	course,	in	those	days	we	were	just	goofing	around,	or	so	we	thought.	But
the	toy	we	had—well,	it	turned	out	to	be	some	toy.	A	few	of	us	at	Lakeside
refused	to	quit	playing	with	it.	In	the	minds	of	a	lot	of	people	at	school	we
became	linked	with	the	computer,	and	it	with	us.	I	was	asked	by	a	teacher	to
help	teach	computer	programming,	and	that	seemed	to	be	OK	With	everyone.
But	when	I	got	the	lead	in	the	school	play,	Black	Comedy,	some	students	were
heard	muttering,	"Why	did	they	pick	the	computer	guy?"	That's	still	the	way	I
sometimes	get	identified.
1968:	Bill	Gates	(Standing)	and	Paul	Allen	working	at	the	computer	terminal
at	Lakeside	School.
It	seems	there	was	a	whole	generation	of	us,	all	over	the	world,	who	dragged
that	favorite	toy	with	us	into	adulthood.	In	doing	so,	we	caused	a	kind	of
revolution—peaceful,	mainly—and	now	the	computer	has	taken	up	residence
in	our	offices	and	homes.	Computers	shrank	in	size	and	grew	in	power,	as
they	dropped	dramatically	in	price.	And	it	all	happened	fairly	quickly.	Not	as
quickly	as	I	once	thought,	but	still	pretty	fast.	Inexpensive	computer	chips
now	show	up	in	engines,	watches,	antilock	brakes,	facsimile	machines,
elevators,	gasoline	pumps,	cameras,	thermostats,	treadmills,	vending

machines,	burglar	alarms,	and	even	talking	greeting	cards.	School	kids	today
are	doing	amazing	things	with	personal	computers	that	are	no	larger	than
textbooks	but	outperform	the	largest	computers	of	a	generation	ago.
Now	that	computing	is	astoundingly	inexpensive	and	computers	inhabit	every
part	of	our	lives,	we	stand	at	the	brink	of	another	revolution.	This	one	will
involve	unprecedentedly	inexpensive	communication;	all	the	computers	will
join	together	to	communicate	with	us	and	for	us.	Interconnected	globally,	they
will	form	a	network,	which	is	being	called	the	information	highway.	A	direct
precursor	is	the	present	Internet,	which	is	a	group	of	computers	joined	and
exchanging	information	using	current	technology.
The	reach	and	use	of	the	new	network,	its	promise	and	perils,	is	the	subject	of
this	book.
Every	aspect	of	what's	about	to	happen	seems	exciting.	When	I	was	nineteen	I
caught	a	look	at	the	future,	based	my	career	on	what	I	saw,	and	I	turned	out	to
have	been	right.	But	the	Bill	Gates	of	nineteen	was	in	a	very	different	position
from	the	one	I'm	in	now.	In	those	days,	not	only	did	I	have	all	the	self-
assurance	of	a	smart	teenager,	but	also	nobody	was	watching	me,	and	if	I
failed—so	what?	Today	I'm	much	more	in	the	position	of	the	computer	giants
of	the	seventies,	but	I	hope	I've	learned	some	lessons	from	them.
At	one	time	I	thought	I	might	want	to	major	in	economics	in	college.	I
eventually	changed	my	mind,	but	in	a	way	my	whole	experience	with	the
computer	industry	has	been	a	series	of	economics	lessons.	I	saw	firsthand	the
effects	of	positive	spirals	and	inflexible	business	models.	I	watched	the	way
industry	standards	evolved.	I	witnessed	the	importance	of	compatibility	in
technology,	of	feedback,	and	of	constant	innovation.	And	I	think	we	may	be
about	to	witness	the	realization	of	Adam	Smith's	ideal	market,	at	last.
But	I'm	not	using	those	lessons	just	for	theorizing	about	this	future—I'm
betting	on	it.	Back	when	I	was	a	teenager,	I	envisioned	the	impact	that	low-
cost	computers	could	have.	"A	computer	on	every	desk	and	in	every	home"
became	Microsoft's	corporate	mission,	and	we	have	worked	to	help	make	that
possible.	Now	those	computers	are	being	connected	to	one	another,	and	we're
building	software—the	instructions	that	tell	the	computer	hardware	what	to
do—that	will	help	individuals	get	the	benefits	of	this	connected
communication	power.	It	is	impossible	to	predict	exactly	what	it	will	be	like
to	use	the	network.	We'll	communicate	with	it	through	a	variety	of	devices,
including	some	that	look	like	television	sets,	some	like	today's	PCs;	some	will
look	like	telephones,	and	some	will	be	the	size	and	something	like	the	shape

of	a	wallet.	And	at	the	heart	of	each	will	be	a	powerful	computer,	invisibly
connected	to	millions	of	others.
There	will	be	a	day,	not	far	distant,	when	you	will	be	able	to	conduct
business,	study,	explore	the	world	and	its	cultures,	call	up	any	great
entertainment,	make	friends,	attend	neighborhood	markets,	and	show	pictures
to	distant	relatives—without	leaving	your	desk	or	armchair.	You	won't	leave
your	network	connection	behind	at	the	office	or	in	the	classroom.	It	will	be
more	than	an	object	you	carry	or	an	appliance	you	purchase.	It	will	be	your
passport	into	a	new,	mediated	way	of	life.
Firsthand	experiences	and	pleasures	are	personal	and	unmediated.	No	one,	in
the	name	of	progress,	will	take	away	from	you	the	experience	of	lying	on	a
beach,	walking	in	the	woods,	sitting	in	a	comedy	club,	or	shopping	at	a	flea
market.	But	firsthand	experiences	aren't	always	rewarding.	For	example,
waiting	in	line	is	a	firsthand	experience,	but	we	have	been	trying	to	invent
ways	to	avoid	it	ever	since	we	first	queued	up.
Much	of	human	progress	has	come	about	because	someone	invented	a	better
and	more	powerful	tool.	Physical	tools	speed	up	work	and	rescue	people	from
hard	labor.	The	plow	and	the	wheel,	the	crane	and	the	bulldozer,	amplify	the
physical	abilities	of	those	using	them.
Informational	tools	are	symbolic	mediators	that	amplify	the	intellect	rather
than	the	muscle	of	their	users.	You're	having	a	mediated	experience	as	you
read	this	book:	We're	not	actually	in	the	same	room,	but	you	are	still	able	to
find	out	what's	on	my	mind.	A	great	deal	of	work	now	involves	decision
making	and	knowledge,	so	information	tools	have	become,	and	will	continue
increasingly	to	be,	the	focus	of	inventors.	Just	as	any	text	could	be
represented	with	an	arrangement	of	letters,	these	tools	allow	information	of
all	types	to	be	represented	in	digital	form,	in	a	pattern	of	electrical	pulses	that
is	easy	for	computers	to	deal	with.	The	world	today	has	more	than	100	million
computers	whose	purpose	is	to	manipulate	information.	They	are	helping	us
now	by	making	it	much	easier	to	store	and	transmit	information	that	is	already
in	digital	form,	but	in	the	near	future	they	will	allow	us	access	to	almost	any
information	in	the	world.
In	the	United	States,	the	connecting	of	all	these	computers	has	been	compared
to	another	massive	project:	the	gridding	of	the	country	with	interstate
highways,	which	began	during	the	Eisenhower	era.	This	is	why	the	new
network	was	dubbed	the	"information	superhighway."	The	term	was
popularized	by	then-senator	Al	Gore,	whose	father	sponsored	the	1956

Federal	Aid	Highway	Act.
The	highway	metaphor	isn't	quite	right	though.	The	phrase	suggests	landscape
and	geography,	a	distance	between	points,	and	embodies	the	implication	that
you	have	to	travel	to	get	from	one	place	to	another.	In	fact,	one	of	the	most
remarkable	aspects	of	this	new	communications	technology	is	that	it	will
eliminate	distance.	It	won't	matter	if	someone	you're	contacting	is	in	the	next
room	or	on	another	continent,	because	this	highly	mediated	network	will	be
unconstrained	by	miles	and	kilometers.
The	term	"highway"	also	suggests	that	everyone	is	driving	and	following	the
same	route.	This	network	is	more	like	a	lot	of	country	lanes	where	everyone
can	look	at	or	do	whatever	his	individual	interests	suggest.	Another
implication	is	that	perhaps	it	should	be	built	by	the	government,	which	I	think
would	be	a	major	mistake	in	most	countries.	But	the	real	problem	is	that	the
metaphor	emphasizes	the	infrastructure	of	the	endeavor	rather	than	its
applications.	At	Microsoft	we	talk	about	"Information	At	Your	Fingertips,"
which	spotlights	a	benefit	rather	than	the	network	itself.	A	different	metaphor
that	I	think	comes	closer	to	describing	a	lot	of	the	activities	that	will	take
place	is	that	of	the	ultimate	market.	Markets	from	trading	floors	to	malls	are
fundamental	to	human	society,	and	I	believe	this	new	one	will	eventually	be
the	world's	central	department	store.	It	will	be	where	we	social	animals	will
sell,	trade,	invest,	haggle,	pick	stuff	up,	argue,	meet	new	people,	and	hang
out.	When	you	hear	the	phrase	"information	highway,"	rather	than	seeing	a
road,	imagine	a	marketplace	or	an	exchange.	Think	of	the	hustle	and	bustle	of
the	New	York	Stock	Exchange	or	a	farmers'	market	or	of	a	bookstore	full	of
people	looking	for	fascinating	stories	and	information.	All	manner	of	human
activity	takes	place,	from	billion-dollar	deals	to	flirtations.	Many	transactions
will	involve	money,	tendered	in	digital	form	rather	than	currency.	Digital
information	of	all	kinds,	not	just	as	money,	will	be	the	new	medium	of
exchange	in	this	market.
The	global	information	market	will	be	huge	and	will	combine	all	the	various
ways	human	goods,	services,	and	ideas	are	exchanged.	On	a	practical	level,
this	will	give	you	broader	choices	about	most	things,	including	how	you	earn
and	invest,	what	you	buy	and	how	much	you	pay	for	it,	who	your	friends	are
and	how	you	spend	your	time	with	them,	and	where	and	how	securely	you
and	your	family	live.	Your	workplace	and	your	idea	of	what	it======================================================== its	sales	have	increased	because
of	its	killer	app.
The	phrase	is	new,	but	the	idea	isn't.	Thomas	Edison	was	as	great	a	business
leader	as	he	was	an	inventor.	When	he	founded	the	Edison	General	Electric
Company	in	1878,	he	understood	that	to	sell	electricity	he	had	to	demonstrate
its	value	to	consumers—to	sell	the	idea	that	light	could	fill	a	house	day	or
night	with	just	the	flick	of	a	switch.	Edison	lit	up	the	public's	imagination
with	the	promise	that	electric	lighting	would	become	so	cheap	that	only	the
rich	would	buy	candles.	He	correctly	foresaw	that	people	would	pay	to	bring

electric	power	into	their	homes	so	that	they	could	enjoy	a	great	application	of
electric	technology—light.
Electricity	found	a	place	in	most	homes	as	a	means	of	providing	lighting,	but
a	number	of	additional	applications	were	added	quite	quickly.	The	Hoover
Company	greatly	improved	the	early	electric	sweeping	machine.	Electric
cooking	was	popularized.	Soon	there	were	electric	heaters,	toasters,
refrigerators,	washing	machines,	irons,	power	tools,	hair	dryers,	and	a	host	of
other	laborsaving	appliances,	and	electricity	became	a	basic	utility.
Killer	applications	help	technological	advances	change	from	curiosities	into
moneymaking	essentials.	Without	killer	apps	an	invention	won't	catch	on—
witness	such	notable	consumer-electronics	flops	as	3-D	movies	and
quadraphonic	sound.
In	chapter	3,	I	mentioned	that	word	processing	brought	microprocessors	into
corporate	offices	in	the	1970s.	At	first	it	was	provided	by	dedicated	machines
such	as	Wang's,	which	were	used	solely	for	creating	documents.	The	market
for	dedicated	word	processors	grew	incredibly	fast,	until	it	included	more
than	fifty	manufacturers,	with	combined	sales	of	more	than	$1	billion
annually.
Within	a	couple	of	years,	personal	computers	appeared.	Their	ability	to	run
different	types	of	applications	was	something	new.	That	was	their	killer	app.
A	PC	user	could	quit	WordStar	(for	years	one	of	the	most	popular	word-
processing	applications)	and	start	up	another	application,	such	as	the
spreadsheet	program	VisiCalc	or	dBASE	for	database	management.
Collectively,	WordStar,	VisiCalc,	and	dBASE	were	attractive	enough	to
motivate	the	purchase	of	a	personal	computer.	They	were	the	killer
applications.
The	first	killer	application	for	the	original	IBM	PC	was	Lotus	1-2-3,	a
spreadsheet	tailored	to	the	strengths	of	that	machine.	The	Apple	Macintosh's
killer	business	applications	were	Aldus	PageMaker	for	designing	documents
to	be	printed,	Microsoft	Word	for	word	processing,	and	Microsoft	Excel	for
spreadsheets.	Early	on,	more	than	a	third	of	the	Macintoshes	used	in	business
and	many	in	the	home	were	purchased	for	what	became	known	as	desktop
publishing.
The	highway	will	come	about	because	of	a	confluence	of	technological
advances	in	both	communications	and	computers.	No	single	advance	would
be	able	to	produce	the	necessary	killer	applications.	But	together	these	will.
The	highway	will	be	indispensable	because	it	will	offer	a	combination	of

information,	education	services,	entertainment,	shopping,	and	person-to-
person	communication.	We	can't	be	sure	yet	exactly	when	all	the	necessary
components	will	be	ready.	Easy-to-use	information	appliances	will	be	critical
components.	In	the	years	immediately	ahead	there	will	be	a	proliferation	of
digital	devices	that	will	take	on	different	forms	and	communicate	at	different
speeds.	I'll	discuss	them	at	length	later.	For	the	moment	it's	enough	to	know
that	a	variety	of	PC-like	appliances	will	allow	each	of	us	to	stay	in	touch	over
the	highway	with	other	people	as	well	as	with	information.	These	will	include
digital	replacements	for	many	of	the	analog	devices,	including	televisions	and
telephones,	that	surround	us	today.	We	can	already	be	sure	that	the	ones	that
are	retained	will	be	those	that	become	indispensable.	Although	we	don't	know
which	forms	will	be	popular,	we	know	they	will	be	general-purpose,
programmable	computers	connected	to	the	information	highway.
Many	homes	are	already	attached	to	two	dedicated	communications
infrastructures:	telephone	lines	and	television	cables.	When	these	specialized
communication	systems	have	been	generalized	into	a	single	digital-
information	utility,	the	information	highway	will	have	arrived.
Your	television	set	will	not	look	like	a	computer	and	won't	have	a	keyboard,
but	the	additional	electronics	inside	or	attached	will	make	it	architecturally	a
computer	like	a	PC.	Television	sets	will	connect	to	the	highway	via	a	set-top
box	similar	to	ones	supplied	today	by	most	cable	TV	companies.	But	these
new	set-top	boxes	will	include	a	very	powerful	general-purpose	computer.
The	box	may	be	located	inside	a	television,	behind	a	television,	on	top	of	a
television,	on	a	basement	wall,	or	even	outside	the	house.	Both	the	PC	and	the
set-top	box	will	connect	to	the	information	highway	and	conduct	a	"dialogue"
with	the	switches	and	servers	of	the	network,	retrieving	information	and
programming	and	relaying	the	subscriber's	choices.
1995:	A	personal-computer	based	interactive	media	server
However	much	like	a	PC	the	set-top	box	becomes,	there	will	continue	to	be	a
critical	difference	between	the	way	a	PC	is	used	and	a	television	is	used:
viewing	distance.	Today,	more	than	a	third	of	U.S.	households	have	personal

computers	(not	counting	game	machines).	Eventually,	almost	every	home	will
have	at	least	one,	connected	directly	to	the	information	highway.	This	is	the
appliance	you'll	use	when	details	count	or	when	you	want	to	type.	It	places	a
high-quality	monitor	a	foot	or	two	from	your	face,	so	your	eyes	focus	easily
on	text	and	other	small	images.	A	big-screen	TV	across	the	room	doesn't	lend
itself	to	the	use	of	a	keyboard,	nor	does	it	afford	privacy,	although	it	is	ideal
for	applications	that	multiple	people	watch	at	the	same	time.
Set-top	boxes	and	PC-interface	equipment	will	be	designed	so	that	even	the
oldest	TV	sets	and	most	current	personal	computers	can	be	used	with	the
highway,	but	there	will	be	new	televisions	and	PCs	with	better	pictures.	The
images	on	today's	television	sets	are	quite	poor	compared	to	pictures	in
magazines	or	on	movie	theater	screens.	While	U.S.	television	signals	can
have	486	lines	of	picture	information,	they	are	not	all	distinguishable	on	most
sets,	and	the	typical	home	VCR	can	record	or	play	back	only	about	280	lines
of	resolution.	As	a	result,	it	is	difficult	to	read	the	credits	at	the	end	of	a	movie
on	a	television	set.	Conventional	television	screens	are	also	a	different	shape
from	most	movie	theater	screens.	Our	TVs	have	an	"aspect	ratio"	(the
relationship	of	picture	width	to	height)	of	4	by	3,	meaning	a	picture	is	a	third
wider	than	it	is	tall.	Feature	films	typically	are	made	with	an	aspect	ratio	of
about	2	to	1—twice	as	wide	as	they	are	tall.
Prototype	of	a	television	set-top	box
High-definition	television	(HDTV)	systems	that	offer	more	than	1,000	lines
of	resolution,	with	a	16-by-9	aspect	ratio	and	better	color,	have	been
demonstrated,	and	they	are	beautiful	to	watch.	But	despite	the	efforts	of	the
government	and	industry	in	Japan,	where	they	were	created,	HDTV	did	not
catch	on,	because	it	required	expensive	new	equipment	for	both	broadcasting
and	receiving.	Advertisers	wouldn't	pay	extra	to	fund	HDTV,	because	it
doesn't	make	ads	measurably	more	effective.	However,	HDTV	might	still
catch	on,	because	the	highway	will	allow	video	to	be	received	at	multiple
resolutions	and	aspect	ratios.	This	idea	of	adjustable	resolution	is	familiar	to

users	of	personal	computers	who	can	choose	the	typical	resolution	of	480
(called	VGA)	or	higher	resolutions	of	600,	768,	1,024,	or	1,200	horizontal
lines	of	resolution,	depending	on	what	their	monitor	and	display	card	can
support.
Both	TV	screens	and	PC	screens	will	continue	to	improve—to	get	smaller	and
improve	in	quality.	Most	will	be	flat-panel	displays.	One	new	form	will	be	the
digital	white	board:	a	large	wall-mounted	screen,	perhaps	an	inch	thick,	that
will	take	the	place	of	today's	blackboards	and	white	boards.	It	will	display
pictures,	movies,	and	other	visual	materials,	as	well	as	text	and	other	fine
details.	People	will	be	able	to	draw	or	make	lists	by	writing	on	it.	The
computer	controlling	the	white	board	will	recognize	a	handwritten	list	and
convert	it	into	one	with	a	readable	typeface.	These	devices	will	show	up	first
in	conference	rooms,	then	private	offices	and	even	homes.
Today's	telephone	will	connect	to	the	same	networks	as	the	PCs	and	TVs.
Many	future	phones	will	have	small,	flat	screens	and	tiny	cameras.	Otherwise,
though,	they'll	look	more	or	less	like	today's	instruments.	Kitchens	will
continue	to	have	wall	phones,	because	they	conserve	counter	space.	You'll	sit
close	to	the	phone	and	look	at	a	screen	showing	the	person	you	are	speaking
to—or	at	a	stock	picture	he	or	she	has	elected	to	transmit	in	lieu	of	live	video.
Technologically,	the	phone	hanging	over	a	dishwasher	tomorrow	will	have	a
lot	in	common	with	the	set-top	box	in	the	living	room	and	the	personal
computer	in	the	den,	but	it	will	assume	the	form	of	a	phone.	Under	the	hood,
all	information	appliances	will	have	pretty	much	the	same	computer
architecture.	Their	exterior	forms	will	be	different	to	match	their	varying
functions.
In	a	mobile	society,	people	need	to	be	able	to	work	efficiently	while	on	the
road.	Two	centuries	ago,	travelers	often	carried	a	"lap	desk,"	a	hinged	writing
board	attached	to	a	thin	mahogany	box	with	a	drawer	for	pens	and	ink.	When
folded,	it	was	reasonably	compact,	and	when	opened,	it	offered	an	ample
writing	surface.	In	fact,	the	Declaration	of	Independence	was	written	on	a	lap
desk	in	Philadelphia,	a	long	way	from	Thomas	Jefferson's	Virginia	home.	The
need	for	a	portable	writing	station	is	met	today	by	the	laptop,	a	folding,	lap-
size	personal	computer.	Many	people—including	me—who	work	from	both
office	and	home,	choose	a	laptop	(or	a	slightly	smaller	computer,	known	as	a
notebook)	as	their	primary	computer.	These	small	computers	can	then	be
connected