======================================================== kets	already	served	by	others.	Interestingly,	in	the	cable	TV	business,	the
few	places	a	second	system	was	constructed,	the	"overbuilder"	never	made
money.	Having	two	or	more	general-purpose	connections	running	into	every
home	would	aid	competition,	but	the	extra	cost	is	immense.
Servers	for	the	information	highway	will	have	to	be	large	computers	with
gigantic	storage	capacity	that	run	twenty-four	hours	a	day,	seven	days	a	week.
Competition	to	supply	them	will	be	intense.	Various	companies	have	different
ideas	about	the	right	design	for	the	servers,	and	strategies	for	developing
them.	Not	surprisingly,	the	positions	held	by	the	various	potential	competitors
are	influenced	by	their	areas	of	expertise.	If	your	only	tool	is	a	hammer,	pretty
soon	every	new	problem	starts	to	look	like	a	nail	that	needs	pounding.	Mini-
computer	companies	such	as	Hewlett	Packard	envision	using	clusters	of	mini-
computers	as	servers.	A	variety	of	companies	that	primarily	make	personal
computers	believe	that	inexpensive	PCs,	connected	together	in	large	numbers,
will	prove	to	be	the	most	cost-effective	and	reliable	approach.	Mainframe
specialists	such	as	IBM	are	adapting	their	big	machines	to	be	servers.	They
cherish	a	fond	hope	that	the	information	highway	will	be	the	last	bastion	of
Big	Iron.
Software	companies	naturally	see	their	product	as	the	answer.	Software	is	so
inexpensive	to	duplicate	that	substituting	it	for	costly	hardware	reduces
system	costs.	Another	competition	is	shaping	up	to	supply	the	software
platforms	that	will	run	these	servers.	Oracle,	a	database-management
company	that	makes	software	for	mainframes	and	mini-computers,	envisions
the	server	as	a	supercomputer	or	mini-computer	running	Oracle	software.
AT&T,	with	its	experience	in	the	network	business,	will	probably	try	to

embed	most	of	the	system's	intelligence	in	the	servers	and	switches	of	the
network	and	put	relatively	little	processing	power	in	information	appliances
such	as	PCs	and	set-top	boxes.
At	Microsoft,	our	only	"hammer"	is	software.	We	expect	that	the	highway's
intelligence	will	be	evenly	divided	between	servers	and	information
appliances.	This	arrangement	is	sometimes	called	"client/server"	computing,
which	means	that	the	information	appliances	(the	clients)	and	the	servers	will
run	cooperating	software	applications.	We	don't	believe	that	giant
supercomputers,	mainframes,	or	even	clusters	of	mini-computers	will	be
necessary.	Instead,	Microsoft,	like	many	of	the	PC	manufacturers,	sees	the
server	as	a	network	of	dozens	to	hundreds	of	what	are	essentially	personal
computers.	They	won't	have	the	familiar	cases,	monitors,	and	keyboards,	and
may	be	housed	together	in	large	racks	at	the	headquarters	of	a	cable	system	or
the	central	office	of	a	telephone	system.	It	will	take	special	software
technology	to	harness	the	computing	horsepower	of	thousands	of	such
machines.	Our	approach	is	to	make	the	coordination	of	the	highway	a
software	problem	and	then	use	the	highest-volume	(and	therefore	cheapest)
computers	to	do	the	work—the	same	ones	used	in	the	PC	industry.
Our	approach	focuses	on	taking	full	advantage	of	all	the	advances	going	on	in
the	PC	industry,	including	the	software.	The	PC	will	be	one	of	the	primary
devices	used	on	the	highway.	We	think	the	set-top	box	should	share	as	many
technical	features	as	possible	with	the	PC	to	make	it	easy	for	developers	to
create	applications	and	services	that	will	work	with	both.	This	will	allow	the
Internet	to	evolve	upward	into	the	highway	in	a	compatible	fashion.	We
believe	tools	and	applications	available	on	the	PC	today	can	be	used	to	build
new	applications.	For	instance,	we	think	set-top	boxes	should	be	able	to	run
most	of	the	CD-ROM	titles	for	PCs	that	will	appear	over	the	next	decade.	One
could	argue	that	we	are	thinking	too	narrowly	by	trying	to	imagine	the	new
world	in	terms	of	the	PC.	But	there	are	more	than	50	million	PCs	sold	every
year	worldwide.	The	population	of	installed	PCs	will	provide	a	substantial
starter	market	for	a	prospective	developer	of	any	application	or	service.
Even	if	there	were	suddenly	a	million	of	one	type	of	set-top	box	in	use,	it	still
would	represent	a	tiny	market	compared	to	the	opportunity	for	multi-media
titles	for	the	PC.	A	developer	could	afford	to	spend	only	a	small	fraction	of	its
R&D	on	customers	with	these	specialized	boxes.	Only	the	very	largest
companies	are	able	to	invest	in	new	applications	without	concerning
themselves	about	the	near-term	audience	size.	We	believe	that	most	of	the
innovation	that	will	occur	will	be	extending	existing	markets,	and	that	using
the	PC/Internet	market	is	the	likeliest	means	of	extending	to	interactive	TV

and	the	highway.	But	similar	arguments	could	be	made	in	favor	of	other
computer	platforms	or	even	home	game	machines.
Other	software	companies	are	equally	confident	about	their	own	strategies	for
set-top	box	software.	Apple	proposes	to	use	Macintosh	technology,	and
Silicon	Graphics	intends	to	adapt	its	workstation	operating	system,	which	is	a
form	of	UNIX.	One	small	company	even	wants	to	repurpose	an	operating
system	that	is	currently	used	primarily	in	the	antilock-brake	systems	of
commercial	trucks!
Hardware	manufacturers	are	making	similar	decisions	about	which	approach
to	set-top	boxes	they	want	to	take.	Meanwhile,	consumer-electronics
companies	are	determining	what	sorts	of	information	appliances—from	wallet
PCs	to	TVs	they	will	build	and	what	software	they	will	use.
The	battle	among	software	architectures	will	play	out	over	a	long	period	and
may	involve	potential	competitors	who	have	not	yet	declared	their	interest.
All	software	components	will	be	compatible	to	a	degree,	the	way	all	of
today's	computer	systems	share	certain	degrees	of	compatibility.	You	can
connect	nearly	any	computer	to	the	Internet,	and	the	same	will	be	true	for	the
highway.
There	are	open	questions	such	as	to	what	extent	these	platforms	will	share	a
personality	or	user	interface.	A	single	common	user	interface	is	great—unless
you	happen	not	to	like	it.	Will	Mom,	Dad,	Grandma,	the	preschooler,	and	the
Generation	X-er	all	have	the	same	taste?	Must	one	size	fit	all	in	this,	the	most
flexible	medium?	Here,	too,	good	arguments	can	be	made	in	all	directions,	so
interface	is	another	area	in	which	the	industry	will	have	to	experiment,
innovate,	and	let	the	market	decide.
There	are	other,	similar	decisions	awaiting	the	judgment	of	the	marketplace.
For	instance,	will	advertising	play	a	large	role	in	underwriting	information
and	entertainment,	or	will	customers	pay	directly	for	most	services?	Will	you
control	all	of	what	you	see	when	you	first	turn	on	a	TV	or	other	information
appliance,	or	will	your	network	provider	get	some	part	of	your	first	screen	to
show	you	information	it	controls?
The	market	will	also	influence	technical	aspects	of	network	design.	Most
experts	believe	that	the	interactive	network	will	use	asynchronous	transfer
mode	(ATM),	but	today	ATM	costs	too	much	to	use.	If	ATM	equipment	prices
behave	like	other	chip-related	technologies,	they	will	come	down	rapidly.
However,	if	for	some	reason	they	stay	high	or	don't	drop	quickly	enough,
signals	may	have	to	be	translated	into	some	other	form	before	they	enter	a

consumer's	home.
A	wide	range	of	skills,	from	a	wide	range	of	companies,	will	be	necessary	to
put	the	information	highway	together	sufficiently	for	a	mass	market	to	begin.
It	will	be	tempting	for	a	company	strong	in	one	or	more	of	the	necessary
disciplines	to	try	to	find	a	way	to	do	every	piece	and	ignite	the	market	all	by
itself,	but	I	think	this	would	be	a	mistake.
I	have	always	believed	businesses	that	concentrate	on	a	very	few	core
competencies	will	do	the	best.	One	of	the	lessons	of	the	computer	industry—
as	well	as	of	life—is	that	it	is	almost	impossible	to	do	everything	well.	IBM
and	DEC	and	other	companies	in	the	old	computer	industry	tried	offering
everything,	including	chips,	software,	systems,	and	consulting.	When	the	pace
of	technology	was	accelerated	by	the	microprocessor	and	PC	standards,	the
diversified	strategy	proved	vulnerable,	because,	over	time,	competitors	who
had	focused	on	specific	areas	did	better.	One	company	did	great	chips,
another	did	great	PC	design,	yet	another	did	great	distribution	and	integration.
Each	successful	new	company	picked	a	narrow	slice	and	focused	on	it.
Beware!	Mergers	that	are	attempts	to	bring	all	aspects	of	highway	expertise
into	one	organization	should	be	viewed	skeptically.	Much	of	the	press
coverage	about	the	highway	has	concerned	just	such	huge	business	deals.
Media	companies	are	merging	and	trying	different	configurations.	Some
phone	companies	are	buying	cable	companies.	McCaw	Cellular	wireless
communications	company	was	bought	by	wire-based	AT&T.	Disney	has
purchased	Capital	Cities-ABC	and	Time-Warner	proposed	buying	Turner
Broadcasting.	It	will	be	a	long	time	before	the	corporations	making	these
investments	can	assess	how	wise	they	were.
Right	or	wrong,	deals	like	these	fascinate	the	public.	For	example,	when	the
proposed	$30	billion	merger	between	Bell	Atlantic	and	TCI	fell	through,	the
press	speculated	about	whether	it	was	a	setback	for	the	information	highway.
The	answer	is	no.	Both	companies	still	have	very	aggressive	investment	plans
for	building	the	highway's	infrastructure.
The	highway's	arrival	will	depend	on	the	evolution	of	the	PC,	the	Internet,
and	new	applications.	Companies	merging,	or	failing	to	merge,	is	no
indication	of	progress	or	the	lack	of	it.	The	deals	are	like	background	noise;
they	keep	rumbling	along	whether	or	not	anyone	is	listening.	Microsoft	plans
to	reach	out	to	hundreds	of	companies,	including	movie	studios,	television
networks,	and	newspaper	and	magazine	publishers.	We	hope	to	work	with
them	so	that	together	we	can	assemble	their	respective	content	assets	and

build	applications	for	CD-ROMs,	the	Internet,	and	the	highway.
We	believe	in	alliances	and	are	eager	to	participate	in	them.	Our	core	mission,
however,	is	to	build	a	number	of	software	components	for	the	information
h======================================================== t	of	other	news	accounts	in	which	she	figured
recently.	Point	at	something	on	the	list,	and	you	will	be	able	to	read	it	or
watch	it,	jumping	any	number	of	times	from	topic	to	topic	and	gathering
video,	audio,	and	text	information	from	all	over	the	world.
Spatial	navigation	can	also	be	used	for	touring.	If	you	want	to	see
reproductions	of	the	artwork	in	a	museum	or	gallery,	you'll	be	able	to	"walk"
through	a	visual	representation,	navigating	among	the	works	much	as	if	you
were	physically	there.	For	details	about	a	painting	or	sculpture,	you	would	use
a	hyperlink.	No	crowds,	no	rush,	and	you	could	ask	anything	without
worrying	about	seeming	uninformed.	You	would	bump	into	interesting	things,
just	as	you	do	in	a	real	gallery.	Navigating	through	a	virtual	gallery	won't	be
like	walking	through	a	real	art	gallery,	but	it	will	be	a	rewarding
approximation—just	as	watching	a	ballet	or	basketball	game	on	television	can
be	entertaining	even	though	you're	not	in	the	theater	or	stadium.
If	other	people	are	visiting	the	same	"museum,"	you	will	be	able	to	choose	to
see	them	and	interact	with	them	or	not,	as	you	please.	Your	visits	needn't	be
solitary	experiences.	Some	locations	will	be	used	purely	for	cyberspace

socialization;	in	others	no	one	will	be	visible.	Some	will	force	you	to	appear
to	some	degree	as	you	are;	others	won't.	The	way	you	look	to	other	users	will
depend	on	your	choices	and	the	rules	of	the	particular	location.
If	you	are	using	spatial	navigation,	the	place	you're	moving	around	in	won't
have	to	be	real.	You'll	be	able	to	set	up	imaginary	places	and	return	to	them
whenever	you	want.	In	your	own	museum,	you'll	be	able	to	move	walls,	add
imaginary	galleries,	and	rearrange	the	art.	You	might	want	all	still	lifes	to	be
displayed	together,	even	if	one	is	a	fragment	of	a	Pompeian	fresco	that	hangs
in	a	gallery	of	ancient	Roman	art	and	one	is	a	Cubist	Picasso	from	a
twentieth-century	gallery.	You	will	be	able	to	play	curator	and	gather	images
of	your	favorite	artworks	from	around	the	world	to	"hang"	in	a	gallery	of	your
own.	Suppose	you	want	to	include	a	warmly	remembered	painting	of	a	man
asleep	being	nuzzled	by	a	lion,	but	you	can't	recall	either	the	artist	or	where
you	saw	it.	The	information	highway	won't	make	you	go	looking	for	the
information.	You'll	be	able	to	describe	what	you	want	by	posing	a	query.	The
query	will	start	your	computer	or	other	information	appliance	sifting	through
a	reservoir	of	information	to	deliver	those	pieces	that	match	your	request.
You	will	even	be	able	to	give	friends	tours,	whether	they	are	sitting	next	to
you	or	watching	from	the	other	side	of	the	world.	"Here,	between	the	Raphael
and	the	Modigliani,"	you	might	say,	"is	a	favorite	finger	painting	I	did	when	I
was	three	years	old."
The	last	type	of	navigational	aid,	and	in	many	ways	the	most	useful	of	all,	is
an	agent.	This	is	a	filter	that	has	taken	on	a	personality	and	seems	to	show
initiative.	An	agent's	job	is	to	assist	you.	In	the	Information	Age,	that	means
the	agent	is	there	to	help	you	find	information.
To	understand	the	ways	an	agent	can	help	with	a	variety	of	tasks,	consider
how	it	could	improve	today's	PC	interface.	The	present	state	of	the	art	in	user
interface	is	the	graphical	user	interface,	such	as	Apple's	Macintosh	and
Microsoft	Windows,	which	depicts	information	and	relationships	on	the
screen	instead	of	just	describing	them	in	text.	Graphical	interfaces	also	allow
the	user	to	point	to	and	move	objects	including	pictures—around	on	the
screen.
But	the	graphical	user	interface	isn't	easy	enough	for	future	systems.	We've
put	so	many	options	on	the	screen	that	programs	or	features	that	are	not	used
regularly	have	become	daunting.	The	features	are	great	and	fast	for	people
familiar	with	the	software,	but	for	the	average	user	not	enough	guidance
comes	from	the	machine	for	him	or	her	to	feel	comfortable.	Agents	will

remedy	that.
Agents	will	know	how	to	help	you	partly	because	the	computer	will
remember	your	past	activities.	It	will	be	able	to	find	patterns	of	use	that	will
help	it	work	more	effectively	with	you.	Through	the	magic	of	software,
information	appliances	connected	to	the	highway	will	appear	to	learn	from
your	interactions	and	will	make	suggestions	to	you.	I	call	this	"softer
software."
Software	allows	hardware	to	perform	a	number	of	functions,	but	once	the
program	is	written,	it	stays	the	same.	Softer	software	will	appear	to	get
smarter	as	you	use	it.	It	will	learn	about	your	requirements	in	pretty	much	the
same	way	a	human	assistant	does	and,	like	a	human	assistant,	will	become
more	helpful	as	it	learns	about	you	and	your	work.	The	first	day	a	new
assistant	is	on	the	job,	you	can't	simply	ask	him	to	format	a	document	like
another	memo	you	wrote	a	few	weeks	ago.	You	can't	say,	"Send	a	copy	to
everybody	who	should	know	about	this."	But	over	the	course	of	months	and
years,	the	assistant	becomes	more	valuable	as	he	picks	up	on	what	is	typical
routine	and	how	you	like	things	done.
The	computer	today	is	like	a	first-day	assistant.	It	needs	explicit	first-day
instructions	all	the	time.	And	it	remains	a	first-day	assistant	forever.	It	will
never	make	one	iota	of	adjustment	as	a	response	to	its	experience	with	you.
We're	working	to	perfect	softer	software.	No	one	should	be	stuck	with	an
assistant,	in	this	case	software,	that	doesn't	learn	from	experience.
If	an	agent	that	could	learn	were	available	now,	I	would	want	it	to	take	over
certain	functions	for	me.	For	instance,	it	would	be	very	helpful	if	it	could	scan
every	project	schedule,	note	the	changes,	and	distinguish	the	ones	I	had	to	pay
attention	to	from	the	ones	I	didn't.	It	would	learn	the	criteria	for	what	needed
my	attention:	the	size	of	the	project,	what	other	projects	are	dependent	on	it,
the	cause	and	the	length	of	any	delay.	It	would	learn	when	a	two-week	slip
could	be	ignored,	and	when	such	a	slip	indicates	real	trouble	and	I'd	better
look	into	it	right	away	before	it	gets	worse.	It	will	take	time	to	achieve	this
goal,	partly	because	it's	difficult,	as	with	an	assistant,	to	find	the	right	balance
between	initiative	and	routine.	We	don't	want	to	overdo	it.	If	the	built-in	agent
tries	to	be	too	smart	and	anticipates	and	confidently	performs	unrequested	or
undesired	services,	it	will	be	annoying	to	users	who	are	accustomed	to	having
explicit	control	over	their	computers.
When	you	use	an	agent,	you	will	be	in	a	dialogue	with	a	program	that	behaves
to	some	degree	like	a	person.	It	could	be	that	the	software	mimics	the

behavior	of	a	celebrity	or	a	cartoon	character	as	it	assists	you.	An	agent	that
takes	on	a	personality	provides	a	"social	user	interface."	A	number	of
companies,	including	Microsoft,	are	developing	agents	with	social-user-
interface	capabilities.	Agents	won't	replace	the	graphical-user-interface
software,	but,	rather,	will	supplement	it	by	providing	a	character	of	your
choosing	to	assist	you.	The	character	will	disappear	when	you	get	to	the	parts
of	the	product	you	know	very	well.	But	if	you	hesitate	or	ask	for	help,	the
agent	will	reappear	and	offer	assistance.	You	may	even	come	to	think	of	the
agent	as	a	collaborator,	built	right	into	the	software.	It	will	remember	what
you're	good	at	and	what	you've	done	in	the	past,	and	try	to	anticipate
problems	and	suggest	solutions.	It	will	bring	anything	unusual	to	your
attention.	If	you	work	on	something	for	a	few	minutes	and	then	decide	to
discard	the	revision,	the	agent	might	ask	if	you're	sure	you	want	to	throw	the
work	away.	Some	of	today's	software	already	does	that.	But	if	you	were	to
work	for	two	hours	and	then	give	an	instruction	to	delete	what	you'd	just
done,	the	social	interface	would	recognize	that	as	unusual	and	possibly	a
serious	mistake	on	your	part.	The	agent	would	say,	"You've	worked	on	this	for
two	hours.	Are	you	really,	really	sure	you	want	to	delete	it?"
Some	people,	hearing	about	softer	software	and	social	interface,	find	the	idea
of	a	humanized	computer	creepy.	But	I	believe	even	they	will	come	to	like	it,
once	they	have	tried	it.	We	humans	tend	to	anthropomorphize.	Animated
movies	take	advantage	of	this	tendency.	The	Lion	King	is	not	very	realistic,
nor	does	it	try	to	be.	Anybody	could	distinguish	little	Simba	from	a	live	lion
cub	on	film.	When	a	car	breaks	down	or	a	computer	crashes,	we	are	apt	to
yell	at	it,	or	curse	it,	or	even	ask	why	it	let	us	down.	We	know	better,	of
course,	but	still	tend	to	treat	inanimate	objects	as	if	they	were	alive	and	had
free	will.	Researchers	at	universities	and	software	companies	are	exploring
how	to	make	computer	interfaces	more	effective,	using	this	human	tendency.
In	programs	such	as	Microsoft	Bob,	they	have	demonstrated	that	people	will
treat	mechanical	agents	that	have	personalities	with	a	surprising	degree	of
deference.	It	has	also	been	found	that	users'	reactions	differed	depending	on
whether	the	agent's	voice	was	female	or	male.	Recently	we	worked	on	a
project	that	involved	users	rating	their	experience	with	a	computer.	When	we
had	the	computer	the	users	had	worked	with	ask	for	an	evaluation	of	its
performance,	the	responses	tended	to	be	positive.	But	when	we	had	a	second
computer	ask	the	same	people	to	evaluate	their	encounters	with	the	first
machine,	the	people	were	significantly	more	critical.	Their	reluctance	to
criticize	the	first	computer	"to	its	face"	suggested	that	they	didn't	want	to	hurt
its	feelings,	even	though	they	knew	it	was	only	a	machine.	Social	interfaces
may	not	be	suitable	for	all	users	or	all	situations,	but	I	think	that	we'll	see	lots
of	them	in	the	future	because	they	"humanize"	computers.

We	have	a	fairly	clear	idea	of	what	sorts	of	navigation	we'll	have	on	the
highway.	It's	less	clear	what	we'll	be	navigating	through,	but	we	can	make
some	good	guesses.	Many	applications	available	on	the	highway	will	be
purely	for	fun.	Pleasures	will	be	as	simple	as	playing	bridge	or	a	board	game
with	your	best	friends,	even	though	you	are	all	in	several	different	cities.
Televised	sporting	events	will	offer	you	the	opportunity======================================================== udience	is	with	a	classified
ad.	Each	classification	represents	a	small	community	of	interest:	people	who
want	to	buy	or	sell	a	rug,	for	example.	Tomorrow,	the	classified	ad	won't	be
tied	to	paper	or	limited	to	text.	If	you're	looking	for	a	used	car,	you	will	send
out	a	query	specifying	the	price	range,	model,	and	features	that	interest	you
and	will	be	shown	a	list	of	the	available	cars	that	match	your	preferences.	Or
you	will	ask	a	software	agent	to	notify	you	when	a	suitable	car	comes	on	the
market.	Car	sellers'	ads	might	include	links	to	a	picture	or	a	video	of	the	car
or	even	the	car's	maintenance	records,	so	you	can	get	a	sense	of	what	shape	it
is	in.	You'll	be	able	to	learn	the	mileage	the	same	way,	and	whether	the	engine
has	ever	been	replaced,	and	if	the	car	has	air	bags.	Perhaps	you	will	want	to
cross-link	to	police	records,	which	are	public,	to	see	whether	it	has	been	in	a
wreck.

If	you	put	your	house	on	the	market,	you	will	be	able	to	describe	it	fully	and
include	photographs,	video,	floor	plans,	tax	records,	utility	and	repair	bills,
even	a	little	mood	music.	The	chances	that	a	potential	buyer	for	your	house
will	see	your	ad	are	improved	because	the	information	highway	will	make	it
easy	for	anyone	to	look	it	up.	The	whole	system	of	real	estate	agencies	and
commissions	may	be	changed	by	the	principals'	having	direct	access	to	so
much	information.
At	first,	on-line	classified	ads	won't	be	very	attractive,	because	not	many
people	will	be	using	them.	But	then	word-of-mouth	from	a	few	satisfied
customers	will	entice	more	and	more	users	to	the	service.	There	will	be	a
positive-feedback	loop	created	as	more	sellers	attract	more	buyers	and	vice
versa.	When	a	critical	mass	is	achieved,	which	might	be	only	a	year	or	two
after	the	service	is	first	offered,	the	information	highway's	classified
advertising	service	will	be	transformed	from	a	curiosity	to	the	primary	way
private	sellers	and	buyers	get	together.
Direct-response	advertising—the	junk-mail	business	is	in	for	even	bigger
changes.	Today,	a	lot	of	it	really	is	junk,	because	we	cut	down	a	lot	of	trees	in
order	to	mail	out	material,	much	of	which	is	discarded	unopened.	Direct-
response	advertising	on	the	information	highway	will	come	in	the	form	of	an
interactive	multi-media	document	rather	than	a	piece	of	paper.	Although	it
won't	waste	natural	resources,	there	will	have	to	be	some	way	to	make	sure
you	don't	get	thousands	of	these	almost-free	communications	a	day.
You	won't	be	drowned	by	the	deluge	of	unimportant	information	because
you'll	use	software	to	filter	incoming	advertising	and	other	extraneous
messages	and	spend	your	valuable	time	looking	at	those	messages	that
interest	you.	Most	people	will	block	e-mail	ads	except	for	those	about	product
areas	of	particular	concern.	One	way	for	the	advertiser	to	capture	your
attention	will	be	to	offer	a	small	amount	of	money—a	nickel	or	a	dollar,
perhaps—if	you	will	look	at	an	ad.	When	you	have	watched	it,	or	as	you're
interacting	with	it,	your	electronic	account	gets	credited	and	the	advertiser's
electronic	account	is	debited.	In	effect,	some	of	the	billions	of	dollars	now
spent	annually	on	media	advertising,	and	on	the	printing	and	postage	of
direct-mail	advertising,	will	instead	be	divvied	up	among	consumers	who
agree	to	watch	or	read	ads	sent	directly	to	them	as	messages.
Mailings	offering	this	sort	of	paying	advertisement	could	be	extremely
effective	because	they	can	be	carefully	targeted.	Advertisers	will	be	smart
about	sending	messages	worth	money	only	to	people	who	meet	appropriate
demographics.	A	company	such	as	Ferrari	or	Porsche	might	send	$1	messages

to	car	enthusiasts,	on	the	chance	that	seeing	a	cool	new	car	and	hearing	the
sound	of	its	engine	will	generate	interest.	If	the	ad	led	to	even	one	in	1,000
people's	buying	a	new	car	as	a	result,	it	would	be	worthwhile	to	the	company.
They	could	adjust	the	amount	they	offer	according	to	the	customer's	profile.
Such	ads	will	be	available	to	those	not	on	the	advertiser's	A-list.	For	instance,
if	a	sixteen-year-old	car-crazy	kid	wants	to	experience	a	Ferrari,	and	is	willing
to	do	it	for	nothing,	he'll	get	the	message	too.
This	may	sound	a	little	strange,	but	it	is	just	another	use	of	the	market
mechanism	for	friction-free	capitalism.	The	advertiser	decides	how	much
money	it	is	willing	to	bid	for	your	time,	and	you	decide	what	your	time	is
worth.
Advertising	messages,	like	the	rest	of	your	incoming	mail,	will	be	stored	in
various	folders.	You	will	instruct	your	computer	how	to	do	the	sorting	for
you.	Unread	mail	from	friends	and	family	members	might	be	in	one	folder.
Messages	and	documents	that	relate	to	a	personal	or	business	interest	would
be	in	other	folders.	And	advertisements	and	messages	from	unknown	people
could	be	sorted	by	how	much	money	was	attached	to	them.	There	would	be	a
group	of	1-cent	messages,	a	group	of	10-cent	messages,	and	so	forth.	If	there
was	no	fee	attached,	they	could	be	refused.	You	will	be	able	to	scan	each
message	and	dispose	of	it	if	it	isn't	of	interest.	Some	days	you	might	not	look
into	any	of	the	advertising	message	folders.	But	if	someone	sent	you	a	$10
message,	you	would	probably	take	a	look—if	not	for	the	money,	then	just	to
see	who	thought	reaching	you	was	worth	$10.
You	won't	have	to	take	the	money	someone	bids,	of	course.	When	you	accept
the	message,	you'll	be	able	to	cancel	the	payment,	so	it's	really	just	the
amount	the	person	puts	at	risk	to	get	your	attention.	The	sender's	credit	will
be	checked	in	advance.	If	a	man	sends	you	a	$100	message	suggesting	that	he
is	your	long-lost	brother,	you	might	forgive	him	the	money	if,	in	fact,	he
turned	out	to	be	your	brother.	On	the	other	hand,	if	he	was	just	someone
trying	to	get	your	attention	to	sell	you	something,	you	would	probably	keep
the	money,	thank	you	very	much.
In	the	United	States,	advertisers	currently	spend	more	than	$20	a	month	per
American	family	to	subsidize	free	broadcast	and	cable	television.	Ads	in
general	are	so	familiar	they	don't	really	bother	us	when	we	watch	television	or
listen	to	the	radio.	We	understand	that	programs	are	"free"	because	of	the
commercials.	Customers	pay	for	them	indirectly	because	advertising	costs	are
built	into	the	prices	of	cornflakes,	shampoo,	and	diamonds.	We	also	pay	for
entertainment	and	information	directly	when	we	buy	a	book	or	a	movie	ticket,

or	order	a	pay-per-view	movie.	The	average	American	household	pays	a	total
of	$100	a	month	for	movie	tickets,	subscriptions	to	newspapers	and
magazines,	books,	cable	television	fees,	compact	discs	and	tapes,	video
rentals,	and	the	like.
When	you	pay	for	entertainment	by	buying	a	tape	or	a	disc,	your	rights	to
reuse	or	resell	it	are	restricted.	If	you	buy	a	copy	of	Abbey	Road	by	the
Beatles,	you're	actually	purchasing	the	physical	disc	or	tape	and	a	license	to
replay,	any	number	of	times,	for	noncommercial	purposes,	the	music	stored
on	it.	If	you	buy	a	paperback	book,	what	you're	really	buying	is	the	paper	and
ink	and	the	right	to	read,	and	allow	others	to	read,	the	words	printed	on	that
particular	paper	with	that	particular	ink.	You	don't	own	the	words	and	you
can't	reprint	them,	except	in	narrowly	defined	circumstances.	When	you
watch	a	television	show,	you	don't	own	it,	either.	In	fact,	it	took	a	United
States	Supreme	Court	decision	to	confirm	that	people	in	this	country	can
legally	videotape	a	television	show	for	their	personal	use.
The	information	highway	will	enable	innovations	in	the	way	that	intellectual
property,	such	as	music	and	software,	is	licensed.	Record	companies,	or	even
individual	recording	artists,	might	choose	to	sell	music	a	new	way.	You,	the
consumer,	won't	need	compact	discs,	tapes,	or	any	other	kinds	of	physical
apparatus.	The	music	will	be	stored	as	bits	of	information	on	a	server	on	the
highway.	"Buying"	a	song	or	album	will	really	mean	buying	the	right	to
access	the	appropriate	bits.	You	will	be	able	to	listen	at	home,	at	work,	or	on
vacation,	without	carrying	around	a	collection	of	titles.	Anyplace	you	go
where	there	are	audio	speakers	connected	to	the	highway,	you'll	be	able	to
identify	yourself	and	take	advantage	of	your	rights.	You	won't	be	allowed	to
rent	a	concert	hall	and	play	that	recording	of	the	music	or	create	an
advertisement	that	incorporated	it.	But	in	any	noncommercial	setting,
anywhere	you	go,	you'll	have	the	right	to	play	the	song	without	additional
payment	to	the	copyright	holder.	In	the	same	way,	the	information	highway
could	keep	track	of	whether	you	had	bought	the	right	to	read	a	particular	book
or	see	a	movie.	If	you	had,	you'd	be	able	to	call	it	up	at	any	time,	from	any
information	appliance	anywhere.
This	personal,	lifetime	buyout	of	rights	is	similar	to	what	we	do	today	when
we	buy	a	music	disc	or	tape,	or	book,	except	that	there	is	no	physical	medium
involved.	It	sounds	comfortingly	familiar.	However,	there	are	lots	of	other
ways	to	sell	the	enjoyment	of	music	or	other	information.
For	example,	a	song	could	be	made	available	on	a	pay-per-hearing	basis.	Each
time	you	listened	to	it,	your	account	would	be	charged	some	small	amount,

such	as	5	cents.	At	that	rate,	it	would	cost	60	cents	to	listen	to	a	twelve-song
"album."	You	would	have	to	play	the	whole	album	twenty-five	times	to	spend
$15,	which	is	roughly	what	a	compact	disc	sells	for	today.	If	you	found	that
you	liked	only	one	song	on	the	album,	you	could	play	it	three	hundred	times,
at	a	nickel	each	time,	for	your	$15.	Because	digital	information	is	so	flexible,
as	the	audio	quality	improves	you	won't	have	to	pay	for	the	same	music	again
the	way	people	did	when	they	bought	CDs	to	replace	the	LPs	in	their	personal
libraries.
All	kinds	of	pricing	schemes	will	be	tried.	We	may	see	digital	entertainment
that	has	an	expiration	date	or	that	allows	only	a	certain	number	of	plays
before	it	has	to	be	purchased	again.	A	record	company	might	offer	a	very	low
price	for	a	song	but	let	you	play	it	only	ten	or	twenty	times.	Or	they	might	let
you	play	a	song—or	an	addictive	game—ten	times	free	be======================================================== will	connect	to	the	wireless	part	of	the	highway,	a	switch	will
connect	that	to	the	wired	part,	and	then	to	the	computer/server	in	your	home
or	office	and	bring	you	the	information	you	asked	for.
There	will	also	be	local,	less	expensive	kinds	of	wireless	networks	available
inside	businesses	and	most	homes.	These	networks	will	allow	you	to	connect
to	the	highway	or	your	own	computer	system	without	paying	time	charges	so
long	as	you	are	within	a	certain	range.	Local	wireless	networks	will	use
technology	different	from	the	one	used	by	the	wide-area	wireless	networks.
However,	portable	information	devices	will	automatically	select	the	least
expensive	network	they	are	able	to	connect	to,	so	the	user	won't	be	aware	of
the	technological	differences.	The	indoor	wireless	networks	will	allow	wallet
PCs	to	be	used	in	place	of	remote	controls.
Wireless	service	poses	obvious	concerns	about	privacy	and	security,	because
radio	signals	can	easily	be	intercepted.	Even	wired	networks	can	be	tapped.
The	highway	software	will	have	to	encrypt	transmission	to	avoid
eavesdropping.
Governments	have	long	understood	the	importance	of	keeping	information
private,	for	both	economic	and	military	reasons.	The	need	to	make	personal,
commercial,	military,	or	diplomatic	messages	secure	(or	to	break	into	them)
has	attracted	powerful	intellects	through	the	generations.	It	is	very	satisfying
to	break	an	encoded	message.	Charles	Babbage,	who	made	dramatic	advances
in	the	art	of	code	breaking	in	the	mid-1800s,	wrote:	"Deciphering	is,	in	my
opinion,	one	of	the	most	fascinating	of	arts,	and	I	fear	I	have	wasted	upon	it
more	time	than	it	deserves."	I	discovered	its	fascination	as	a	kid	when,	like
kids	everywhere,	a	bunch	of	us	played	with	simple	ciphers.	We	would	encode
messages	by	substituting	one	letter	of	the	alphabet	for	another.	If	a	friend	sent
me	a	cipher	that	began	"ULFW	NZXX"	it	would	be	fairly	easy	to	guess	that
this	represented	"DEAR	BILL,"	and	that	U	stood	for	D,	and	L	for	E,	and	so
forth.	With	those	seven	letters	it	wasn't	hard	to	unravel	the	rest	of	the	cipher
fairly	quickly.

Past	wars	have	been	won	or	lost	because	the	most	powerful	governments	on
earth	didn't	have	the	cryptological	power	any	interested	junior	high	school
student	with	a	personal	computer	can	harness	today.	Soon	any	child	old
enough	to	use	a	computer	will	be	able	to	transmit	encoded	messages	that	no
government	on	earth	will	find	easy	to	decipher.	This	is	one	of	the	profound
implications	of	the	spread	of	fantastic	computing	power.
When	you	send	a	message	across	the	information	highway	it	will	be	"signed"
by	your	computer	or	other	information	appliance	with	a	digital	signature	that
only	you	are	capable	of	applying,	and	it	will	be	encrypted	so	that	only	the
intended	recipient	will	be	able	to	decipher	it.	You'll	send	a	message,	which
could	be	information	of	any	kind,	including	voice,	video,	or	digital	money.
The	recipient	will	be	able	to	be	almost	positive	that	the	message	is	really	from
you,	that	it	was	sent	at	exactly	the	indicated	time,	that	it	has	not	been
tampered	with	in	the	slightest,	and	that	others	cannot	decipher	it.
The	mechanism	that	will	make	this	possible	is	based	on	mathematical
principles,	including	what	are	called	"one-way	functions"	and	"public-key
encryption."	These	are	quite	advanced	concepts,	so	I'm	only	going	to	touch	on
them.	Keep	in	mind	that	regardless	of	how	complicated	the	system	is
technically,	it	will	be	extremely	easy	for	you	to	use.	You'll	just	tell	your
information	appliance	what	you	want	it	to	do	and	it	will	seem	to	happen
effortlessly.
A	one-way	function	is	something	that	is	much	easier	to	do	than	undo.
Breaking	a	pane	of	glass	is	a	one-way	function,	but	not	one	useful	for
encoding.	The	sort	of	one-way	function	required	for	cryptography	is	one	that
is	easy	to	undo	if	you	know	an	extra	piece	of	information	and	very	difficult	to
undo	without	that	information.	There	are	a	number	of	such	one-way	functions
in	mathematics.	One	involves	prime	numbers.	Kids	learn	about	prime
numbers	in	school.	A	prime	number	cannot	be	divided	evenly	by	any	number
except	1	and	itself.	Among	the	first	dozen	numbers,	the	primes	are	2,	3,	5,	7,
and	11.	The	numbers	4,	6,	8,	and	10	are	not	prime	because	2	divides	into	each
of	them	evenly.	The	number	9	is	not	prime	because	3	divides	into	it	evenly.
There	are	an	infinite	number	of	prime	numbers,	and	there	is	no	known	pattern
to	them	except	that	they	are	prime.	When	you	multiply	two	prime	numbers
together,	you	get	a	number	that	can	be	divided	evenly	only	by	those	same	two
primes.	For	example,	only	5	and	7	can	be	divided	evenly	into	35.	Finding	the
primes	is	called	"factoring"	the	number.
It	is	easy	to	multiply	the	prime	numbers	11,927	and	20,903	and	get	the
number	249,310,081,	but	it	is	much	harder	to	recover	from	the	product,

249,310,081,	the	two	prime	numbers	that	are	its	factors.	This	one-way
function,	the	difficulty	of	factoring	numbers,	underlies	an	ingenious	kind	of
cipher:	the	most	sophisticated	encryption	system	in	use	today.	It	takes	a	long
time	for	even	the	largest	computers	to	factor	a	really	large	product	back	into
its	constituent	primes.	A	coding	system	based	on	factoring	uses	two	different
decoding	keys,	one	to	encipher	a	message	and	a	different	but	related	one	to
decipher.	With	only	the	enciphering	key,	it's	easy	to	encode	a	message,	but
deciphering	it	within	any	practical	period	of	time	is	nearly	impossible.
Deciphering	requires	a	separate	key,	available	only	to	the	intended	recipient
of	the	message—or,	rather,	to	the	recipient's	computer.	The	enciphering	key	is
based	on	the	product	of	two	huge	prime	numbers,	whereas	the	deciphering
key	is	based	on	the	primes	themselves.	A	computer	can	generate	a	new	pair	of
unique	keys	in	a	flash,	because	it	is	easy	for	a	computer	to	generate	two	large
prime	numbers	and	multiply	them	together.	The	enciphering	key	thus	created
can	be	made	public	without	appreciable	risk,	because	of	the	difficulty	even
another	computer	would	have	factoring	it	to	obtain	the	deciphering	key.
The	practical	application	of	this	encryption	will	be	at	the	center	of	the
information	highway's	security	system.	The	world	will	become	quite	reliant
on	this	network,	so	it	is	important	that	security	be	handled	competently.	You
can	think	of	the	information	highway	as	a	postal	network	where	everyone	has
a	mailbox	that	is	impervious	to	tampering	and	has	an	unbreakable	lock.	Each
mailbox	has	a	slot	that	lets	anyone	slide	information	in,	but	only	the	owner	of
a	mailbox	has	the	key	to	get	information	out.	(Some	governments	may	insist
that	each	mailbox	have	a	second	door	with	a	separate	key	that	the	government
keeps,	but	we'll	ignore	that	political	consideration	for	now	and	concentrate	on
the	security	that	software	will	provide.)
Each	user's	computer	or	other	information	appliance	will	use	prime	numbers
to	generate	an	enciphering	key,	which	will	be	listed	publicly,	and	a
corresponding	deciphering	key,	which	only	the	user	will	know.	This	is	how	it
will	work	in	practice:	I	have	information	I	want	to	send	you.	My	information
appliance/computer	system	looks	up	your	public	key	and	uses	it	to	encrypt	the
information	before	sending	it.	No	one	can	read	the	message,	even	though	your
key	is	public	knowledge,	because	your	public	key	does	not	contain	the
information	needed	for	decryption.	You	receive	the	message	and	your
computer	decrypts	it	with	a	private	key	that	corresponds	to	your	public	key.
You	want	to	answer.	Your	computer	looks	up	my	public	key	and	uses	it	to
encrypt	your	reply.	No	one	else	can	read	the	message,	even	though	it	was
encrypted	with	a	key	that	is	totally	public.	Only	I	can	read	it	because	only	I
have	the	private	deciphering	key.	This	is	very	practical,	because	no	one	has	to

trade	keys	in	advance.
How	big	do	the	prime	numbers	and	their	products	have	to	be	to	ensure	an
effective	one-way	function?.
The	concept	of	public-key	encryption	was	invented	by	Whitfield	Diffie	and
Martin	Hellman	in	1977.	Another	set	of	computer	scientists,	Ron	Rivest,	Adi
Shamir,	and	Leonard	Adelman,	soon	came	up	with	the	notion	of	using	prime
factorization	as	part	of	what	is	now	known	as	the	RSA	cryptosystem,	after	the
initials	of	their	last	names.	They	projected	that	it	would	take	millions	of	years
to	factor	a	130-digit	number	that	was	the	product	of	two	primes,	regardless	of
how	much	computing	power	was	brought	to	bear.	To	prove	the	point,	they
challenged	the	world	to	find	the	two	factors	in	this	129-digit	number,	known
to	people	in	the	field	as	RSA	129:
114,381,625,757,888,867,669,235,779,976,146,612,010,218,296,
721,242,362,562,561,842,935,706,935,245,733,897,830,597,123,563,958,705,058,989,075,147,599,29.0,026,879,543,541
They	were	sure	that	a	message	they	had	encrypted	using	the	number	as	the
public	key	would	be	totally	secure	forever.	But	they	hadn't	anticipated	either
the	full	effects	of	Moore's	Law,	as	discussed	in	chapter	2,	which	has	made
computers	much	more	powerful,	or	the	success	of	the	personal	computer,
which	has	dramatically	increased	the	number	of	computers	and	computer
users	in	the	world.	In	1993	a	group	of	more	than	600	academics	and	hobbyists
from	around	the	world	began	an	assault	on	the	129-digit	number,	using	the
Internet	to	coordinate	the	work	of	various	computers.	In	less	than	a	year	they
factored	the	number	into	two	primes,	one	64	digits	long	and	the	other	65.	The
primes	are	as	follows:
3,490,529,510,847,650,949,147,849,619,903,898,133,417,764,638,
493,387,843,990,820,577
and
32,769,132,993,266,709,549,961,988,190,834,461,413,177,642,
967,992,942,539,798,288,533
And	the	encoded	message	says:	"The	magic	words	are	squeamish	and
ossifrage."
One	lesson	that	came	out	of	this	challenge	is	that	a	129-digit	public	key	is	not
long	enough	if	the	information	being	encrypted	is	really	important	and
sensitive.	Another	is	that	no	one	should	get	too	cocksure	about	the	security	of

encryption.
Increasing	the	key	just	a	few	digits	makes	it	much	more	difficult	to	crack.
Mathematicians	today	believe	that	a	250-digit-long	pr======================================================== s	that.
IBM	was	such	a	great	company.	Why	should	it	have	so	much	trouble	with	PC
software	development?	One	answer	was	that	IBM	tended	to	promote	all	their
good	programmers	into	management	and	leave	the	less	talented	behind.	Even
more	significant,	IBM	was	haunted	by	its	successful	past.	Its	traditional
engineering	process	was	unsuitable	for	the	rapid	pace	and	market
requirements	of	PC	software.
In	April	1987,	IBM	unveiled	its	integrated	hardware/software,	which	was
supposed	to	beat	back	imitators.	The	"clone-killer"	hardware	was	called	PS/2
and	it	ran	the	new	operating	system,	OS/2.
The	PS/2	included	a	number	of	innovations.	The	most	celebrated	was	the	new
"microchannel	bus"	circuitry,	which	allowed	accessory	cards	to	connect	to	the
system	and	permitted	the	PC	hardware	to	be	extended	to	meet	such	particular
customer	requirements	as	sound	or	mainframe	communications	capabilities.
Every	compatible	computer	included	a	hardware-connection	"bus"	to	allow
these	cards	to	work	with	the	PC.	The	PS/2's	Microchannel	was	an	elegant
replacement	for	the	connection	bus	in	the	PC	AT.	But	it	solved	problems	that
most	customers	didn't	have.	It	was	potentially	much	faster	than	the	PC	AT's
bus.	But	in	actual	practice	the	speed	of	the	bus	hadn't	been	holding	anyone	up,
and	therefore	customers	couldn't	get	much	benefit	from	this	newly	available
speed.	More	important,	the	Microchannel	didn't	work	with	any	of	the
thousands	of	add-in	cards	that	worked	with	the	PC	AT	and	compatible	PCs.
Ultimately,	IBM	agreed	to	license	the	Microchannel,	for	a	royalty,	to
manufacturers	of	add-in	cards	and	PCs.	But	by	then	a	coalition	of
manufacturers	had	already	announced	a	new	bus	with	many	of	the	capabilities
of	the	Microchannel	but	compatible	with	the	PC	AT	bus.	Customers	rejected
Microchannel	in	favor	of	machines	with	the	old	PC	AT	bus.	The	complement
of	accessory	cards	for	the	PS/2	never	came	close	to	the	number	available	for
PC	AT-compatible	systems.	This	forced	IBM	to	continue	to	release	machines
that	supported	the	old	bus.	The	real	casualty	was	that	IBM	lost	control	of
personal-computer	architecture.	Never	again	would	they	be	able	to	move	the
industry	singlehanded	to	a	new	design.
Despite	a	great	deal	of	promotion	from	both	IBM	and	Microsoft,	customers
thought	OS/2	was	too	unwieldy	and	complicated.	The	worse	OS/2	looked,	the
better	Windows	seemed.	Because	we'd	lost	the	chances	both	for	compatibility
between	Windows	and	OS/2,	and	for	OS/2	to	run	on	modest	machines,	it	still

made	sense	to	us	to	continue	to	develop	Windows.	Windows	was	far
"smaller"—meaning	it	used	less	hard-disk	space	and	could	work	in	a	machine
with	less	memory,	so	there	would	be	a	place	for	it	on	machines	that	could
never	run	OS/2.	We	called	this	the	"family"	strategy.	In	other	words,	OS/2
would	be	the	high-end	system	and	Windows	would	be	the	junior	member	of
the	family,	for	smaller	machines.
IBM	was	never	happy	about	our	family	strategy,	but	it	had	its	own	plans.	In
the	spring	of	1988,	it	joined	other	computer	makers	in	establishing	the	Open
Software	Foundation	to	promote	UNIX,	an	operating	system	that	had
originally	been	developed	at	AT&T's	Bell	Labs	in	1969	but	over	the	years	had
splintered	into	a	number	of	versions.	Some	of	the	versions	were	developed	at
universities,	which	used	UNIX	as	a	working	laboratory	for	operating-systems
theory.	Other	versions	were	developed	by	computer	companies.	Each
company	enhanced	UNIX	for	its	own	computers,	which	made	their	operating
system	incompatible	with	everyone	else's.	This	meant	that	UNIX	had	become
not	a	single	open	system,	but	a	collection	of	operating	systems	competing
with	one	another.	All	the	differences	made	software	compatibility	harder	and
held	back	the	rise	of	a	strong	third-party	software	market	for	UNIX.	Only	a
few	software	companies	could	afford	to	develop	and	test	applications	for	a
dozen	different	versions	of	UNIX.	Also,	computer-software	stores	couldn't
afford	to	stock	all	the	different	versions.
The	Open	Software	Foundation	was	the	most	promising	of	several	attempts	to
"unify"	UNIX	and	create	a	common	software	architecture	that	would	work	on
various	different	manufacturers'	hardware.	In	theory,	a	unified	UNIX	could
get	a	positive-feedback	cycle	going.	But	despite	significant	funding,	it	turned
out	to	be	impossible	for	the	Open	Software	Foundation	to	mandate
cooperation	from	a	committee	of	vendors	who	were	competing	for	each	sale.
Its	members,	including	IBM,	DEC,	and	others,	continued	to	promote	the
benefits	of	their	particular	versions	of	UNIX.	The	UNIX	companies	suggested
their	systems	would	benefit	customers	by	offering	them	more	choices.	But	if
you	bought	a	UNIX	system	from	one	vendor,	your	software	couldn't
automatically	run	on	any	other	system.	This	meant	you	were	tied	to	that
vendor,	whereas	in	the	PC	world	you	have	a	choice	of	where	to	buy	your
hardware.
The	problems	of	the	Open	Software	Foundation	and	similar	initiatives	point
up	the	difficulty	of	trying	to	impose	a	standard	in	a	field	in	which	innovation
is	moving	rapidly	and	all	the	companies	that	make	up	the	standards
committee	are	competitors.	The	marketplace	(in	computers	or	consumer
electronics)	adopts	standards	because	customers	insist	on	standards.	Standards

are	to	ensure	interoperability,	minimize	user	training,	and	of	course	foster	the
largest	possible	software	industry.	Any	company	that	wants	to	create	a
standard	has	to	price	it	very	reasonably	or	it	won't	be	adopted.	The	market
effectively	chooses	a	reasonably	priced	standard	and	replaces	it	when	it	is
obsolete	or	too	expensive.
Microsoft	operating	systems	are	offered	today	by	more	than	nine	hundred
different	manufacturers,	which	gives	customers	choices	and	options.
Microsoft	has	been	able	to	provide	compatibility	because	hardware
manufacturers	have	agreed	not	to	allow	modifications	to	our	software	that
introduce	incompatibility.	This	means	that	hundreds	of	thousands	of	software
developers	don't	need	to	worry	about	what	PCs	their	software	will	run	on.
Although	the	term	"open"	is	used	in	many	different	ways,	to	me	it	means
offering	choice	in	hardware	and	software	applications	to	the	customer.
Consumer	electronics	has	also	benefited	from	standards	managed	by	private
companies.	Years	ago	consumer	electronics	companies	often	tried	to	restrict
competitors	from	using	their	technology,	but	now	all	of	the	major	consumer
electronics	makers	are	quite	open	to	licensing	their	patents	and	trade	secrets.
The	royalties	for	their	products	are	typically	under	5	percent	of	the	cost	of	the
device.	Audiocassettes,	VHS	tapes,	compact	discs,	televisions,	and	cellular
telephones	are	all	examples	of	technologies	that	were	created	by	private
companies	that	receive	royalties	from	everyone	who	makes	the	equipment.
Dolby	Laboratories'	algorithms,	for	example,	are	the	de	facto	standard	for
noise	reduction.
In	May	1990,	the	last	weeks	before	the	release	of	Windows	3.0,	we	tried	to
reach	an	agreement	with	IBM	for	it	to	license	Windows	to	use	on	its	personal
computers.	We	told	IBM	we	thought	that	although	OS/2	would	work	out	over
time,	for	the	moment	Windows	was	going	to	be	a	success	and	OS/2	would
find	its	niche	slowly.
In	1992,	IBM	and	Microsoft	stopped	their	joint	development	of	OS/2.	IBM
continued	to	develop	the	operating	system	alone.	The	ambitious	plan	for
OfficeVision	was	eventually	canceled.
Analysts	estimate	that	IBM	poured	more	than	$2	billion	into	OS/2,
OfficeVision,	and	related	projects.	If	IBM	and	Microsoft	had	found	a	way	to
work	together,	thousands	of	people-years—the	best	years	of	some	of	the	best
employees	at	both	companies—would	not	have	been	wasted.	If	OS/2	and
Windows	had	been	compatible,	graphical	computing	would	have	become
mainstream	years	sooner.

The	acceptance	of	graphical	interfaces	was	also	held	back	because	most	major
software-applications	companies	did	not	invest	in	them.	They	largely	ignored
the	Macintosh	and	ignored	or	ridiculed	Windows.	Lotus	and	WordPerfect,	the
market	leaders	for	spreadsheet	and	word-processing	applications,	made	only
modest	efforts	on	OS/2.	In	retrospect,	this	was	a	mistake,	and,	in	the	end,	a
costly	one.	When	Windows	finally	benefited	from	a	positive-feedback	cycle,
generated	by	applications	from	many	of	the	small	software	companies,	the	big
companies	fell	behind	because	they	didn't	move	to	Windows	fast	enough.
Windows,	like	the	PC,	continues	to	evolve.	Microsoft	has	continued
to	add	new	capabilities	to	various	versions.	Anyone	can	develop	application
software	that	runs	on	the	Windows	platform,	without	having	to	notify	or	get
permission	from	Microsoft.	In	fact,	today	there	are	tens	of	thousands	of
commercially	available	software	packages	for	the	platform,	including
offerings	that	compete	with	most	Microsoft	applications.
Customers	express	to	me	their	worry	that	Microsoft,	because	it	is,	by
definition,	the	only	source	for	Microsoft	operating-system	software,	could
raise	prices	and	slow	down	or	even	stop	its	innovation.	Even	if	we	did	we
wouldn't	be	able	to	sell	our	new	versions.	Existing	users	would	not	upgrade
and	we	wouldn't	get	any	new	users.	Our	revenue	would	fall	and	many	more
companies	would	compete	to	take	our	place.	The	positive-feedback
mechanism	helps	challengers	as	well	as	the	incumbent.	You	can't	rest	on	your
laurels,	because	there	is	always	a	competitor	coming	up	behind	you.
No	product	stays	on	top	unless	it	is	improved.	Even	the	VHS	standard	will	be
replaced	when	better	formats	appear	at	reasonable	prices.	In	fact,	the	era	of
VHS	is	almost	over.	Within	the	next	several	years	we	will	see	new	digital	tape
formats,	digital	movie	discs	that	put	feature	films	on	discs	like	a	music	CD,
and	eventually	the	information	highway	will	enable	new	services	such	as
video-on-demand,	and	VHS	will	be	unnecessary.
MS-DOS	is	being	replaced	now.	Despite	its	incredible	strength	as	the	leading
operating	system	for	personal	computers,	it	is	being	replaced	by	a	system	with
a	graphical	user	interface.	The	Macintosh	software	might	have	become	the
successor	to	MS-DOS.	So	might	OS/2	or	UNIX.	I======================================================== ked	through	a	wall	of	it	70	miles	thick,	you'd	be	able	to	see	a	candle
burning	on	the	other	side.	Binary	signals,	in	the	form	of	modulated	light,
carry	for	long	distances	through	these	optic	fibers.	A	signal	doesn't	move	any
faster	through	fiber-optic	cable	than	it	does	in	copper	wire;	both	go	at	the
speed	of	light.	The	enormous	advantage	fiber-optic	cable	has	over	wire	is	the
bandwidth	it	can	carry.	Bandwidth	is	a	measure	of	the	number	of	bits	that	can
be	moved	through	a	circuit	in	a	second.	This	really	is	like	a	highway.	An
eight-lane	interstate	has	more	room	for	vehicles	than	a	narrow	dirt	road.	The
greater	the	bandwidth,	the	more	lanes	available—thus,	that	many	more	cars,
or	bits	of	information,	can	pass	in	a	second.	Cables	with	limited	bandwidth,
used	for	text	or	voice	transmissions,	are	called	narrow-band	circuit.	Cables
with	more	capacity,	which	carry	images	and	limited	animation,	are	"midband
capable."	Those	with	a	high	bandwidth,	which	can	carry	multiple	video	and
audio	signals,	are	said	to	have	broadband	capacity.
The	information	highway	will	use	compression,	but	there	will	still	have	to	be
a	great	deal	of	bandwidth.	One	of	the	main	reasons	we	don't	already	have	a
working	highway	is	that	there	isn't	sufficient	bandwidth	in	today's
communications	networks	for	all	the	new	applications.	And	there	won't	be
until	fiber-optic	cable	is	brought	into	enough	neighborhoods.

Fiber-optic	cable	is	an	example	of	technology	that	goes	beyond	what	Babbage
or	even	Eckert	and	Mauchly	could	have	predicted.	So	is	the	speed	at	which
the	performance	and	capacity	of	chips	have	improved.
In	1965,	Gordon	Moore,	who	later	cofounded	Intel	with	Bob	Noyce,
predicted	that	the	capacity	of	a	computer	chip	would	double	every	year.	He
said	this	on	the	basis	of	having	examined	the	price/performance	ratio	of
computer	chips	over	the	previous	three	years	and	projecting	it	forward.	In
truth,	Moore	didn't	believe	that	this	rate	of	improvement	would	last	long.	But
ten	years	later,	his	forecast	proved	true,	and	he	then	predicted	the	capacity
would	double	every	two	years.	To	this	day	his	predictions	have	held	up,	and
the	average—a	doubling	every	eighteen	months—is	referred	to	among
engineers	as	Moore's	Law.
No	experience	in	our	everyday	life	prepares	us	for	the	implications	of	a
number	that	doubles	a	great	number	of	times—exponential	improvements.
One	way	to	understand	it	is	with	a	fable.
King	Shirham	of	India	was	so	pleased	when	one	of	his	ministers	invented	the
game	of	chess	that	he	asked	the	man	to	name	any	reward.
"Your	Majesty,"	said	the	minister,	"I	ask	that	you	give	me	one	grain	of	wheat
for	the	first	square	of	the	chessboard,	two	grains	for	the	second	square,	four
grains	for	the	third,	and	so	on,	doubling	the	number	of	grains	each	time	until
all	sixty-four	squares	are	accounted	for."	The	king	was	moved	by	the	modesty
of	the	request	and	called	for	a	bag	of	wheat.
The	king	asked	that	the	promised	grains	be	counted	out	onto	the	chessboard.
On	the	first	square	of	the	first	row	was	placed	one	small	grain.	On	the	second
square	were	two	specks	of	wheat.	On	the	third	square	there	were	4,	then	8,	16,
32,	64,	128.	By	square	eight	at	the	end	of	the	first	row,	King	Shirham's	supply
master	had	counted	out	a	total	of	255	grains.

Intel	microprocessors	have	doubled	in	transister	count	approximately	every
eighteen	months,	in	accordance	with	Moore's	Law.
The	king	probably	registered	no	concern.	Maybe	a	little	more	wheat	was	on
the	board	than	he	had	expected,	but	nothing	surprising	had	happened.
Assuming	it	would	take	one	second	to	count	each	grain,	the	counting	so	far
had	taken	only	about	four	minutes.	If	one	row	was	done	in	four	minutes,	try	to
guess	how	long	it	would	take	to	count	out	the	wheat	for	all	sixty-four	squares
of	the	board.	Four	hours?	Four	days?	Four	years?
By	the	time	the	second	row	was	complete,	the	supply	master	had	worked	for
about	eighteen	hours	just	counting	out	65,535	grains.	By	the	end	of	the	third
of	the	eight	rows,	it	took	194	days	to	count	the	16.8	million	grains	for	the
twenty-fourth	square.	And	there	were	still	forty	empty	squares	to	go.
It	is	safe	to	say	that	the	king	broke	his	promise	to	the	minister.	The	final
square	would	have	gotten	18,446,744,073,709,551,615	grains	of	wheat	on	the
board,	and	required	584	billion	years	of	counting.	Current	estimates	of	the	age
of	the	earth	are	around	4.5	billion	years.	According	to	most	versions	of	the
legend,	King	Shirham	realized	at	some	point	in	the	counting	that	he	had	been
tricked	and	had	his	clever	minister	beheaded.
Exponential	growth,	even	when	explained,	seems	like	a	trick.
Moore's	Law	is	likely	to	hold	for	another	twenty	years.	If	it	does,	a
computation	that	now	takes	a	day	will	be	more	than	10,000	times	faster,	and
thus	take	fewer	than	ten	seconds.

Laboratories	are	already	operating	"ballistic"	transistors	that	have	switching
times	on	the	order	of	a	femtosecond.	That	is	1/1,000,000,000,000,000	of	a
second,	which	is	about	10	million	times	faster	than	the	transistors	in	today's
microprocessors.	The	trick	is	to	reduce	the	size	of	the	chip	circuitry	and	the
current	flow	so	that	moving	electrons	don't	bump	into	anything,	including
each	other.	The	next	stage	is	the	"single-electron	transistor,"	in	which	a	single
bit	of	information	is	represented	by	a	lone	electron.	This	will	be	the	ultimate
in	low-power	computing,	at	least	according	to	our	current	understanding	of
physics.	In	order	to	make	use	of	the	incredible	speed	advantages	at	the
molecular	level,	computers	will	have	to	be	very	small,	even	microscopic.	We
already	understand	the	science	that	would	allow	us	to	build	these	superfast
computers.	What	we	need	is	an	engineering	breakthrough,	and	these	are	often
quick	in	coming.
By	the	time	we	have	the	speed,	storing	all	those	bits	won't	be	a	problem.	In
the	spring	of	1983,	IBM	released	its	PC/XT,	the	company's	first	personal
computer	with	an	interior	hard	disk.	The	disk	served	as	a	built-in	storage
device	and	held	10	megabytes,	or	"megs,"	of	information,	about	10	million
characters	or	80	million	bits.	Existing	customers	who	wanted	to	add	these	10
megs	to	their	original	computers	could,	for	a	price.	IBM	offered	a	$3,000	kit,
complete	with	separate	power	supply,	to	expand	the	computer's	storage.	That's
$300	per	megabyte.	Today,	thanks	to	the	exponential	growth	described	by
Moore's	Law,	personal-computer	hard	drives	that	can	hold	1.2	gigabytes—1.2
billion	characters	of	information—are	priced	at	$250.	That's	21	cents	per
megabyte!	And	we	look	toward	an	exotic	improvement	called	a	holographic
memory,	which	can	hold	terabytes	of	characters	in	less	than	a	cubic	inch	of
volume.	With	such	capability,	a	holographic	memory	the	size	of	your	fist
could	hold	the	contents	of	the	Library	of	Congress.
As	communications	technology	goes	digital,	it	becomes	subject	to	the	same
exponential	improvements	that	have	made	today's	$2,000	laptop	computer
more	powerful	than	a	$10	million	IBM	mainframe	computer	of	twenty	years
ago.
At	some	point	not	far	in	the	future,	a	single	wire	running	into	each	home	will
be	able	to	deliver	all	of	a	household's	digital	data.	The	wire	will	either	be
fiber,	which	is	what	long-distance	telephone	calls	are	carried	on	now,	or
coaxial	cable,	which	currently	brings	us	cable	television	signals.	If	the	bits	are
interpreted	as	voice	calls,	the	phone	will	ring.	If	there	are	video	images,	they
will	show	up	on	the	television	set.	If	they	are	on-line	news	services,	they	will
arrive	as	written	text	and	pictures	on	a	computer	screen.

That	single	wire	bringing	the	network	will	certainly	carry	much	more	than
phone	calls,	movies,	news.	But	we	can	no	more	imagine	what	the	information
highway	will	carry	in	twenty-five	years	than	a	Stone	Age	man	using	a	crude
knife	could	have	envisioned	Ghiberti's	Baptistery	doors	in	Florence.	Only
when	the	highway	arrives	will	all	its	possibilities	be	understood.	However,	the
last	twenty	years	of	experience	with	digital	breakthroughs	allow	us	to
understand	some	of	the	key	principles	and	possibilities	for	the	future.

3
LESSONS	FROM	THE
COMPUTER	INDUSTRY
Success	is	a	lousy	teacher.	It	seduces	smart	people	into	thinking	they	can't
lose.	And	it's	an	unreliable	guide	to	the	future.	What	seems	the	perfect
business	plan	or	latest	technology	today	may	soon	be	as	out-of-date	as	the
eight-track	tape	player,	the	vacuum-tube	television,	or	the	mainframe
computer.	I've	watched	it	happen.	Careful	observation	of	many	companies
over	a	long	period	of	time	can	teach	you	principles	that	will	help	with
strategies	for	the	years	ahead.
Companies	investing	in	the	highway	will	try	to	avoid	repeating	the	mistakes
made	in	the	computer	industry	over	the	past	twenty	years.	I	think	most	of
these	mistakes	can	be	understood	by	looking	at	a	few	critical	factors.	Among
them	are	negative	and	positive	spirals,	the	necessity	of	initiating	rather	than
following	trends,	the	importance	of	software	as	opposed	to	hardware,	and	the
role	of	compatibility	and	the	positive	feedback	it	can	generate.
You	can't	count	on	conventional	wisdom.	That	only	makes	sense	in
conventional	markets.	For	the	last	three	decades	the	market	for	computer
hardware	and	software	has	definitely	been	unconventional.	Large	established
companies	that	one	day	had	hundreds	of	millions	of	dollars	in	sales	and	lots
of	satisfied	customers	had	disappeared	in	a	short	time.	New	companies,	such
as	Apple,	Compaq,	Lotus,	Oracle,	Sun,	and	Microsoft,	appeared	to	go	from
nothing	to	a	billion	dollars	of	revenue	in	a	flash.	These	successes	were	driven,
in	part,	by	what	I	call	the	"positive	spiral"
When	you	have	a	hot	product,	investors	pay	attention	to	you	and	are	willing
to	put	their	money	into	your	company.	Smart	kids	think,	Hey,	everybody's
talking	about	this	company.	I'd	like	to	work	there.	When	one	smart	person
comes	to	a	company,	soon	another	does,	because	talented	people	like	to	work
with	each	other.	This	creates	a	sense	of	excitement.	Potential	partners	and
customers	pay	more	attention,	and	the	spiral	continues,	making	the	next
success	easi======================================================== logy.	As	she	scrolls	through	the	document,	the
two	of	you	would	discuss	your	needs.	Then,	if	she	was	particularly	adept,	you
might	even	watch	her	do	the	editing.	However,	if	you	wanted	a	hand	in
editing	the	document	instead	of	just	watching	it	run	on	your	lawyer's
computer,	you	could	join	in	and	work	together.	You	would	be	able	not	only	to
talk	to	each	other	but	also	to	see	the	same	image	on	your	computer	screens.

You	won't	need	to	have	the	same	software.	The	application	just	has	to	run	on
one	end	of	the	connection,	the	lawyer's	end	in	this	case.	On	your	end,	you
would	need	only	an	appropriate	modem	and	DSVD	software.
Another	important	use	of	voice/data	connections	will	be	to	improve	product
support.	Microsoft	has	thousands	of	employees	whose	job	is	to	answer
product-support	questions	about	Microsoft	software.	In	fact,	we	have	as	many
product-support	people	answering	questions	about	our	software	as	we	have
engineers	building	it.	This	is	wonderful,	because	we	log	all	that	feedback	and
use	it	to	improve	our	products.	We	get	lots	of	these	questions	by	e-mail,	but
most	of	our	customers	still	telephone	us.	These	phone	conversations	are
inefficient.	A	customer	calls	in	to	say	his	particular	computer	is	configured	in
a	specific	way	and	is	giving	a	certain	error	message.	The	product-support
specialist	listens	to	this	description,	and	then	suggests	something,	which	it
takes	the	caller	a	few	minutes	to	do.	Then	the	conversation	resumes.	The
average	call	takes	fifteen	minutes,	and	some	take	an	hour.	But	once	everyone
is	using	DSVD,	the	product-support	specialist	will	be	able	to	see	what's	on	the
caller's	computer	screen	(with	the	caller's	explicit	permission,	of	course)	and
examine	the	caller's	computer	directly	rather	than	having	to	rely	on	the	caller
to	explain	what	he	is	seeing.	This	will	have	to	be	done	carefully,	to	ensure	that
no	one's	privacy	is	invaded.	The	process	will	reduce	the	length	of	the	average
call	by	30	or	40	percent,	which	will	make	customers	a	lot	happier	and	will	cut
costs	and	product	prices.
The	picture	transmitted	during	a	DSVD	(or	ISDN)	telephone	connection
won't	necessarily	have	to	be	of	a	document.	One	or	both	people	participating
will	also	be	able	to	transmit	still	images	of	themselves.	If	you	are	calling	in	to
buy	a	product,	you	might	expect	the	company's	service	representative	to	be
there,	smiling.	But	you,	as	the	customer,	might	choose	to	transmit	only	your
voice.	You	can	select	images	of	yourself	dressed	appropriately	for	the
occasion,	so	it	won't	matter	what	you	are	actually	wearing.	Or	you	might
decide	to	have	available	several	pictures	of	yourself,	one	smiling,	one
laughing,	one	contemplative,	and	maybe	one	that	is	angry.	During	the	course
of	the	conversation,	you	could	change	the	image	to	suit	your	mood	or	the
point	you	were	making.
Electronic	mail	and	shared	screens	will	eliminate	the	need	for	many	meetings.
Presentation	meetings,	called	primarily	so	participants	can	listen	and	learn,
can	be	replaced	with	e-mail	messages	with	spreadsheets	and	other	exhibits
enclosed	as	attachments.	When	face-to-face	meetings	do	take	place,	they	will
be	more	efficient	because	participants	will	already	have	exchanged
background	information	by	e-mail.

It	will	also	be	easier	to	schedule	meetings	because	software	will	handle	it.	For
example,	if	you	want	to	sit	down	face-to-face	with	your	lawyer,	your
scheduling	program	and	hers	will	be	able	to	communicate	across	the	network
—even	the	phone	network—and	pick	a	date	and	time	that	you	both	have	free.
Then	the	appointment	would	just	show	up	on	your	respective	electronic
calendars.
This	will	also	be	an	efficient	way	to	schedule	restaurant	or	theater
reservations,	but	it	raises	an	interesting	issue.	Let's	say	a	restaurant	isn't
getting	much	business,	or	tickets	to	a	show	aren't	selling	well,	or	your	lawyer
doesn't	want	you	to	know	that	you're	her	only	client.	Such	companies	and
individuals	might	instruct	their	scheduling	programs	just	to	respond	to
meeting	requests.	Your	scheduling	program	wouldn't	be	able	to	ask	your
lawyer's	program	to	list	all	the	times	she	is	free.	However,	if	it	asked	for	a
specific	two-hour	block,	the	response	would	be:	"Yes,	we	can	schedule	you
for	Tuesday	at	eleven	o'clock."
Clients	will	expect	their	lawyers,	dentists,	accountants,	and	other
professionals	to	be	able	to	schedule	appointments	and	exchange	documents
electronically.	You	might	have	a	quick	follow-up	question	for	your	doctor—
for	instance,	whether	a	generic	version	of	a	drug	is	acceptable.	It	is	hard	to
interrupt	a	doctor,	but	you'll	expect	to	be	able	to	trade	e-mail	with	all	of	the
professionals	you	work	with.	We're	going	to	see	competition	based	on	how
effectively	one	professional	group	has	adopted	these	communications	tools
and	how	much	more	accessible	and	efficient	this	makes	them.	I'm	sure	we'll
then	begin	seeing	ads	in	which	a	firm	will	tout	how	much	more	advanced	it
has	become	in	the	use	of	PC	communications.
When	the	information	highway	is	available,	people	won't	be	limited	to	audio
and	still	images,	because	the	highway	will	also	transmit	high-quality	video.
The	meetings	they	schedule	will	more	and	more	often	be	conducted
electronically,	using	shared-screen	videoconferencing.	Each	electronic
participant,	wherever	he	or	she	is,	will	look	at	a	different	physical	screen:	a
video	white	board,	a	television	set,	or	a	PC,	but	each	screen	will	show	much
the	same	image.	Part	of	the	screen	might	show	someone's	face,	while	another
part	might	display	a	document.	If	anyone	modifies	the	document,	the	change
will	appear	almost	immediately	on	all	the	screens.	Geographically	distant
collaborators	will	be	able	to	work	together	in	rich	ways.	This	is	synchronous
or	real-time	sharing,	which	means	that	the	computer	screens	will	keep	up	with
the	people	using	them.
If	a	group	were	to	meet	electronically	to	collaborate	on	a	press	release,	each

member	would	be	able	to	use	his	or	her	PC	or	notebook	computer	to	move
paragraphs	around	and	drop	in	a	photograph	or	a	video.	The	rest	of	the	group
would	be	able	to	look	at	the	result	on	their	individual	screens	and	see	each
contributor's	work	as	it	is	actually	happening.
We're	already	accustomed	to	watching	video	meetings.	Anyone	who	tunes	in
to	television	news	shows,	such	as	Nightline,	which	feature	long-distance
debates,	is	seeing	a	videoconference.	The	host	and	guests	may	be	separated
by	continents,	yet	they	engage	in	give-and-take	as	if	they	were	in	the	same
room,	and	to	viewers	it	almost	appears	that	they	are.
Today,	in	order	to	videoconference,	it	is	necessary	to	go	to	a	specially
equipped	facility	with	special	phone	lines.	Microsoft	has	at	least	one
dedicated	videoconference	room	in	each	of	its	sales	offices	around	the	world.
They're	used	quite	a	bit,	but	the	setting	is	fairly	formal.	These	facilities	have
saved	us	lots	of	traveling.	Employees	in	other	offices	"sit	in"	on	staff
meetings,	and	customers	and	vendors	have	"visited"	us	without	traveling	to
our	headquarters	outside	Seattle.	Such	meetings	will	become	very	popular
because	they	save	time	and	money	and	are	often	more	productive	than	audio-
only	phone	conferences	or	even	face-to-face	meetings,	because	people	seem
to	be	more	attentive	if	they	know	they	are	on-camera.
I've	noticed	that	it	does	take	some	getting	used	to,	though.	If	one	person	is	on
a	videoconference	screen,	he	or	she	tends	to	get	much	more	attention	than
others	in	the	meeting.	I	first	noticed	this	when	a	bunch	of	us	in	Seattle	were
videoconferencing	with	Steve	Ballmer,	who	was	in	Europe.	It	was	as	if	we
were	all	glued	to	The	Steve	Ballmer	Show.	If	Steve	took	off	his	shoes,	we'd
all	look	at	each	other's	reactions.	When	the	meeting	was	over	I	could	have
told	you	all	about	Steve's	new	haircut	but	I	might	not	have	been	able	to	name
the	other	people	who'd	been	in	the
room	with	me.	I	think	this	distortion	will	go	away	as	videoconferences
become	commonplace.
It's	currently	fairly	expensive	to	set	up	a	videoconference	room—it	costs	at
least	$40,000.	However,	desktop	systems	that	attach	to	PCs	are	coming,	and
they	will	reduce	the	cost—and	the	formality—dramatically.	Our	facilities	are
generally	connected	with	ISDN	lines	operating	at	384,000	bits	per	second,
which	provide	reasonable	picture	and	sound	quality	for	about	$20	to	$35	an
hour	for	connections	within	the	United	States	and	about	$250	to	$300	an	hour
for	an	international	connection.
The	cost	of	videoconferencing,	like	that	of	almost	every	other	computer-

driven	service,	is	going	to	drop	as	technology	and	communications	costs	do.
Small	video	devices	using	cameras	attached	to	personal	computers	or
television	sets	will	allow	us	to	meet	readily	across	the	information	highway
with	much	higher	quality	pictures	and	sound	for	lower	prices.	As	ISDN
connected	to	PCs	becomes	popular,	videoconferences	will	be	as	standard	a
business	procedure	as	using	a	copier	to	duplicate	a	document	for	distribution
is	now.
Some	people	worry	that,	by	eliminating	the	subtlety	of	human	dynamics	in	a
meeting,	videoconferences	and	shared	screens	will	give	corporate	gatherings
all	the	spontaneity	of	a	congressional	photo	opportunity.	How	will	people
whisper,	roll	their	eyes	at	a	tedious	speaker,	or	pass	notes?	Actually,
clandestine	communication	will	be	simpler	at	a	video	meeting	because	the
network	will	facilitate	individual	communications	on	the	side.	Meetings	have
always	had	unwritten	rules,	but	when	the	network	is	mediating
videoconferences,	some	rules	will	have	to	become	explicit.	Will	people	be
able	to	signal,	publicly	or	privately,	individually	or	collectively,	that	they	are
bored?	To	what	degree	should	a	participant	be	allowed	to	block	his	or	her
video	or	audio	from	others?	Should	private	side	conversations,	one	PC	to
another,	be	permitted?	Over	time,	as	we	use	these	facilities,	new	rules	of
meeting	etiquette	will	emerge.
Home	videoconferences	will	naturally	be	somewhat	different.	If	the
conference	has	only	two	participants,	it	will	amount	to	a	video	phone	call.
That	will	be	great	for	saying	hello	to	y======================================================== he	telegraph	and,	later,	ticker	services	was	to	deliver	racetrack
results.	Satellite	television	broadcasts	contributed	to	off-track	betting.	Slot
machine	designs	have	always	tracked	the	progress	in	mechanical	calculators
and,	more	recently,	computers.	The	information	highway	will	have	an	even
more	significant	effect	on	both	legal	and	illegal	gambling.	We	are	sure	to	see
current	odds	posted	on	servers,	and	e-mail	as	a	way	to	make	bets.	Electronic
currency	will	be	used	to	place	bets	and	make	payoffs.
Gambling	is	a	highly	regulated	business,	so	it's	difficult	to	predict	what	forms
will	be	allowed	on	the	highway.	Maybe	air	travelers	who	are	stuck	on	a	plane
with	nothing	else	to	do	will	be	able	to	gamble	with	each	other.	Perhaps
gambling	games	will	have	to	provide	full	disclosure	of	the	odds	against	you.
The	technology	will	allow	people	to	bet	on	anything	they	choose	to,	and	if	it's
legal	someone	is	sure	to	set	up	a	service.	It	will	be	possible	to	bring	horse
races,	dog	races,	or	any	other	kind	of	live	sports	event	into	your	home	in	real-
time,	so	some	of	the	excitement	of	the	track	or	stadium	will	be	made
available.	Many	governments	raise	revenue	with	lotteries	and	in	the	future
could	provide	plug-into	electronic	lotteries.	The	highway	will	make	gambling
far	more	difficult	to	control	than	it	is	today.
We	can	be	sure	we'll	use	the	highway's	unique	capabilities	to	help	us	find
communities	of	others	with	common	interests.	Today	you	may	belong	to	the
local	ski	club	so	you	can	meet	other	people	who	like	to	ski.	You	may	also

subscribe	to	Recreational	Skier	so	you	can	get	information	about	new	ski
products.	Tomorrow	you	will	be	able	to	join	such	a	community	on	the
information	highway.	It	will	not	only	provide	you	with	up-to-date	information
about	weather	conditions	instantly,	but	will	also	be	a	way	for	you	to	stay	in
touch	with	other	enthusiasts.
The	greater	the	number	of	people	who	join	an	electronic	community,	the	more
valuable	it	will	be	to	everyone	who	uses	it.	Most	of	the	world's	skiing
enthusiasts	will	participate,	at	least	occasionally.	In	time,	the	world's	best
information	about	skis	and	skiing	will	be	available	electronically.	If	you	join,
you	will	find	the	best	slopes	near	Munich,	the	lowest	price	anywhere	for	a
particular	set	of	poles,	and	the	latest	news	and	advertising	about	all	ski-related
products.	If	people	have	taken	photos	or	made	videos	of	a	race	or	a	trip,	they
can	share	them.	Books	about	skiing	will	be	reviewed	by	anyone	who	has	an
opinion.	Laws	and	safety	practices	will	be	debated.	Instructional	videos	will
be	available	on	a	moment's	notice.	These	multi-media	documents	will	be
available	free	or	for	a	charge,	to	one	person	or	to	hundreds	of	thousands.	This
community	on	the	information	highway	will	become	the	place	to	go	if	you	are
interested	in	skiing.
If	you	want	to	get	yourself	in	better	physical	condition	before	trying	a	hard
slope,	you	might	find	training	more	fun	if	you	are	in	close	electronic	touch
with	a	dozen	other	people	who	are	your	size,	weight,	and	age,	and	who	share
your	specific	goals	for	exercise	and	weight	reduction.	You	would	have	less	to
be	self-conscious	about	in	an	exercise	program	in	which	everyone	else	is	like
you.	And	if	you	still	were	uncomfortable,	you	could	turn	your	video	camera
off.	Members	of	this	community	could	get	together	to	encourage	each	other
and	even	work	out	at	the	same	time.
The	community	of	skiers	is	quite	large	and	easy	to	define.	On	the	information
highway	there	will	be	applications	to	help	you	find	people	and	information
that	intersect	with	your	interests,	no	matter	how	specific.	If	you're	thinking	of
visiting	Berlin,	the	highway	will	make	vast	amounts	of	historical,	touristic,
and	sociological	information	available.	But	there	will	also	be	applications	to
let	you	find	fellow	enthusiasts	there.	You'll	be	invited	to	register	your	interests
in	databases	that	can	be	analyzed	by	the	applications.	These	applications	will
even	suggest	people	you	might	like	to	meet.	If	you	have	a	collection	of
Venetian	glass	paperweights,	you'll	probably	choose	to	be	a	member	of	one	or
more	world	communities	of	people	who	share	this	interest.	Some	of	those
people	may	live	in	Berlin	and	have	collections	they'd	be	delighted	to	show
you.	If	you	have	a	ten-year-old	daughter	you'll	be	taking	with	you	to	Berlin,
you	might	query	whether	there	is	anyone	in	Berlin	who	has	a	ten-year-old,

shares	your	language,	and	is	willing	to	spend	time	with	you	during	your	visit.
If	you	find	two	or	three	suitable	people,	you	have	created	a	small—and
probably	temporary—community	of	interest.
I	recently	visited	Africa	and	took	a	lot	of	pictures	of	chimpanzees.	If	the
information	highway	were	available	now,	I	would	put	out	a	message	saying
that	if	anyone	else	from	the	safari	wanted	to	exchange	photographs,	he	or	she
should	put	them	on	the	same	bulletin	board	where	I	had	posted	my
chimpanzee	photos.	I	would	be	able	to	set	it	up	so	only	fellow	safari	members
could	have	access	to	that	bulletin	board.
Already,	thousands	of	newsgroups	on	the	Internet	and	countless	forums	on
commercial	on-line	services	have	been	set	up	as	locations	for	small
communities	to	share	information.	For	example,	on	the	Internet	there	are
lively	text-based	discussion	groups	with	such	names	as	alt.agriculture.fruit,
alt.animals.raccoons,	alt.asian-movies,	alt.coffee,	bionet.-
biology.cardiovascular,	soc.religion.islam,	and	talk.philosophy,	misc.	But
these	topics	aren't	nearly	so	specialized	as	some	of	the	subjects	I	expect
electronic	communities	will	address	in	the	future.	Some	communities	will	be
very	local,	and	some	will	be	global.	You	won't	be	overwhelmed	by	the
number	of	choices	of	communities	any	more	than	you	are	now	by	the
telephone	system.	You'll	look	for	a	group	that	interests	you	in	general,	and
then	you'll	search	through	it	for	the	small	segment	you	want	to	join.	I	can
imagine	the	administration	of	every	municipality,	for	example,	becoming	the
focus	of	an	electronic	community.
Sometimes	I	get	annoyed	by	a	traffic	light	near	my	office	that	always	stays
red	longer	than	I	think	it	should.	I	could	write	a	letter	to	the	city,	telling	the
folks	who	program	the	lights	that	the	timing	isn't	optimal,	but	that	would	just
be	one	cranky	letter.	On	the	other	hand,	if	I	could	find	the	"community"	of
people	who	drive	the	route	I	do,	we	could	send	a	strong	complaint	to	the	city.
I	could	find	these	others	by	sending	a	message	to	people	who	live	near	me	or
by	posting	a	message	on	a	community	affairs	bulletin	board	that	showed	a
map	of	the	intersection	accompanied	by	the	message:	"During	the	morning
rush	hours	hardly	anyone	goes	left	at	this	intersection.	Does	anyone	else	think
the	cycle	should	be	shortened?"	Anyone	who	agreed	with	me	could	add	to	my
message.	It	would	make	it	easier	to	fight	City	Hall.
As	on-line	communities	grow	in	importance,	they	will	increasingly	be	where
people	will	turn	to	find	out	what	the	public	is	really	thinking.	People	like	to
know	what's	popular,	which	movies	friends	are	watching,	and	what	news
others	think	is	interesting.	I	want	to	read	the	same	"newspaper	front	page"	as

those	I'm	going	to	meet	with	later	today,	so	we	can	have	something	in
common	to	talk	about.	You	will	be	able	to	see	what	places	on	the	network	are
being	looked	at	often.	There	will	be	all	sorts	of	"hot	lists"	of	the	coolest
places.
Electronic	communities,	with	all	the	information	they	reveal,	will	also	create
problems.	Some	institutions	will	have	to	make	big	changes	as	on-line
communities	gain	power.	Doctors	and	medical	researchers	are	already	having
to	contend	with	patients	who	explore	medical	literature	electronically	and
compare	notes	with	other	patients	who	have	the	same	serious	disease.	Word
of	unorthodox	or	unapproved	treatments	spreads	fast	in	these	communities.
Some	patients	in	drug	trials	have	been	able	to	figure	out,	by	communicating
with	other	patients	in	the	trial,	that	they	are	receiving	a	placebo	rather	than	the
real	medication.	The	discovery	has	prompted	some	of	them	to	drop	out	of	the
trials	or	to	seek	alternate,	simultaneous	remedies.	This	undermines	the
research,	but	it	is	hard	to	fault	patients	who	are	trying	to	save	their	lives.
It's	not	just	medical	researchers	who	will	be	affected	by	so	much	access	to
information.	One	of	the	biggest	concerns	is	parents	having	to	contend	with
children	who	can	find	out	about	almost	anything	they	want	to,	right	from	a
home	information	appliance.	Already,	rating	systems	are	being	designed	to
allow	parental	control	over	what	kids	have	access	to.	This	could	become	a
major	political	issue	if	the	information	publishers	don't	handle	it	properly.
On	balance,	the	advantages	will	greatly	outweigh	the	problems.	The	more
information	there	is	available,	the	more	choices	we	will	have.	Today,	devoted
fans	plan	their	evenings	around	the	broadcast	times	of	their	favorite	television
shows,	but	once	video-on-demand	gives	us	the	opportunity	to	watch	whatever
we	like	whenever	we	like,	family	or	social	activities,	rather	than	a
broadcaster's	time	slots,	will	control	our	entertainment	schedules.	Before	the
telephone,	people	thought	of	their	neighbors	as	their	only	community.	Almost
everything	was	done	with	others	who	lived	nearby.	The	telephone	and	the
automobile	allowed	us	to	stretch	out.	We	may	visit	face-to-face	less	often	than
we	did	a	century	ago	because	we	can	pick	up	the	telephone,	but	this	doesn't
mean	we	have	become	isolated.	It	has	made	it	easier	for	us	to	talk	to	each
other	and	stay	in	touch.	Sometimes	it	may	seem	too	easy	for	people	to	reach
you.
A	decade	from	now,	you	may	shake	your	head	that	there	was	ever	a	time
when	any	stranger	or	a	wrong	number	could	interrupt	you	at	home	with	a
phone	call.	Cellular	phones,	pagers,	and	fax	machines	have	already	made	it
necessary	for	businesspeople	to	make	explicit	decisions	that	used	to	be

implicit.	A	decade	ago	we	didn't	have	to	decide	whether	we	wanted	to	receive
documents	at	home	or	take	calls	on	the	road.	It	was	easy	to	withdraw	to	your
house,	or	certainly	to	you======================================================== logy.	As	she	scrolls	through	the	document,	the
two	of	you	would	discuss	your	needs.	Then,	if	she	was	particularly	adept,	you
might	even	watch	her	do	the	editing.	However,	if	you	wanted	a	hand	in
editing	the	document	instead	of	just	watching	it	run	on	your	lawyer's
computer,	you	could	join	in	and	work	together.	You	would	be	able	not	only	to
talk	to	each	other	but	also	to	see	the	same	image	on	your	computer	screens.

You	won't	need	to	have	the	same	software.	The	application	just	has	to	run	on
one	end	of	the	connection,	the	lawyer's	end	in	this	case.	On	your	end,	you
would	need	only	an	appropriate	modem	and	DSVD	software.
Another	important	use	of	voice/data	connections	will	be	to	improve	product
support.	Microsoft	has	thousands	of	employees	whose	job	is	to	answer
product-support	questions	about	Microsoft	software.	In	fact,	we	have	as	many
product-support	people	answering	questions	about	our	software	as	we	have
engineers	building	it.	This	is	wonderful,	because	we	log	all	that	feedback	and
use	it	to	improve	our	products.	We	get	lots	of	these	questions	by	e-mail,	but
most	of	our	customers	still	telephone	us.	These	phone	conversations	are
inefficient.	A	customer	calls	in	to	say	his	particular	computer	is	configured	in
a	specific	way	and	is	giving	a	certain	error	message.	The	product-support
specialist	listens	to	this	description,	and	then	suggests	something,	which	it
takes	the	caller	a	few	minutes	to	do.	Then	the	conversation	resumes.	The
average	call	takes	fifteen	minutes,	and	some	take	an	hour.	But	once	everyone
is	using	DSVD,	the	product-support	specialist	will	be	able	to	see	what's	on	the
caller's	computer	screen	(with	the	caller's	explicit	permission,	of	course)	and
examine	the	caller's	computer	directly	rather	than	having	to	rely	on	the	caller
to	explain	what	he	is	seeing.	This	will	have	to	be	done	carefully,	to	ensure	that
no	one's	privacy	is	invaded.	The	process	will	reduce	the	length	of	the	average
call	by	30	or	40	percent,	which	will	make	customers	a	lot	happier	and	will	cut
costs	and	product	prices.
The	picture	transmitted	during	a	DSVD	(or	ISDN)	telephone	connection
won't	necessarily	have	to	be	of	a	document.	One	or	both	people	participating
will	also	be	able	to	transmit	still	images	of	themselves.	If	you	are	calling	in	to
buy	a	product,	you	might	expect	the	company's	service	representative	to	be
there,	smiling.	But	you,	as	the	customer,	might	choose	to	transmit	only	your
voice.	You	can	select	images	of	yourself	dressed	appropriately	for	the
occasion,	so	it	won't	matter	what	you	are	actually	wearing.	Or	you	might
decide	to	have	available	several	pictures	of	yourself,	one	smiling,	one
laughing,	one	contemplative,	and	maybe	one	that	is	angry.	During	the	course
of	the	conversation,	you	could	change	the	image	to	suit	your	mood	or	the
point	you	were	making.
Electronic	mail	and	shared	screens	will	eliminate	the	need	for	many	meetings.
Presentation	meetings,	called	primarily	so	participants	can	listen	and	learn,
can	be	replaced	with	e-mail	messages	with	spreadsheets	and	other	exhibits
enclosed	as	attachments.	When	face-to-face	meetings	do	take	place,	they	will
be	more	efficient	because	participants	will	already	have	exchanged
background	information	by	e-mail.

It	will	also	be	easier	to	schedule	meetings	because	software	will	handle	it.	For
example,	if	you	want	to	sit	down	face-to-face	with	your	lawyer,	your
scheduling	program	and	hers	will	be	able	to	communicate	across	the	network
—even	the	phone	network—and	pick	a	date	and	time	that	you	both	have	free.
Then	the	appointment	would	just	show	up	on	your	respective	electronic
calendars.
This	will	also	be	an	efficient	way	to	schedule	restaurant	or	theater
reservations,	but	it	raises	an	interesting	issue.	Let's	say	a	restaurant	isn't
getting	much	business,	or	tickets	to	a	show	aren't	selling	well,	or	your	lawyer
doesn't	want	you	to	know	that	you're	her	only	client.	Such	companies	and
individuals	might	instruct	their	scheduling	programs	just	to	respond	to
meeting	requests.	Your	scheduling	program	wouldn't	be	able	to	ask	your
lawyer's	program	to	list	all	the	times	she	is	free.	However,	if	it	asked	for	a
specific	two-hour	block,	the	response	would	be:	"Yes,	we	can	schedule	you
for	Tuesday	at	eleven	o'clock."
Clients	will	expect	their	lawyers,	dentists,	accountants,	and	other
professionals	to	be	able	to	schedule	appointments	and	exchange	documents
electronically.	You	might	have	a	quick	follow-up	question	for	your	doctor—
for	instance,	whether	a	generic	version	of	a	drug	is	acceptable.	It	is	hard	to
interrupt	a	doctor,	but	you'll	expect	to	be	able	to	trade	e-mail	with	all	of	the
professionals	you	work	with.	We're	going	to	see	competition	based	on	how
effectively	one	professional	group	has	adopted	these	communications	tools
and	how	much	more	accessible	and	efficient	this	makes	them.	I'm	sure	we'll
then	begin	seeing	ads	in	which	a	firm	will	tout	how	much	more	advanced	it
has	become	in	the	use	of	PC	communications.
When	the	information	highway	is	available,	people	won't	be	limited	to	audio
and	still	images,	because	the	highway	will	also	transmit	high-quality	video.
The	meetings	they	schedule	will	more	and	more	often	be	conducted
electronically,	using	shared-screen	videoconferencing.	Each	electronic
participant,	wherever	he	or	she	is,	will	look	at	a	different	physical	screen:	a
video	white	board,	a	television	set,	or	a	PC,	but	each	screen	will	show	much
the	same	image.	Part	of	the	screen	might	show	someone's	face,	while	another
part	might	display	a	document.	If	anyone	modifies	the	document,	the	change
will	appear	almost	immediately	on	all	the	screens.	Geographically	distant
collaborators	will	be	able	to	work	together	in	rich	ways.	This	is	synchronous
or	real-time	sharing,	which	means	that	the	computer	screens	will	keep	up	with
the	people	using	them.
If	a	group	were	to	meet	electronically	to	collaborate	on	a	press	release,	each

member	would	be	able	to	use	his	or	her	PC	or	notebook	computer	to	move
paragraphs	around	and	drop	in	a	photograph	or	a	video.	The	rest	of	the	group
would	be	able	to	look	at	the	result	on	their	individual	screens	and	see	each
contributor's	work	as	it	is	actually	happening.
We're	already	accustomed	to	watching	video	meetings.	Anyone	who	tunes	in
to	television	news	shows,	such	as	Nightline,	which	feature	long-distance
debates,	is	seeing	a	videoconference.	The	host	and	guests	may	be	separated
by	continents,	yet	they	engage	in	give-and-take	as	if	they	were	in	the	same
room,	and	to	viewers	it	almost	appears	that	they	are.
Today,	in	order	to	videoconference,	it	is	necessary	to	go	to	a	specially
equipped	facility	with	special	phone	lines.	Microsoft	has	at	least	one
dedicated	videoconference	room	in	each	of	its	sales	offices	around	the	world.
They're	used	quite	a	bit,	but	the	setting	is	fairly	formal.	These	facilities	have
saved	us	lots	of	traveling.	Employees	in	other	offices	"sit	in"	on	staff
meetings,	and	customers	and	vendors	have	"visited"	us	without	traveling	to
our	headquarters	outside	Seattle.	Such	meetings	will	become	very	popular
because	they	save	time	and	money	and	are	often	more	productive	than	audio-
only	phone	conferences	or	even	face-to-face	meetings,	because	people	seem
to	be	more	attentive	if	they	know	they	are	on-camera.
I've	noticed	that	it	does	take	some	getting	used	to,	though.	If	one	person	is	on
a	videoconference	screen,	he	or	she	tends	to	get	much	more	attention	than
others	in	the	meeting.	I	first	noticed	this	when	a	bunch	of	us	in	Seattle	were
videoconferencing	with	Steve	Ballmer,	who	was	in	Europe.	It	was	as	if	we
were	all	glued	to	The	Steve	Ballmer	Show.	If	Steve	took	off	his	shoes,	we'd
all	look	at	each	other's	reactions.	When	the	meeting	was	over	I	could	have
told	you	all	about	Steve's	new	haircut	but	I	might	not	have	been	able	to	name
the	other	people	who'd	been	in	the
room	with	me.	I	think	this	distortion	will	go	away	as	videoconferences
become	commonplace.
It's	currently	fairly	expensive	to	set	up	a	videoconference	room—it	costs	at
least	$40,000.	However,	desktop	systems	that	attach	to	PCs	are	coming,	and
they	will	reduce	the	cost—and	the	formality—dramatically.	Our	facilities	are
generally	connected	with	ISDN	lines	operating	at	384,000	bits	per	second,
which	provide	reasonable	picture	and	sound	quality	for	about	$20	to	$35	an
hour	for	connections	within	the	United	States	and	about	$250	to	$300	an	hour
for	an	international	connection.
The	cost	of	videoconferencing,	like	that	of	almost	every	other	computer-

driven	service,	is	going	to	drop	as	technology	and	communications	costs	do.
Small	video	devices	using	cameras	attached	to	personal	computers	or
television	sets	will	allow	us	to	meet	readily	across	the	information	highway
with	much	higher	quality	pictures	and	sound	for	lower	prices.	As	ISDN
connected	to	PCs	becomes	popular,	videoconferences	will	be	as	standard	a
business	procedure	as	using	a	copier	to	duplicate	a	document	for	distribution
is	now.
Some	people	worry	that,	by	eliminating	the	subtlety	of	human	dynamics	in	a
meeting,	videoconferences	and	shared	screens	will	give	corporate	gatherings
all	the	spontaneity	of	a	congressional	photo	opportunity.	How	will	people
whisper,	roll	their	eyes	at	a	tedious	speaker,	or	pass	notes?	Actually,
clandestine	communication	will	be	simpler	at	a	video	meeting	because	the
network	will	facilitate	individual	communications	on	the	side.	Meetings	have
always	had	unwritten	rules,	but	when	the	network	is	mediating
videoconferences,	some	rules	will	have	to	become	explicit.	Will	people	be
able	to	signal,	publicly	or	privately,	individually	or	collectively,	that	they	are
bored?	To	what	degree	should	a	participant	be	allowed	to	block	his	or	her
video	or	audio	from	others?	Should	private	side	conversations,	one	PC	to
another,	be	permitted?	Over	time,	as	we	use	these	facilities,	new	rules	of
meeting	etiquette	will	emerge.
Home	videoconferences	will	naturally	be	somewhat	different.	If	the
conference	has	only	two	participants,	it	will	amount	to	a	video	phone	call.
That	will	be	great	for	saying	hello	to	y======================================================== kets	already	served	by	others.	Interestingly,	in	the	cable	TV	business,	the
few	places	a	second	system	was	constructed,	the	"overbuilder"	never	made
money.	Having	two	or	more	general-purpose	connections	running	into	every
home	would	aid	competition,	but	the	extra	cost	is	immense.
Servers	for	the	information	highway	will	have	to	be	large	computers	with
gigantic	storage	capacity	that	run	twenty-four	hours	a	day,	seven	days	a	week.
Competition	to	supply	them	will	be	intense.	Various	companies	have	different
ideas	about	the	right	design	for	the	servers,	and	strategies	for	developing
them.	Not	surprisingly,	the	positions	held	by	the	various	potential	competitors
are	influenced	by	their	areas	of	expertise.	If	your	only	tool	is	a	hammer,	pretty
soon	every	new	problem	starts	to	look	like	a	nail	that	needs	pounding.	Mini-
computer	companies	such	as	Hewlett	Packard	envision	using	clusters	of	mini-
computers	as	servers.	A	variety	of	companies	that	primarily	make	personal
computers	believe	that	inexpensive	PCs,	connected	together	in	large	numbers,
will	prove	to	be	the	most	cost-effective	and	reliable	approach.	Mainframe
specialists	such	as	IBM	are	adapting	their	big	machines	to	be	servers.	They
cherish	a	fond	hope	that	the	information	highway	will	be	the	last	bastion	of
Big	Iron.
Software	companies	naturally	see	their	product	as	the	answer.	Software	is	so
inexpensive	to	duplicate	that	substituting	it	for	costly	hardware	reduces
system	costs.	Another	competition	is	shaping	up	to	supply	the	software
platforms	that	will	run	these	servers.	Oracle,	a	database-management
company	that	makes	software	for	mainframes	and	mini-computers,	envisions
the	server	as	a	supercomputer	or	mini-computer	running	Oracle	software.
AT&T,	with	its	experience	in	the	network	business,	will	probably	try	to

embed	most	of	the	system's	intelligence	in	the	servers	and	switches	of	the
network	and	put	relatively	little	processing	power	in	information	appliances
such	as	PCs	and	set-top	boxes.
At	Microsoft,	our	only	"hammer"	is	software.	We	expect	that	the	highway's
intelligence	will	be	evenly	divided	between	servers	and	information
appliances.	This	arrangement	is	sometimes	called	"client/server"	computing,
which	means	that	the	information	appliances	(the	clients)	and	the	servers	will
run	cooperating	software	applications.	We	don't	believe	that	giant
supercomputers,	mainframes,	or	even	clusters	of	mini-computers	will	be
necessary.	Instead,	Microsoft,	like	many	of	the	PC	manufacturers,	sees	the
server	as	a	network	of	dozens	to	hundreds	of	what	are	essentially	personal
computers.	They	won't	have	the	familiar	cases,	monitors,	and	keyboards,	and
may	be	housed	together	in	large	racks	at	the	headquarters	of	a	cable	system	or
the	central	office	of	a	telephone	system.	It	will	take	special	software
technology	to	harness	the	computing	horsepower	of	thousands	of	such
machines.	Our	approach	is	to	make	the	coordination	of	the	highway	a
software	problem	and	then	use	the	highest-volume	(and	therefore	cheapest)
computers	to	do	the	work—the	same	ones	used	in	the	PC	industry.
Our	approach	focuses	on	taking	full	advantage	of	all	the	advances	going	on	in
the	PC	industry,	including	the	software.	The	PC	will	be	one	of	the	primary
devices	used	on	the	highway.	We	think	the	set-top	box	should	share	as	many
technical	features	as	possible	with	the	PC	to	make	it	easy	for	developers	to
create	applications	and	services	that	will	work	with	both.	This	will	allow	the
Internet	to	evolve	upward	into	the	highway	in	a	compatible	fashion.	We
believe	tools	and	applications	available	on	the	PC	today	can	be	used	to	build
new	applications.	For	instance,	we	think	set-top	boxes	should	be	able	to	run
most	of	the	CD-ROM	titles	for	PCs	that	will	appear	over	the	next	decade.	One
could	argue	that	we	are	thinking	too	narrowly	by	trying	to	imagine	the	new
world	in	terms	of	the	PC.	But	there	are	more	than	50	million	PCs	sold	every
year	worldwide.	The	population	of	installed	PCs	will	provide	a	substantial
starter	market	for	a	prospective	developer	of	any	application	or	service.
Even	if	there	were	suddenly	a	million	of	one	type	of	set-top	box	in	use,	it	still
would	represent	a	tiny	market	compared	to	the	opportunity	for	multi-media
titles	for	the	PC.	A	developer	could	afford	to	spend	only	a	small	fraction	of	its
R&D	on	customers	with	these	specialized	boxes.	Only	the	very	largest
companies	are	able	to	invest	in	new	applications	without	concerning
themselves	about	the	near-term	audience	size.	We	believe	that	most	of	the
innovation	that	will	occur	will	be	extending	existing	markets,	and	that	using
the	PC/Internet	market	is	the	likeliest	means	of	extending	to	interactive	TV

and	the	highway.	But	similar	arguments	could	be	made	in	favor	of	other
computer	platforms	or	even	home	game	machines.
Other	software	companies	are	equally	confident	about	their	own	strategies	for
set-top	box	software.	Apple	proposes	to	use	Macintosh	technology,	and
Silicon	Graphics	intends	to	adapt	its	workstation	operating	system,	which	is	a
form	of	UNIX.	One	small	company	even	wants	to	repurpose	an	operating
system	that	is	currently	used	primarily	in	the	antilock-brake	systems	of
commercial	trucks!
Hardware	manufacturers	are	making	similar	decisions	about	which	approach
to	set-top	boxes	they	want	to	take.	Meanwhile,	consumer-electronics
companies	are	determining	what	sorts	of	information	appliances—from	wallet
PCs	to	TVs	they	will	build	and	what	software	they	will	use.
The	battle	among	software	architectures	will	play	out	over	a	long	period	and
may	involve	potential	competitors	who	have	not	yet	declared	their	interest.
All	software	components	will	be	compatible	to	a	degree,	the	way	all	of
today's	computer	systems	share	certain	degrees	of	compatibility.	You	can
connect	nearly	any	computer	to	the	Internet,	and	the	same	will	be	true	for	the
highway.
There	are	open	questions	such	as	to	what	extent	these	platforms	will	share	a
personality	or	user	interface.	A	single	common	user	interface	is	great—unless
you	happen	not	to	like	it.	Will	Mom,	Dad,	Grandma,	the	preschooler,	and	the
Generation	X-er	all	have	the	same	taste?	Must	one	size	fit	all	in	this,	the	most
flexible	medium?	Here,	too,	good	arguments	can	be	made	in	all	directions,	so
interface	is	another	area	in	which	the	industry	will	have	to	experiment,
innovate,	and	let	the	market	decide.
There	are	other,	similar	decisions	awaiting	the	judgment	of	the	marketplace.
For	instance,	will	advertising	play	a	large	role	in	underwriting	information
and	entertainment,	or	will	customers	pay	directly	for	most	services?	Will	you
control	all	of	what	you	see	when	you	first	turn	on	a	TV	or	other	information
appliance,	or	will	your	network	provider	get	some	part	of	your	first	screen	to
show	you	information	it	controls?
The	market	will	also	influence	technical	aspects	of	network	design.	Most
experts	believe	that	the	interactive	network	will	use	asynchronous	transfer
mode	(ATM),	but	today	ATM	costs	too	much	to	use.	If	ATM	equipment	prices
behave	like	other	chip-related	technologies,	they	will	come	down	rapidly.
However,	if	for	some	reason	they	stay	high	or	don't	drop	quickly	enough,
signals	may	have	to	be	translated	into	some	other	form	before	they	enter	a

consumer's	home.
A	wide	range	of	skills,	from	a	wide	range	of	companies,	will	be	necessary	to
put	the	information	highway	together	sufficiently	for	a	mass	market	to	begin.
It	will	be	tempting	for	a	company	strong	in	one	or	more	of	the	necessary
disciplines	to	try	to	find	a	way	to	do	every	piece	and	ignite	the	market	all	by
itself,	but	I	think	this	would	be	a	mistake.
I	have	always	believed	businesses	that	concentrate	on	a	very	few	core
competencies	will	do	the	best.	One	of	the	lessons	of	the	computer	industry—
as	well	as	of	life—is	that	it	is	almost	impossible	to	do	everything	well.	IBM
and	DEC	and	other	companies	in	the	old	computer	industry	tried	offering
everything,	including	chips,	software,	systems,	and	consulting.	When	the	pace
of	technology	was	accelerated	by	the	microprocessor	and	PC	standards,	the
diversified	strategy	proved	vulnerable,	because,	over	time,	competitors	who
had	focused	on	specific	areas	did	better.	One	company	did	great	chips,
another	did	great	PC	design,	yet	another	did	great	distribution	and	integration.
Each	successful	new	company	picked	a	narrow	slice	and	focused	on	it.
Beware!	Mergers	that	are	attempts	to	bring	all	aspects	of	highway	expertise
into	one	organization	should	be	viewed	skeptically.	Much	of	the	press
coverage	about	the	highway	has	concerned	just	such	huge	business	deals.
Media	companies	are	merging	and	trying	different	configurations.	Some
phone	companies	are	buying	cable	companies.	McCaw	Cellular	wireless
communications	company	was	bought	by	wire-based	AT&T.	Disney	has
purchased	Capital	Cities-ABC	and	Time-Warner	proposed	buying	Turner
Broadcasting.	It	will	be	a	long	time	before	the	corporations	making	these
investments	can	assess	how	wise	they	were.
Right	or	wrong,	deals	like	these	fascinate	the	public.	For	example,	when	the
proposed	$30	billion	merger	between	Bell	Atlantic	and	TCI	fell	through,	the
press	speculated	about	whether	it	was	a	setback	for	the	information	highway.
The	answer	is	no.	Both	companies	still	have	very	aggressive	investment	plans
for	building	the	highway's	infrastructure.
The	highway's	arrival	will	depend	on	the	evolution	of	the	PC,	the	Internet,
and	new	applications.	Companies	merging,	or	failing	to	merge,	is	no
indication	of	progress	or	the	lack	of	it.	The	deals	are	like	background	noise;
they	keep	rumbling	along	whether	or	not	anyone	is	listening.	Microsoft	plans
to	reach	out	to	hundreds	of	companies,	including	movie	studios,	television
networks,	and	newspaper	and	magazine	publishers.	We	hope	to	work	with
them	so	that	together	we	can	assemble	their	respective	content	assets	and

build	applications	for	CD-ROMs,	the	Internet,	and	the	highway.
We	believe	in	alliances	and	are	eager	to	participate	in	them.	Our	core	mission,
however,	is	to	build	a	number	of	software	components	for	the	information
h======================================================== long	as	society	needs	help,	there	will	definitely	be	plenty	for	everyone	to	do.
The	broad	benefits	of	advancing	productivity	are	no	solace	for	someone
whose	job	is	on	the	line.	When	a	person	has	been	trained	for	a	job	that	is	no
longer	needed,	you	can't	just	suggest	he	go	out	and	learn	something	else.
Adjustments	aren't	that	simple	or	fast,	but	ultimately	they	are	necessary.	It
isn't	easy	to	prepare	for	the	next	century,	because	it's	almost	impossible	to
guess	the	secondary	effects	of	even	the	changes	we	can	foresee,	much	less
those	we	can't.	A	hundred	years	ago,	people	saw	the	automobile	coming.	It
was	sure	to	make	fortunes,	and	also	to	run	over	some	jobs	and	industries.	But
specifics	would	have	been	hard	to	predict.	You	might	have	warned	your
friends	at	the	Acme	Buggy	Whip	Company	to	polish	up	their	résumés,	and
perhaps	learn	about	engines,	but	would	you	have	known	to	invest	in	real
estate	for	strip	malls?
More	than	ever,	an	education	that	emphasizes	general	problem-solving	skills
will	be	important.	In	a	changing	world,	education	is	the	best	preparation	for
being	able	to	adapt.	As	the	economy	shifts,	people	and	societies	who	are
appropriately	educated	will	tend	to	do	best.	The	premium	that	society	pays	for
skills	is	going	to	climb,	so	my	advice	is	to	get	a	good	formal	education	and
then	keep	on	learning.	Acquire	new	interests	and	skills	throughout	your	life.
A	lot	of	people	will	be	pushed	out	of	their	comfort	zones,	but	that	doesn't

mean	that	what	they	already	know	won't	still	be	valuable.	It	does	mean	that
people	and	companies	will	have	to	be	open	to	reinventing	themselves—
possibly	more	than	once.	Companies	and	governments	can	help	train	and
retrain	workers,	but	the	individual	must	ultimately	bear	principal
responsibility	for	his	education.
A	first	step	will	be	to	come	to	terms	with	computers.	Computers	make	almost
everyone	nervous	before	they	understand	them.	Children	are	the	primary
exception.	First-time	users	worry	that	a	single	misstep	will	cause	them	to	ruin
the	computer	or	lose	everything	stored	in	it.	People	do	lose	data,	of	course,
but	very	rarely	is	the	damage	irreversible.	We	have	worked	to	make	it	harder
to	lose	data	and	easier	to	recover	from	mistakes.	Most	programs	have	"Undo"
commands	that	make	it	simple	to	try	something,	then	quickly	reverse	it.	Users
become	more	confident	as	they	see	that	making	mistakes	won't	be
catastrophic.	And	then	they	begin	to	experiment.	PCs	provide	all	kinds	of
opportunities	for	experimentation.	The	more	experience	people	have	with
PCs,	the	better	they	understand	what	they	can	and	can't	do.	Then	PCs	become
tools	instead	of	threats.	Like	a	tractor	or	a	sewing	machine,	a	computer	is	a
machine	we	can	use	to	help	us	get	certain	tasks	done	more	efficiently.
Another	fear	people	express	is	that	computers	will	be	so	"smart"	they	will
take	over	and	do	away	with	any	need	for	the	human	mind.	Although	I	believe
that	eventually	there	will	be	programs	that	will	recreate	some	elements	of
human	intelligence,	it	is	very	unlikely	to	happen	in	my	lifetime.	For	decades
computer	scientists	studying	artificial	intelligence	have	been	trying	to	develop
a	computer	with	human	understanding	and	common	sense.	Alan	Turing	in
1950	suggested	what	has	come	to	be	called	the	Turing	Test:	If	you	were	able
to	carry	on	a	conversation	with	a	computer	and	another	human,	both	hidden
from	your	view,	and	were	uncertain	about	which	was	which,	you	would	have
a	truly	intelligent	machine.
Every	prediction	about	major	advances	in	artificial	intelligence	has	proved	to
be	overly	optimistic.	Today	even	simple	learning	tasks	still	go	well	beyond
the	world's	most	capable	computer.	When	computers	appear	to	be	intelligent
it	is	because	they	have	been	specially	programmed	to	handle	some	task	in	a
straightforward	fashion—like	trying	out	billions	of	chess	moves	in	order	to
play	master-level	chess.
The	computer	has	the	potential	to	be	a	tool	to	leverage	human	intelligence	for
the	foreseeable	future.	However,	information	appliances	won't	become
mainstream	for	publishing	information	until	almost	everyone	is	a	user.	It
would	be	wonderful	if	everyone—rich	or	poor,	urban	or	rural,	old	or	young—

could	have	access	to	one.	However,	personal	computers	are	still	too	expensive
for	most	people.	Before	the	information	highway	can	become	fully	integrated
into	society,	it	must	be	available	to	virtually	every	citizen,	not	just	the	elite,
but	this	does	not	mean	that	every	citizen	has	to	have	an	information	appliance
in	his	house.	Once	the	majority	of	people	have	systems	installed	in	their
homes,	those	who	do	not	can	be	accommodated	with	a	shared	appliance	at	a
library,	school,	post	office,	or	public	kiosk.	It's	important	to	remember	that	the
question	of	universal	access	arises	only	if	the	highway	is	immensely
successful—more	successful	than	many	commentators	expect.	Amazingly,
some	of	the	same	critics	who	complain	the	highway	will	be	so	popular	it	will
cause	problems	also	complain	it	won't	be	popular	at	all.
The	fully	developed	information	highway	will	be	affordable—almost	by
definition.	An	expensive	system	that	connected	a	few	big	corporations	and
wealthy	people	simply	would	not	be	the	information	highway—it	would	be
the	information	private	road.	The	network	will	not	attract	enough	great
content	to	thrive	if	only	the	most	affluent	10	percent	of	society	choose	to	avail
themselves	of	it.	There	are	fixed	costs	to	authoring	material;	so	to	make	them
affordable,	a	large	audience	is	required.	Advertising	revenue	won't	support	the
highway	if	a	majority	of	eligible	people	don't	embrace	it.	If	that	is	the	case,
the	price	for	connecting	will	have	to	be	cut	or	deployment	delayed	while	the
system	is	redesigned	to	be	more	attractive.	The	information	highway	is	a	mass
phenomenon,	or	it	is	nothing.
Eventually	the	costs	of	computing	and	communications	will	be	so	low,	and
the	competitive	environment	so	open,	that	much	of	the	entertainment	and
information	offered	on	the	highway	will	cost	very	little.	Advertising	income
will	allow	a	lot	of	content	to	be	free.	However,	most	service	providers,
whether	they	are	rock	bands	or	consulting	engineers	or	book	publishers,	will
still	ask	that	users	make	a	payment.	So	the	information	highway	will	be
affordable,	if	used	judiciously,	but	it	won't	be	free.
A	large	portion	of	the	money	you	will	spend	on	highway	services	you	spend
today	for	the	same	services	in	other	forms.	In	the	past	you	may	have	shifted
money	you	spent	on	records	to	buying	compact	discs,	or	from	movie	tickets
to	videotape	rentals.	Soon	your	spending	for	videotape	rentals	will	go	to
video-on-demand	movies.	You	will	redirect	part	of	what	you	now	spend	on
printed-periodical	subscriptions	to	interactive	information	services	and
communities.	Most	of	the	money	that	now	goes	to	local	telephone	service,
long-distance	service,	and	cable	television	will	be	available	to	spend	on	the
highway.

Access	to	government	information,	medical	advice,	bulletin	boards,	and	some
educational	material	will	be	free.	Once	people	are	on	the	highway,	they	will
enjoy	full	egalitarian	access	to	vital	on-line	resources.	Within	twenty	years,	as
commerce,	education,	and	broad-scale	communications	services	move	onto
the	highway,	an	individual's	ability	to	be	part	of	mainstream	society	will
depend,	at	least	in	part,	on	his	or	her	using	it.	Society	will	then	have	to	decide
how	to	subsidize	broad	access	so	that	all	users	will	be	equal,	both
geographically	and	socioeconomically.
Education	is	not	the	entire	answer	to	the	challenges	presented	by	the
Information	Age,	but	it	is	part	of	the	answer,	just	as	education	is	part	of	the
answer	to	a	range	of	society's	problems.	H.	G.	Wells,	who	was	as	imaginative
and	forward-looking	as	any	futurist,	summed	it	up	back	in	1920.	"Human
history,"	he	said,	"becomes	more	and	more	a	race	between	education	and
catastrophe"	Education	is	society's	great	leveler,	and	any	improvement	in
education	goes	a	long	way	toward	equalizing	opportunity.	Part	of	the	beauty
of	the	electronic	world	is	that	the	extra	cost	of	letting	additional	people	use
educational	material	is	basically	zero.
Your	education	in	personal	computers	can	be	informal.	As	I've	said,	my
fascination	began	with	game	playing,	as	years	later	Warren	Buffett's	did.	My
dad	got	hooked	when	he	used	a	computer	to	help	him	prepare	his	taxes.	If
computers	seem	intimidating	to	you,	why	not	try	doing	the	same	sort	of
thing?	Find	something	a	personal	computer	does	that	will	make	your	life
easier	or	more	fun	and	latch	on	to	that	as	a	way	of	getting	more	involved.
Write	a	screenplay;	do	your	banking	from	home;	help	your	child	with	her
homework.	It	is	worth	making	the	effort	to	establish	a	level	of	comfort	with
computers.	If	you	give	them	a	chance,	you	will	most	likely	be	won	over.	If
personal	computing	still	seems	too	hard	or	confusing,	it	doesn't	mean	you
aren't	smart	enough.	It	means	we	still	have	work	to	do	to	make	them	easier.
The	younger	you	are,	the	more	important	this	is.	If	you	are	fifty	or	older
today,	you	may	be	out	of	the	workforce	before	you'll	need	to	learn	to	use	a
computer—although	I	think	if	you	don't	learn,	you'll	be	missing	out	on	the
chance	for	an	amazing	experience.	But	if	you	are	twenty-five	today	and	not
comfortable	with	computers,	you	risk	being	ineffective	in	almost	any	kind	of
work	you	pursue.	To	begin	with,	finding	a	job	will	be	easier	if	you	have
embraced	the	computer	as	a	tool.
Ultimately,	the	information	highway	is	not	for	my	generation	or	those	before
me.	It	is	for	future	generations.	The	kids	who	have	grown	up	with	PCs	in	the
last	decade,	and	those	who	will	grow	up	with	the	highway	in	the	next,	will

push	the	technology	to	its	limits.
We	have	to	pay	particular	attention	to	correcting	the	gender	imbalance.	When
I	was	young,	it	seemed	that	only	boys	were	encouraged	to	mess	around	with
computers.	Girls	are	far	more	active	with	computers	today	than	twenty	years
ago,	but	there	are	still	many	fewer	women	in	technical	careers.	By	making
sure	that	girls	as	well	as	boys	become	comfortable	with	c======================================================== ighway.	We	are	providing	software	tools	to	a	number	of	hardware	companies
building	new	applications.	Many	media	and	communications	companies	from
around	the	world	will	be	working	with	us	and	observing	the	ways	customers
respond	to	the	applications.	It	will	be	critical	to	listen	to	customer	feedback.
You	too	will	be	able	to	read	about	the	results	of	the	highway	trials.	Are	people
gravitating	toward	new	types	of	multiplayer	games?	Are	they	socializing	in
new	ways?	Are	they	working	together	across	the	network?	Are	they	shopping
in	the	new	marketplace?	Are	exciting	applications	you	never	would	have
imagined	coming	along?	Are	people	willing	to	pay	for	these	new	capabilities?
The	answers	to	these	questions	are	the	key	to	how	the	Information	Age
develops.	Mergers	and	mania	are	fun	to	watch.	But	if	you	want	to	know	how
the	race	to	build	the	information	highway	is	really	going,	keep	your	eye	on
PCs	connected	to	the	Internet,	and	on	the	software	applications	that	are
popular	in	highway	trials.	At	least	that's	what	I'm	going	to	do.

12
CRITICAL	ISSUES
This	is	an	exciting	time	in	the	Information	Age.	It	is	the	very	beginning.
Almost	everywhere	I	go,	whether	to	speak	to	a	group	or	to	have	dinner	with
friends,	questions	come	up	about	how	information	technology	will	change	our
lives.	People	want	to	understand	how	it	will	make	the	future	different.	Will	it
make	our	lives	better	or	worse?
I've	already	said	I'm	an	optimist,	and	I'm	optimistic	about	the	impact	of	the
new	technology.	It	will	enhance	leisure	time	and	enrich	culture	by	expanding
the	distribution	of	information.	It	will	help	relieve	pressures	on	urban	areas	by
enabling	individuals	to	work	from	home	or	remote-site	offices.	It	will	relieve
pressure	on	natural	resources	because	increasing	numbers	of	products	will	be
able	to	take	the	form	of	bits	rather	than	of	manufactured	goods.	It	will	give	us
more	control	over	our	lives	and	allow	experiences	and	products	to	be	custom
tailored	to	our	interests.	Citizens	of	the	information	society	will	enjoy	new
opportunities	for	productivity,	learning,	and	entertainment.	Countries	that
move	boldly	and	in	concert	with	each	other	will	enjoy	economic	rewards.
Whole	new	markets	will	emerge,	and	a	myriad	new	opportunities	for
employment	will	be	created.
When	measured	by	decades,	the	economy	is	always	in	upheaval.	For	the	past
few	hundred	years,	every	generation	has	found	more	efficient	ways	of	getting
work	done,	and	the	cumulative	benefits	have	been	enormous.	The	average
person	today	enjoys	a	much	better	life	than	the	nobility	did	a	few	centuries
ago.	It	would	be	great	to	have	a	king's	land,	but	what	about	his	lice?	Medical
advances	alone	have	greatly	increased	life	spans	and	improved	standards	of
living.
Henry	Ford,	in	the	first	part	of	the	twentieth	century,	was	the	automotive
industry,	but	your	car	is	superior	to	anything	he	ever	drove.	It's	safer,	more
reliable,	and	surely	has	a	better	sound	system.	This	pattern	of	improvement
isn't	going	to	change.	Advancing	productivity	propels	societies	forward,	and	it
is	only	a	matter	of	time	before	the	average	person	in	a	developed	country	will
be	"richer"	in	many	ways	than	anyone	is	today.
Just	because	I'm	optimistic	doesn't	mean	I	don't	have	concerns	about	what	is
going	to	happen	to	all	of	us.	As	with	all	major	changes,	the	benefits	of	the

information	society	will	carry	costs.	There	will	be	dislocations	in	some
business	sectors	that	will	create	a	need	for	worker	retraining.	The	availability
of	virtually	free	communications	and	computing	will	alter	the	relationships	of
nations,	and	of	socioeconomic	groups	within	nations.	The	power	and
versatility	of	digital	technology	will	raise	new	concerns	about	individual
privacy,	commercial	confidentiality,	and	national	security.	There	are,
moreover,	equity	issues	that	will	have	to	be	addressed.	The	information
society	should	serve	all	of	its	citizens,	not	only	the	technically	sophisticated
and	economically	privileged.	In	short,	a	range	of	important	issues	confronts
us.	I	don't	necessarily	have	the	solutions,	but,	as	I	started	off	the	book	saying,
now	is	a	good	time	for	a	broad	discussion.	Technological	progress	will	force
all	of	society	to	confront	tough	new	problems,	only	some	of	which	we	can
foresee.	The	pace	of	technological	change	is	so	fast	that	sometimes	it	seems
the	world	will	be	completely	different	from	one	day	to	the	next.	It	won't.	But
we	should	be	prepared	for	change.	Societies	are	going	to	be	asked	to	make
hard	choices	in	such	areas	as	universal	availability,	investment	in	education,
regulation,	and	the	balance	between	individual	privacy	and	community
security.
While	it	is	important	that	we	start	thinking	about	the	future,	we	should	guard
against	the	impulse	to	take	hasty	action.	We	can	ask	only	the	most	general
kinds	of	questions	today,	so	it	doesn't	make	sense	to	come	up	with	detailed,
specific	regulations.	We've	got	a	good	number	of	years	to	observe	the	course
of	the	coming	revolution,	and	we	should	use	that	time	to	make	intelligent
rather	than	reflexive	decisions.
Perhaps	the	most	widespread	and	personal	anxiety	is,	"How	will	I	fit	into	the
evolving	economy?"	Men	and	women	are	worried	that	their	own	jobs	will
become	obsolete,	that	they	won't	be	able	to	adapt	to	new	ways	of	working,
that	their	children	will	get	into	industries	that	will	cease	to	exist,	or	that
economic	upheaval	will	create	wholesale	unemployment,	especially	among
older	workers.	These	are	legitimate	concerns.	Entire	professions	and
industries	will	fade.	But	new	ones	will	flourish.	This	will	be	happening	over
the	next	two	or	three	decades,	which	is	fast	by	historical	standards,	but	may
turn	out	to	be	no	more	disruptive	than	the	pace	at	which	the	microprocessor
revolution	brought	about	its	changes	in	the	workplace,	or	the	upheavals	in	the
airline,	trucking,	and	banking	industries	over	the	last	decade.
Although	the	microprocessor	and	the	personal	computer	that	it	enabled	have
altered	and	even	eliminated	some	jobs	and	companies,	it	is	hard	to	find	any
large	sector	of	the	economy	that	has	been	negatively	affected.	Mainframe,
mini-computer,	and	typewriter	companies	have	downsized,	but	the	computer

industry	as	a	whole	has	grown,	with	a	substantial	net	increase	in	employment.
As	big	computer	companies	such	as	IBM	or	DEC	have	laid	people	off,	many
of	those	workers	have	found	employment	within	the	industry—usually	at
companies	doing	something	related	to	PCs.
Outside	the	computer	industry	it	is	also	hard	to	find	a	complete	business
sector	hurt	by	the	PC.	There	are	some	typesetters	who	were	displaced	by
desktop-publishing	programs—but	for	every	worker	in	that	situation	there	are
several	whose	jobs	desktop	publishing	created.	All	the	change	hasn't	always
been	good	for	all	the	people,	but	as	revolutions	go,	the	one	set	in	motion	by
the	personal	computer	has	been	remarkably	benign.
Some	people	worry	that	there	are	only	a	finite	number	of	jobs	in	the	world,
and	that	each	time	a	job	goes	away	someone	is	left	stranded	with	no	further
purpose.	Fortunately,	this	is	not	how	the	economy	works.	The	economy	is	a
vast	interconnected	system	in	which	any	resource	that	is	freed	up	becomes
available	to	another	area	of	the	economy	that	finds	it	most	valuable.	Each
time	a	job	is	made	unnecessary,	the	person	who	was	filling	that	job	is	freed	to
do	something	else.	The	net	result	is	that	more	gets	done,	raising	the	overall
standard	of	living	in	the	long	run.	If	there	is	a	general	downturn	across	the
economy—a	recession	or	a	depression—there	is	a	cyclical	loss	of	jobs,	but
the	shifts	that	have	come	about	as	a	result	of	technology	have	tended,	if
anything,	to	create	jobs.
Job	categories	change	constantly	in	an	evolving	economy.	Once	all	telephone
calls	were	made	through	an	operator.	When	I	was	a	child,	long-distance	calls
from	our	home	were	made	by	dialing	"0"	and	giving	an	operator	the	number,
and	when	I	was	a	teenager,	many	companies	still	employed	in-house
telephone	operators	who	routed	calls	by	plugging	cables	into	receptacles.
Today	there	are	comparatively	few	telephone	operators,	even	though	the
volume	of	calls	is	greater	than	ever.	Automation	has	taken	over.
Before	the	Industrial	Revolution,	most	people	lived	or	worked	on	farms.
Growing	food	was	mankind's	main	preoccupation.	If	someone	had	predicted
back	then	that	within	a	couple	of	centuries	only	a	tiny	percentage	of	the
population	would	be	needed	to	produce	food,	all	those	farmers	would	have
worried	about	what	everyone	would	do	for	a	living.	The	great	majority	of	the
501	job	categories	recognized	in	1990	by	the	U.S.	Census	Bureau	didn't	even
exist	fifty	years	earlier.	Although	we	can't	predict	new	job	categories,	most
will	relate	to	unmet	needs	in	education,	social	services,	and	leisure
opportunities.

We	know	that	when	the	highway	connects	buyers	and	sellers	directly,	it	will
put	pressure	on	people	who	are	currently	acting	as	middlemen.	This	is	the
same	sort	of	pressure	that	mass	merchants	such	as	WalMart,	Price-Costco,
and	other	companies	with	particularly	efficient	consumer-merchandising
approaches	have	already	put	on	more	traditional	stores.	When	Wal-Mart
moves	into	a	rural	area,	the	merchants	in	the	local	towns	feel	the	pinch.	Some
survive,	some	do	not,	but	the	net	economic	effect	on	the	region	is	modest.	We
may	regret	the	cultural	ramifications,	but	warehouse	stores	and	fast-food
chains	are	thriving	because	consumers,	who	vote	with	their	dollars,	tend	to
support	outlets	that	pass	their	productivity	savings	along	in	the	form	of	lower
prices.
Reducing	the	number	of	middlemen	is	another	way	of	lowering	costs.	It	will
also	cause	economic	shifts,	but	no	faster	than	the	changes	happened	in
retailing	in	the	last	decade.	It	will	take	many	years	for	the	highway	to	be
utilized	so	widely	for	shopping	that	there	will	be	significantly	fewer
middlemen.	There	is	plenty	of	time	to	prepare.	The	jobs	those	displaced
middlemen	change	to	might	not	even	have	been	thought	of	yet.	We'll	have	to
wait	and	see	what	kinds	of	creative	work	the	new	economy	devises.	But	as======================================================== a	dollar	to	print	and	mail	a	letter	and	on	average	about	that
much	for	a	long-distance	phone	call.	And	to	make	such	a	call	you	have	to
know	the	number	and	have	coordinated	a	time	to	talk.	So	it	takes	considerable
time	and	effort	to	contact	even	a	modest-size	group.	On	a	bulletin	board	all
you	have	to	do	is	type	your	message	in	once	and	it's	available	to	everyone.
Bulletin	boards	on	the	Internet	cover	a	wide	range	of	topics.	Some	postings
are	not	serious.	Somebody	will	send	a	message	with	something	humorous	in	it
to	a	mailing	list	or	post	it	somewhere.	If	it	seems	funny	enough,	it	starts	being
forwarded	as	e-mail.	In	late	1994	this	happened	with	a	phony	press	release
about	Microsoft	buying	the	Catholic	Church.	Thousands	of	copies	were
distributed	inside	Microsoft	on	our	e-mail	system.	I	was	sent	more	than
twenty	copies	as	various	friends	and	colleagues	inside	and	outside	the
company	chose	to	forward	them.
There	are	many	more	serious	examples	of	the	networks'	being	used	to
mobilize	those	who	share	a	common	concern	or	interest.	During	the	recent
political	conflict	in	Russia,	both	sides	were	able	to	contact	people	throughout
the	world	through	postings	on	electronic	bulletin	boards.	The	networks	let
you	contact	people	you	have	never	met	or	heard	from	who	happen	to	share	an
interest.
Information	published	by	electronic	posting	is	grouped	by	topic.	Each	bulletin
board	or	newsgroup	has	a	name,	and	anyone	interested	can	"hang	out"	there.
There	are	lists	of	interesting	newsgroups	or	you	can	browse	names	that	sound
interesting.	If	you	wanted	to	communicate	about	paranormal	phenomena,	you
would	go	to	the	newsgroup	alt.paranormal.	If	you	wanted	to	discuss	that	sort
of	thing	with	others	who	don't	believe	in	it,	you	would	go	to	sci.skeptic.	Or
you	could	connect	to	copernicus.bbn.com	and	look	in	National	School

Network	Testbed	for	a	set	of	lesson	plans	used	by	kindergarten	through
twelfth-grade	teachers.	Almost	any	topic	you	can	name	has	a	group
communicating	about	it	on	the	network.
We	have	seen	that	Gutenberg's	invention	started	mass	publishing,	but	the
literacy	it	engendered	ultimately	led	to	a	great	deal	more	person-to-person
correspondence.	Electronic	communication	developed	the	other	way	around.
It	started	out	as	electronic	mail,	a	way	to	communicate	to	small	groups.	Now
millions	of	people	are	taking	advantage	of	the	networks'	low-friction
distribution	to	communicate	on	a	wide	scale	via	various	forms	of	posting.
The	Internet	has	enormous	potential,	but	it's	important	for	its	continuing
credibility	that	expectations	aren't	cranked	too	high.	The	total	number	of	users
of	the	Internet,	and	of	commercial	on-line	services	such	as	Prodigy,
CompuServe,	and	America	Online,	is	still	a	very	small	portion	of	the
population.	Surveys	indicate	that	nearly	50	percent	of	all	PC	users	in	the
United	States	have	a	modem,	but	fewer	than	about	10	percent	of	those	users
subscribe	to	an	on-line	service.	And	the	attrition	rate	is	very	high—many
subscribers	drop	off	after	less	than	a	year.
Significant	investments	will	be	required	to	develop	great	on-line	content	that
will	delight	and	excite	PC	users	and	raise	the	number	on-line	from	10	percent
up	to	50	percent,	or	even	the	90	percent	I	believe	it	will	become.	Part	of	the
reason	this	sort	of	investment	isn't	happening	today	is	that	simple	mechanisms
for	authors	and	publishers	to	charge	their	users	or	to	be	paid	by	advertisers	are
just	being	developed.
Commercial	on-line	services	collect	revenue,	but	they	have	been	paying
information	providers	royalties	of	only	10	percent	to	30	percent	of	what
customers	pay.	Although	the	provider	probably	knows	the	customers	and
market	better,	pricing—the	way	the	customer	is	charged—and	marketing	are
both	controlled	by	the	service.	The	resulting	revenue	stream	is	simply	not
large	enough	to	encourage	the	information	providers	to	create	exciting	new
on-line	information.
Over	the	next	several	years	the	evolution	of	on-line	services	will	solve	these
problems	and	create	an	incentive	for	suppliers	to	furnish	great	material.	There
will	be	new	billing	options	monthly	subscriptions,	hourly	rates,	charges	per
item	accessed,	and	advertising	payments—so	that	more	revenue	flows	to	the
information	providers.	Once	that	happens	a	successful	new	mass	medium	will
come	into	existence.	This	might	take	several	years	and	a	new	generation	of
network	technology,	such	as	ISDN	and	cable	modems,	but	one	way	or	another

it	will	happen.	When	it	does,	it	will	open	tremendous	opportunities	for
authors,	editors,	directors—every	creator	of	intellectual	property.
Whenever	a	new	medium	is	created,	the	first	content	offered	is	brought	over
from	other	media.	But	to	take	best	advantage	of	the	capabilities	of	the
electronic	medium,	content	needs	to	be	specially	authored	with	it	in	mind.	So
far	the	vast	majority	of	content	on-line	has	been	"dumped"	from	another
source.	Magazine	or	newspaper	publishers	are	taking	text	already	created	for
paper	editions	and	simply	shoving	it	on-line,	often	minus	the	pictures,	charts,
and	graphics.	Plain-text	bulletin	boards	and	e-mail	are	interesting	but	cannot
really	compete	with	the	richer	forms	of	information	in	our	lives.	On-line
content	should	include	lots	of	graphics,	photos,	and	links	to	related
information.	As	communications	get	faster	and	the	commercial	opportunity
becomes	clear,	more	audio	and	video	elements	will	be	included.
The	development	of	CD-ROMs—multi-media	versions	of	audio	compact
discs—provides	some	lessons	that	can	be	applied	to	the	creation	of	on-line
content.	CD-ROM-based	multi-media	titles	can	integrate	different	types	of
information—text,	graphics,	photographic	images,	animation,	music,	and
video—into	a	single	document.	Much	of	these	titles'	value	today	is	in	the
"multi,"	not	in	the	"media."	They	are	the	best	approximations	of	what	the	rich
documents	of	the	future	will	be	like.
The	music	and	audio	on	CD-ROMs	are	clear,	but	rarely	as	good	as	on	a	music
CD.	You	could	store	CD-quality	sound	on	a	CD-ROM,	but	the	format	it	uses
is	very	bulky,	so	if	you	stored	too	much	CD-quality	sound,	you	wouldn't	have
room	for	data,	graphics,	and	other	material.
Motion	video	on	CD-ROMs	still	needs	improving.	If	you	compare	the	quality
of	video	a	PC	can	display	today	with	the	postage-stamp-size	displays	of	just	a
few	years	ago,	the	progress	is	amazing.	Longtime	computer	users	got	very
excited	when	they	first	encountered	video	on	their	computers.	On	the	other
hand,	the	grainy,	jerky	image	is	certainly	no	better	than	a	1950s	television
picture.	The	size	and	quality	of	images	will	improve	with	faster	processors
and	better	compression,	and	eventually	will	become	far	better	than	today's
television	picture.
CD-ROM	technology	has	enabled	a	new	category	of	applications.	Shopping
catalogs,	museum	tours,	and	textbooks	are	being	republished	in	this	new,
appealing	form.	Every	subject	is	being	covered.	Competition	and	technology
will	bring	rapid	improvements	in	the	quality	of	the	titles.	CD-ROMs	will	be
replaced	by	a	new	high-capacity	disc	that	will	look	like	today's	CD	but	will

hold	ten	times	as	much	data.	The	additional	capacity	of	these	extended	CDs
will	allow	for	more	than	two	hours	of	digital	video	on	a	single	disc,	which
means	they'll	be	capable	of	holding	a	whole	movie.	The	picture	and	sound
quality	will	be	much	higher	than	those	of	the	best	TV	signal	you	can	receive
on	a	home	set,	and	new	generations	of	graphics	chips	will	allow	multi-media
titles	to	include	Hollywood-quality	special	effects	under	the	interactive
control	of	the	user.
Multi-media	CD-ROMs	are	popular	today	because	they	offer	users
interactivity	rather	than	because	they	have	imitated	TV.	The	commercial
appeal	of	interactivity	has	already	been	demonstrated	by	the	popularity	of
CD-ROM	games	such	as	Brøderbund's	Myst	and	Virgin	Interactive
Entertainment's	Seventh	Guest,	which	are	whodunits,	a	blending	of	narrative
fiction	and	a	series	of	puzzles	that	allow	a	player	to	investigate	a	mystery,
collecting	clues	in	any	order.
The	success	of	these	games	has	encouraged	authors	to	begin	to	create
interactive	novels	and	movies	in	which	they	introduce	the	characters	and	the
general	outline	of	the	plot,	then	the	reader/player	makes	decisions	that	change
the	outcome	of	the	story.	No	one	suggests	that	every	book	or	movie	should
allow	the	reader	or	viewer	to	influence	its	outcome.	A	good	story	that	makes
you	just	want	to	sit	there	for	a	few	hours	and	enjoy	it	is	wonderful
entertainment.	I	don't	want	to	choose	an	ending	for	The	Great	Gatsby	or	La
Dolce	Vita.	F.	Scott	Fitzgerald	and	Federico	Fellini	have	done	that	for	me.
The	suspension	of	disbelief	essential	to	the	enjoyment	of	great	fiction	is
fragile	and	may	not	hold	up	under	the	heavy-handed	use	of	interactivity.	You
can't	simultaneously	control	the	plot	and	surrender	your	imagination	to	it.
Interactive	fiction	is	as	similar	to	and	different	from	the	older	forms	as	poetry
is	similar	to	and	different	from	drama.
There	will	be	interactive	stories	and	games	available	on	the	network	too.	Such
applications	can	share	content	with	CD-ROMs,	but	at	least	for	a	while	the
software	will	have	to	be	carefully	prepared	so	the	CD-ROMs	won't	be	slow
when	used	on	a	network.	This	is	because,	as	discussed	earlier,	bandwidth,	or
the	speed	at	which	bits	are	transferred	from	the	CD-ROM	to	the	computer,	is
far	greater	than	the	bandwidth	of	the	existing	telephone	network.	Over	time,
the	networks	will	meet—then	exceed—the	speed	of	the	CD-ROM.	And	when
that	happens,	the	content	being	created	for	the	two	forms	will	be	the	same.
But	this	will	take	a	number	of	years,	because	improvements	are	also	being
made	in	CD-ROM	technology.	In	the	meantime	the	bit	rate	will	differentiate
the	two	forms	enough	so	that	they	will	remain	separate	technologies.

The	technologies	underlying	the	CD-ROM	and	on-line	services	have
improved	dramatically,	but	very	few	computer	users	are	creating	multi-media
documents	yet.	Too	much	effort	is	still	required.	Millions	of	people	have
camcorders	and	make	videos	of	their	kids	or======================================================== tomers,	we
have	a	chance	to	continue	to	lead	the	way.	We	can	certainly	keep	providing
better	and	better	software	to	make	the	PC	a	universally	empowering	tool.	I
often	say	I	have	the	best	job	in	the	world,	and	I	mean	it.
I	think	this	is	a	wonderful	time	to	be	alive.	There	have	never	been	so	many
opportunities	to	do	things	that	were	impossible	before.	It's	also	the	best	time
ever	to	start	new	companies,	advance	sciences	such	as	medicine	that	improve
quality	of	life,	and	stay	in	touch	with	friends	and	relatives.	It's	important	that

both	the	good	and	bad	points	of	the	technological	advances	be	discussed
broadly	so	that	society	as	a	whole,	rather	than	just	technologists,	can	guide	its
direction.
Now	it's	back	to	you.	I	explained	in	the	Foreword	that	I	was	writing	this	book
to	help	get	a	dialogue	started	and	to	call	attention	to	a	number	of	the
opportunities	and	issues	that	individuals,	companies,	and	nations	will	face.
My	hope	is	that	after	reading	this	book	you	will	share	some	of	my	optimism,
and	will	join	the	discussion	about	how	we	should	be	shaping	the	future.======================================================== er.
Conversely,	there	is	a	negative	spiral	companies	can	get	caught	in.	A
company	in	a	positive	spiral	has	an	air	of	destiny,	while	one	in	a	negative

spiral	feels	doomed.	If	a	company	starts	to	lose	market	share	or	delivers	one
bad	product,	the	talk	becomes	"Why	do	you	work	there?"	"Why	would	you
invest	in	that	company?"	"I	don't	think	you	should	buy	from	them."	The	press
and	analysts	smell	blood	and	begin	telling	inside	stories	about	who's
quarreling	and	who's	responsible	for	mismanagement.	Customers	begin	to
question	whether,	in	the	future,	they	should	continue	to	buy	the	company's
products.	Within	a	sick	company	everything	is	questioned,	including	things
that	are	being	done	well.	Even	a	fine	strategy	can	get	dismissed	with	the
argument	"You	are	just	defending	the	old	way"	and	that	can	cause	more
mistakes.	Then	down	the	company	spirals.	Leaders	such	as	Lee	Iacocca	who
have	been	able	to	reverse	a	negative	spiral	deserve	a	lot	of	credit.
Throughout	my	youth	the	hot	computer	firm	was	Digital	Equipment
Corporation,	known	as	DEC.	For	twenty	years	its	positive	spiral	seemed
unstoppable.	Ken	Olsen,	the	company's	founder,	was	a	legendary	hardware
designer	and	a	hero	of	mine,	a	distant	god.	In	1960	he	had	created	the
minicomputer	industry	by	offering	the	first	"small"	computers.	The	earliest
was	the	PDP-1,	the	ancestor	of	my	high	school's	PDP-8.	A	buyer,	instead	of
paying	the	millions	asked	by	IBM	for	its	"Big	Iron,"	could	get	one	of	Olsen's
PDP-1s	for	$120,000.	It	wasn't	nearly	as	powerful	as	the	big	machines,	but	it
could	be	used	for	a	wide	variety	of	applications.	DEC	grew	to	a	$6.7	billion
company	in	eight	years	by	offering	a	wide	range	of	computers	in	different
sizes.
Two	decades	later,	Olsen's	vision	faltered.	He	couldn't	see	the	future	of	small
desktop	computers.	Eventually	he	was	forced	out	of	DEC,	and	part	of	his
legend	now	is	that	he	is	the	man	famous	for	repeatedly,	and	publicly,
dismissing	the	personal	computer	as	a	passing	fad.	I	am	sobered	by	stories
like	Olsen's.	He	was	brilliant	at	seeing	new	ways	of	doing	things,	and	then—
after	years	of	being	an	innovator—he	missed	a	big	bend	in	the	road.
Another	visionary	who	faltered	was	An	Wang,	the	Chinese	immigrant	who
built	Wang	Laboratories	into	the	dominant	supplier	of	electronic	calculators	in
the	1960s.	In	the	1970s	he	ignored	the	advice	of	everyone	around	him	and	left
the	calculator	market	just	before	the	arrival	of	low-cost	competition	that
would	have	ruined	him.	It	was	a	brilliant	move.	Wang	reinvented	his	company
to	be	the	leading	supplier	of	word-processing	machines.	During	the	1970s,	in
offices	around	the	world,	Wang	word-processing	terminals	began	to	replace
typewriters.	The	machines	contained	a	microprocessor	but	weren't	true
personal	computers,	because	they	were	designed	to	do	only	one	thing—
handle	text.

Wang	was	a	visionary	engineer.	The	kind	of	insight	that	had	led	him	to
abandon	calculators	could	have	led	to	success	in	personal-computer	software
in	the	1980s,	but	he	failed	to	spot	the	next	industry	turn.	Even	though	he
developed	great	software,	it	was	tied	proprietarily	to	his	word	processors.	His
software	was	doomed	once	general-purpose	personal	computers	appeared	that
could	run	a	variety	of	word-processing	software	applications	such	as
WordStar,	WordPerfect,	and	MultiMate	(which	imitated	Wang	software).	If
Wang	had	recognized	the	importance	of	compatible	software	applications,
there	might	not	be	a	Microsoft	today.	I	might	be	a	mathematician	or	an
attorney	somewhere,	and	my	adolescent	foray	into	personal	computing	might
be	little	more	than	a	distant	personal	memory.
IBM	was	another	major	company	that	missed	technological	changes	at	the
start	of	the	PC	revolution.	The	company's	leader	had	been	a	hard-driving
former	cash-register	salesman,	Thomas	J.	Watson.	Technically,	Watson	wasn't
the	founder	of	IBM,	but	it	was	thanks	to	his	aggressive	management	style	that
by	the	early	1930s	IBM	dominated	the	market	for	accounting	machines.
IBM	began	working	on	computers	in	the	middle	1950s.	It	was	one	of	many
companies	in	the	business	vying	for	leadership	in	the	field.	Until	1964	each
computer	model,	even	from	the	same	manufacturer,	had	had	a	unique	design
and	required	its	own	operating	system	and	application	software.	An	operating
system	(sometimes	called	a	disk-operating	system,	or	just	DOS)	is	the
fundamental	software	that	coordinates	a	computer	system's	components,	tells
them	how	to	work	together,	and	performs	other	functions.	Without	an
operating	system,	a	computer	is	useless.	The	operating	system	is	a	platform
on	which	all	the	software	programs	for	applications—such	as	accounting	or
payroll	or	word-processing	or	electronic-mail	programs—are	built.
Computers	at	different	price	levels	had	different	designs.	Some	models	were
dedicated	to	scientific	study,	others	to	commerce.	As	I	discovered	when	I
wrote	the	BASIC	for	various	personal	computers,	significant	work	was
required	to	move	software	from	one	computer	model	to	another.	This	was	true
even	if	the	software	was	written	in	a	standard	language	such	as	COBOL	or
FORTRAN.	Under	the	direction	of	young	Tom,	as	Watson's	son	and	successor
was	known,	the	company	gambled	$5	billion	on	the	novel	notion	of	scalable
architecture—all	the	computers	in	the	System/360	family,	no	matter	what
size,	would	respond	to	the	same	set	of	instructions.	Models	built	with
different	technology,	from	the	slowest	to	the	fastest,	from	small	machines	that
could	fit	into	a	normal	office	to	water-cooled	giants	that	sat	in	climate-
controlled	glass	rooms,	could	run	the	same	operating	system.	Customers
could	move	their	applications	and	peripherals,	accessories	such	as	disks,	tape

drives,	and	printers,	freely	from	one	model	to	the	next.	Scalable	architecture
completely	reshaped	the	industry.
System/360	was	a	runaway	success	and	made	IBM	the	powerhouse	in
mainframe	computers	for	the	next	thirty	years.	Customers	made	large
investments	in	the	360,	confident	that	their	commitment	to	software	and
training	would	not	be	wasted.	If	they	needed	to	move	to	a	larger	computer,
they	could	get	an	IBM	that	ran	the	same	system,	and	shared	the	same
architecture.	In	1977,	DEC	introduced	its	own	scalable-architecture	platform,
the	VAX.	The	VAX	family	of	computers	ultimately	ranged	from	desktop
systems	to	mainframe-size	machine	clusters	and	did	for	DEC	what
System/360	did	for	IBM.	DEC	became	overwhelmingly	the	leader	in	the
minicomputer	market.
The	scalable	architecture	of	the	IBM	System/360	and	its	successor,	the
System/370,	drove	many	of	IBM's	competitors	out	of	business	and	scared
away	potential	newcomers.	In	1970,	a	new	competing	company	was	founded
by	Eugene	Amdahl,	who	had	been	a	senior	engineer	at	IBM.	Amdahl	had	a
novel	business	plan.	His	company,	also	called	Amdahl,	would	build
computers	fully	compatible	with	the	IBM	360	software.	Amdahl	delivered
hardware	that	not	only	ran	the	same	operating	systems	and	applications	as
IBM,	but,	because	it	took	advantage	of	new	technology,	also	outperformed
IBM's	comparably	priced	systems.	Soon	Control	Data,	Hitachi,	and	Itel	all
also	offered	mainframes	that	were	"plug-compatible"	to	IBM.	By	the	mid-
1970s,	the	importance	of	360	compatibility	was	becoming	obvious.	The	only
mainframe	companies	doing	well	were	those	whose	hardware	could	run
IBM's	operating	systems.
Before	the	360,	computer	designs	were	intentionally	incompatible	with	those
from	other	companies	because	the	manufacturer's	goal	was	to	make	it
discouragingly	difficult	and	expensive	for	customers	heavily	invested	in	one
company's	computer	to	switch	to	a	different	brand.	Once	a	customer
committed	to	a	machine,	he	or	she	was	stuck	with	offerings	from	the
computer's	manufacturer	because	changing	the	software	could	be	done	but
was	too	difficult.	Amdahl	and	the	others	ended	that.	Market-driven
compatibility	is	an	important	lesson	for	the	future	personal-computer	industry.
It	should	also	be	remembered	by	those	creating	the	highway.	Customers
choose	systems	that	give	them	a	choice	of	hardware	suppliers	and	the	widest
variety	of	software	applications.
While	this	was	going	on,	I	was	busy	enjoying	school	and	experimenting	with
computers.	I	arrived	at	Harvard	in	the	fall	of	1973.	In	college	there	is	a	lot	of

posturing,	and	appearing	to	slack	off	was	considered	a	great	way	to	establish
your	coolness.	Therefore,	during	my	freshman	year	I	instituted	a	deliberate
policy	of	skipping	most	classes	and	then	studying	feverishly	at	the	end	of	the
term.	It	became	a	game—a	not	uncommon	one—to	see	how	high	a	grade	I
could	pull	while	investing	the	least	time	possible.	I	filled	in	my	leisure	hours
with	a	good	deal	of	poker,	which	had	its	own	attraction	for	me.	In	poker,	a
player	collects	different	shards	of	information—who's	betting	boldly,	what
cards	are	showing,	what's	this	guy's	pattern	of	betting	and	bluffing—and	then
crunches	all	that	information	together	to	devise	a	plan	for	his	own	hand.	I	got
pretty	good	at	this	kind	of	information	processing.
The	experience	of	poker	strategizing—and	the	money—were	helpful	when	I
got	into	business,	but	the	other	game	I	was	playing,	the	postponing	one,	didn't
serve	me	well	at	all.	But	I	didn't	know	that	then.	In	fact,	I	was	encouraged	that
my	dilatory	practices	were	shared	by	a	new	friend,	Steve	Ballmer,	a	math
major	whom	I	met	freshman	year,	when	we	lived	in	the	same	student	dorm,
Currier	House.	Steve	and	I	led	very	different	lives,	but	we	were	both	trying	to
pare	down	to	the	minimum	the	course	time	needed	to	get	top	grades.	Steve	is
a	man	of	endless	energy,	effortlessly	social.	His	activities	took	a	lot	of	his
time.	By	his	sophomore	year	he	was	a	manager	of	the	football	team,	the
advertising	manager	for	the	Harvard	Crimson,	the	school	newspaper,	and
president	of	a	literary	magazine.	He	also	belonged	to	a	social	club,	the
Harvard	equivalent	of	a	fraternity.
He	and	I	would	pay	very	little	attention	to	our	classes	and	then	furiously
inhale	the	key	books	just	before	an	exam.	Once	we	took	a	tough	graduate-
level	economics	course	together—E======================================================== means	to	be
"educated"	will	be	transformed,	perhaps	almost	beyond	recognition.	Your
sense	of	identity,	of	who	you	are	and	where	you	belong,	may	open	up
considerably.	In	short,	just	about	everything	will	be	done	differently.	I	can
hardly	wait	for	this	tomorrow,	and	I'm	doing	what	I	can	to	help	make	it

happen.
You	aren't	sure	you	believe	this?	Or	want	to	believe	it?	Perhaps	you'll	decline
to	participate.	People	commonly	make	this	vow	when	some	new	technology
threatens	to	change	what	they're	familiar	and	comfortable	with.	At	first,	the
bicycle	was	a	silly	contraption;	the	automobile,	a	noisy	intruder;	the	pocket
calculator,	a	threat	to	the	study	of	mathematics;	and	the	radio,	the	end	of
literacy.
But	then	something	happens.	Over	time,	these	machines	find	a	place	in	our
everyday	lives	because	they	not	only	offer	convenience	and	save	labor,	they
can	also	inspire	us	to	new	creative	heights.	We	warm	to	them.	They	assume	a
trusted	place	beside	our	other	tools.	A	new	generation	grows	up	with	them,
changing	and	humanizing	them.	In	short,	playing	with	them.
The	telephone	was	a	major	advance	in	two-way	communication.	But	at	first,
even	it	was	denounced	as	nothing	more	than	a	nuisance.	People	were	made
uncomfortable	and	awkward	by	this	mechanical	invader	in	their	homes.
Eventually,	though,	men	and	women	realized	they	were	not	just	getting	a	new
machine,	they	were	learning	a	new	kind	of	communication.	A	chat	on	the
telephone	wasn't	as	long	or	as	formal	as	a	face-to-face	conversation.	There
was	an	unfamiliar	and,	for	many,	an	off-putting	efficiency	to	it.	Before	the
phone,	any	good	talk	entailed	a	visit	and	probably	a	meal,	and	one	could
expect	to	spend	a	full	afternoon	or	evening.	Once	most	businesses	and
households	had	telephones,	users	created	ways	to	take	advantage	of	the
unique	characteristics	of	this	means	of	communicating.	As	it	flourished,	its
own	special	expressions,	tricks,	etiquette,	and	culture	developed.	Alexander
Graham	Bell	certainly	wouldn't	have	anticipated	the	silly	executive	game	of
"Have	My	Secretary	Get	Him	Onto	the	Line	Before	Me."	As	I	write,	a	newer
form	of	communication—electronic	mail,	or	e-mail—is	undergoing	the	same
sort	of	process:	establishing	its	own	rules	and	habits.
"Little	by	little,	the	machine	will	become	a	part	of	humanity,"	the	French
aviator	and	author	Antoine	de	Saint-Exupéry	wrote	in	his	1939	memoir,	Wind,
Sand,	and	Stars.	He	was	writing	about	the	way	people	tend	to	react	to	new
technology	and	using	the	slow	embrace	of	the	railroad	in	the	nineteenth
century	as	an	example.	He	described	the	way	the	smoke-belching,
demonically	loud	engines	of	the	primitive	locomotives	were	decried	at	first	as
iron	monsters.	Then	as	more	tracks	were	laid,	towns	built	train	stations.
Goods	and	services	flowed.	Interesting	new	jobs	became	available.	A	culture
grew	up	around	this	novel	form	of	transportation,	and	disdain	became
acceptance,	even	approval.	What	had	once	been	the	iron	monster	became	the

mighty	bearer	of	life's	best	products.	Again,	the	change	in	our	perception	was
reflected	in	the	language	we	used.	We	began	calling	it	"the	iron	horse."	"What
is	it	today	for	the	villager	except	a	humble	friend	who	calls	every	evening	at
six?"	Saint-Exupéry	asked.
The	only	other	single	shift	that	has	had	as	great	an	effect	on	the	history	of
communication	took	place	in	about	1450,	when	Johann	Gutenberg,	a
goldsmith	from	Mainz,	Germany,	invented	movable	type	and	introduced	the
first	printing	press	to	Europe	(China	and	Korea	already	had	presses).	That
event	changed	Western	culture	forever.	It	took	Gutenberg	two	years	to
compose	the	type	for	his	first	Bible,	but	once	that	was	done,	he	could	print
multiple	copies.	Before	Gutenberg,	all	books	were	copied	by	hand.	Monks,
who	usually	did	the	copying,	seldom	managed	more	than	one	text	a	year.
Gutenberg's	press	was	a	high-speed	laser	printer	by	comparison.
The	printing	press	did	more	than	just	give	the	West	a	faster	way	to	reproduce
a	book.	Until	that	time,	despite	the	passing	generations,	life	had	been
communal	and	nearly	unchanging.	Most	people	knew	only	about	what	they
had	seen	themselves	or	been	told.	Few	strayed	far	from	their	villages,	in	part
because	without	reliable	maps	it	was	often	nearly	impossible	to	find	the	way
home.	As	James	Burke,	a	favorite	author	of	mine,	put	it:	"In	this	world	all
experience	was	personal:	horizons	were	small,	the	community	was	inward-
looking.	What	existed	in	the	outside	world	was	a	matter	of	hearsay."
The	printed	word	changed	all	that.	It	was	the	first	mass	medium—the	first
time	that	knowledge,	opinions,	and	experiences	could	be	passed	on	in	a
portable,	durable,	and	available	form.	As	the	written	word	extended	the
population's	reach	far	beyond	a	village,	people	began	to	care	about	what	was
happening	elsewhere.	Printing	shops	quickly	sprang	up	in	commercial	cities
and	became	centers	of	intellectual	exchange.	Literacy	became	an	important
skill	that	revolutionized	education	and	altered	social	structures.
Before	Gutenberg,	there	were	only	about	30,000	books	on	the	entire	continent
of	Europe,	nearly	all	Bibles	or	biblical	commentary.	By	1500,	there	were
more	than	9	million,	on	all	sorts	of	topics.	Handbills	and	other	printed	matter
affected	politics,	religion,	science,	and	literature.	For	the	first	time,	those
outside	the	canonical	elite	had	access	to	written	information.
The	information	highway	will	transform	our	culture	as	dramatically	as
Gutenberg's	press	did	the	Middle	Ages.
Personal	computers	have	already	altered	work	habits,	but	they	haven't	really
changed	our	lives	much	yet.	When	tomorrow's	powerful	information

machines	are	connected	on	the	highway,	people,	machines,	entertainment,	and
information	services	will	all	be	accessible.	You	will	be	able	to	stay	in	touch
with	anyone,	anywhere,	who	wants	to	stay	in	touch	with	you;	to	browse
through	any	of	thousands	of	libraries,	day	or	night.	Your	misplaced	or	stolen
camera	will	send	you	a	message	telling	you	exactly	where	it	is,	even	if	it's	in	a
different	city.	You'll	be	able	to	answer	your	apartment	intercom	from	your
office,	or	answer	any	mail	from	your	home.	Information	that	today	is	difficult
to	retrieve	will	be	easy	to	find:
Is	your	bus	running	on	time?
Are	there	any	accidents	right	now	on	the	route	you	usually	take
to	the	office?
Does	anyone	want	to	trade	his	or	her	Thursday	theater	tickets	for
your	Wednesday	tickets?
What	is	your	child's	school-attendance	record?
What's	a,	good	recipe	for	halibut?
Which	store,	anywhere,	can	deliver	by	tomorrow	morning	for	the	lowest
price	a	wristwatch	that	takes	your	pulse?
What	would	someone	pay	for	my	old	Mustang	convertible?
How	is	the	hole	in	a	needle	manufactured?
Are	your	shirts	ready	yet	at	the	laundry?
What's	the	cheapest	way	to	subscribe	to	The	Wall	Street	Journal?
What	are	the	symptoms	of	a	heart	attack?
Was	there	any	interesting	testimony	at	the	county	courthouse
today?
Do	fish	see	in	color?
What	does	the	Champs-Elysées	look	like	right	now?

Where	were	you	at	9:02	P.M.	last	Thursday?
Let's	say	you're	thinking	about	trying	a	new	restaurant	and	want	to	see	its
menu,	wine	list,	and	specials	of	the	day.	Maybe	you're	wondering	what	your
favorite	food	reviewer	said	about	it.	You	may	also	want	to	know	what
sanitation	score	the	health	department	gave	the	place.	If	you're	leery	of	the
restaurant's	neighborhood,	perhaps	you'll	want	to	see	a	safety	rating	based	on
police	reports.	Still	interested	in	going?	You'll	want	reservations,	a	map,	and
driving	instructions	based	on	current	traffic	conditions.	Take	the	instructions
in	printed	form	or	have	them	read	to	you—and	updated—as	you	drive.
All	of	this	information	will	be	readily	accessible	and	completely	personal,
because	you'll	be	able	to	explore	whatever	parts	of	it	interest	you	in	whatever
ways	and	for	however	long	you	want.	You'll	watch	a	program	when	it's
convenient	for	you,	instead	of	when	a	broadcaster	chooses	to	air	it.	You'll
shop,	order	food,	contact	fellow	hobbyists,	or	publish	information	for	others
to	use	when	and	as	you	want	to.	Your	nightly	newscast	will	start	at	a	time	you
determine	and	last	exactly	as	long	as	you	want	it	to.	It	will	cover	subjects
selected	by	you	or	by	a	service	that	knows	your	interests.	You'll	be	able	to	ask
for	reports	from	Tokyo	or	Boston	or	Seattle,	request	more	detail	on	a	news
item,	or	inquire	whether	your	favorite	columnist	has	commented	on	an	event.
And	if	you	prefer,	your	news	will	be	delivered	to	you	on	paper.
Change	of	this	magnitude	makes	people	nervous.	Every	day,	all	over	the
world,	people	are	asking	about	the	implications	of	the	network,	often	with
terrible	apprehension.	What	will	happen	to	our	jobs?	Will	people	withdraw
from	the	physical	world	and	live	vicariously	through	their	computers?	Will
the	gulf	between	the	haves	and	have-nots	widen	irreparably?	Will	a	computer
be	able	to	help	the	disenfranchised	in	East	St.	Louis	or	the	starving	in
Ethiopia?	There	are	some	major	challenges	that	will	come	with	the	network
and	the	changes	it	will	bring.	In	chapter	12,	I	talk	at	length	about	the	many
legitimate	concerns	I	hear	expressed	again	and	again.
I've	thought	about	the	difficulties	and	find	that,	on	balance,	I'm	confident	and
optimistic.	Partly	this	is	just	the	way	I	am,	and	partly	it's	because	I'm
enthusiastic	about	what	my	generation,	which	came	of	age	the	same	time	the
computer	did,	will	be	able	to	do.	We'll	be	giving	people	tools	to	use	to	reach
out	in	new	ways.	I'm	someone	who	believes	that	because	progress	will	come
no	matter	what,	we	need	to	make	the	best	of	it.	I'm	still	thrilled	by	the	feeling
that	I'm	squinting	into	the	future	and	catching	that	first	revealing	hint	of
revolutionary	possibilities.	I	feel	incredibly	lucky	that	I	am	getting	the	chance
to	play	a	part	in	the	beginning	of	an	epochal	change	for	a	second	time.

I	first	experienced	this	particular	euphoria	as	a	teenager	when	I	understood
how	inexpensive	and	powerful	computers	would	become.	The	computer	we
played	tic-tac-toe	on	in	1968	and	most	computers	at	that	time	were
mainframes:	temp======================================================== a	dollar	to	print	and	mail	a	letter	and	on	average	about	that
much	for	a	long-distance	phone	call.	And	to	make	such	a	call	you	have	to
know	the	number	and	have	coordinated	a	time	to	talk.	So	it	takes	considerable
time	and	effort	to	contact	even	a	modest-size	group.	On	a	bulletin	board	all
you	have	to	do	is	type	your	message	in	once	and	it's	available	to	everyone.
Bulletin	boards	on	the	Internet	cover	a	wide	range	of	topics.	Some	postings
are	not	serious.	Somebody	will	send	a	message	with	something	humorous	in	it
to	a	mailing	list	or	post	it	somewhere.	If	it	seems	funny	enough,	it	starts	being
forwarded	as	e-mail.	In	late	1994	this	happened	with	a	phony	press	release
about	Microsoft	buying	the	Catholic	Church.	Thousands	of	copies	were
distributed	inside	Microsoft	on	our	e-mail	system.	I	was	sent	more	than
twenty	copies	as	various	friends	and	colleagues	inside	and	outside	the
company	chose	to	forward	them.
There	are	many	more	serious	examples	of	the	networks'	being	used	to
mobilize	those	who	share	a	common	concern	or	interest.	During	the	recent
political	conflict	in	Russia,	both	sides	were	able	to	contact	people	throughout
the	world	through	postings	on	electronic	bulletin	boards.	The	networks	let
you	contact	people	you	have	never	met	or	heard	from	who	happen	to	share	an
interest.
Information	published	by	electronic	posting	is	grouped	by	topic.	Each	bulletin
board	or	newsgroup	has	a	name,	and	anyone	interested	can	"hang	out"	there.
There	are	lists	of	interesting	newsgroups	or	you	can	browse	names	that	sound
interesting.	If	you	wanted	to	communicate	about	paranormal	phenomena,	you
would	go	to	the	newsgroup	alt.paranormal.	If	you	wanted	to	discuss	that	sort
of	thing	with	others	who	don't	believe	in	it,	you	would	go	to	sci.skeptic.	Or
you	could	connect	to	copernicus.bbn.com	and	look	in	National	School

Network	Testbed	for	a	set	of	lesson	plans	used	by	kindergarten	through
twelfth-grade	teachers.	Almost	any	topic	you	can	name	has	a	group
communicating	about	it	on	the	network.
We	have	seen	that	Gutenberg's	invention	started	mass	publishing,	but	the
literacy	it	engendered	ultimately	led	to	a	great	deal	more	person-to-person
correspondence.	Electronic	communication	developed	the	other	way	around.
It	started	out	as	electronic	mail,	a	way	to	communicate	to	small	groups.	Now
millions	of	people	are	taking	advantage	of	the	networks'	low-friction
distribution	to	communicate	on	a	wide	scale	via	various	forms	of	posting.
The	Internet	has	enormous	potential,	but	it's	important	for	its	continuing
credibility	that	expectations	aren't	cranked	too	high.	The	total	number	of	users
of	the	Internet,	and	of	commercial	on-line	services	such	as	Prodigy,
CompuServe,	and	America	Online,	is	still	a	very	small	portion	of	the
population.	Surveys	indicate	that	nearly	50	percent	of	all	PC	users	in	the
United	States	have	a	modem,	but	fewer	than	about	10	percent	of	those	users
subscribe	to	an	on-line	service.	And	the	attrition	rate	is	very	high—many
subscribers	drop	off	after	less	than	a	year.
Significant	investments	will	be	required	to	develop	great	on-line	content	that
will	delight	and	excite	PC	users	and	raise	the	number	on-line	from	10	percent
up	to	50	percent,	or	even	the	90	percent	I	believe	it	will	become.	Part	of	the
reason	this	sort	of	investment	isn't	happening	today	is	that	simple	mechanisms
for	authors	and	publishers	to	charge	their	users	or	to	be	paid	by	advertisers	are
just	being	developed.
Commercial	on-line	services	collect	revenue,	but	they	have	been	paying
information	providers	royalties	of	only	10	percent	to	30	percent	of	what
customers	pay.	Although	the	provider	probably	knows	the	customers	and
market	better,	pricing—the	way	the	customer	is	charged—and	marketing	are
both	controlled	by	the	service.	The	resulting	revenue	stream	is	simply	not
large	enough	to	encourage	the	information	providers	to	create	exciting	new
on-line	information.
Over	the	next	several	years	the	evolution	of	on-line	services	will	solve	these
problems	and	create	an	incentive	for	suppliers	to	furnish	great	material.	There
will	be	new	billing	options	monthly	subscriptions,	hourly	rates,	charges	per
item	accessed,	and	advertising	payments—so	that	more	revenue	flows	to	the
information	providers.	Once	that	happens	a	successful	new	mass	medium	will
come	into	existence.	This	might	take	several	years	and	a	new	generation	of
network	technology,	such	as	ISDN	and	cable	modems,	but	one	way	or	another

it	will	happen.	When	it	does,	it	will	open	tremendous	opportunities	for
authors,	editors,	directors—every	creator	of	intellectual	property.
Whenever	a	new	medium	is	created,	the	first	content	offered	is	brought	over
from	other	media.	But	to	take	best	advantage	of	the	capabilities	of	the
electronic	medium,	content	needs	to	be	specially	authored	with	it	in	mind.	So
far	the	vast	majority	of	content	on-line	has	been	"dumped"	from	another
source.	Magazine	or	newspaper	publishers	are	taking	text	already	created	for
paper	editions	and	simply	shoving	it	on-line,	often	minus	the	pictures,	charts,
and	graphics.	Plain-text	bulletin	boards	and	e-mail	are	interesting	but	cannot
really	compete	with	the	richer	forms	of	information	in	our	lives.	On-line
content	should	include	lots	of	graphics,	photos,	and	links	to	related
information.	As	communications	get	faster	and	the	commercial	opportunity
becomes	clear,	more	audio	and	video	elements	will	be	included.
The	development	of	CD-ROMs—multi-media	versions	of	audio	compact
discs—provides	some	lessons	that	can	be	applied	to	the	creation	of	on-line
content.	CD-ROM-based	multi-media	titles	can	integrate	different	types	of
information—text,	graphics,	photographic	images,	animation,	music,	and
video—into	a	single	document.	Much	of	these	titles'	value	today	is	in	the
"multi,"	not	in	the	"media."	They	are	the	best	approximations	of	what	the	rich
documents	of	the	future	will	be	like.
The	music	and	audio	on	CD-ROMs	are	clear,	but	rarely	as	good	as	on	a	music
CD.	You	could	store	CD-quality	sound	on	a	CD-ROM,	but	the	format	it	uses
is	very	bulky,	so	if	you	stored	too	much	CD-quality	sound,	you	wouldn't	have
room	for	data,	graphics,	and	other	material.
Motion	video	on	CD-ROMs	still	needs	improving.	If	you	compare	the	quality
of	video	a	PC	can	display	today	with	the	postage-stamp-size	displays	of	just	a
few	years	ago,	the	progress	is	amazing.	Longtime	computer	users	got	very
excited	when	they	first	encountered	video	on	their	computers.	On	the	other
hand,	the	grainy,	jerky	image	is	certainly	no	better	than	a	1950s	television
picture.	The	size	and	quality	of	images	will	improve	with	faster	processors
and	better	compression,	and	eventually	will	become	far	better	than	today's
television	picture.
CD-ROM	technology	has	enabled	a	new	category	of	applications.	Shopping
catalogs,	museum	tours,	and	textbooks	are	being	republished	in	this	new,
appealing	form.	Every	subject	is	being	covered.	Competition	and	technology
will	bring	rapid	improvements	in	the	quality	of	the	titles.	CD-ROMs	will	be
replaced	by	a	new	high-capacity	disc	that	will	look	like	today's	CD	but	will

hold	ten	times	as	much	data.	The	additional	capacity	of	these	extended	CDs
will	allow	for	more	than	two	hours	of	digital	video	on	a	single	disc,	which
means	they'll	be	capable	of	holding	a	whole	movie.	The	picture	and	sound
quality	will	be	much	higher	than	those	of	the	best	TV	signal	you	can	receive
on	a	home	set,	and	new	generations	of	graphics	chips	will	allow	multi-media
titles	to	include	Hollywood-quality	special	effects	under	the	interactive
control	of	the	user.
Multi-media	CD-ROMs	are	popular	today	because	they	offer	users
interactivity	rather	than	because	they	have	imitated	TV.	The	commercial
appeal	of	interactivity	has	already	been	demonstrated	by	the	popularity	of
CD-ROM	games	such	as	Brøderbund's	Myst	and	Virgin	Interactive
Entertainment's	Seventh	Guest,	which	are	whodunits,	a	blending	of	narrative
fiction	and	a	series	of	puzzles	that	allow	a	player	to	investigate	a	mystery,
collecting	clues	in	any	order.
The	success	of	these	games	has	encouraged	authors	to	begin	to	create
interactive	novels	and	movies	in	which	they	introduce	the	characters	and	the
general	outline	of	the	plot,	then	the	reader/player	makes	decisions	that	change
the	outcome	of	the	story.	No	one	suggests	that	every	book	or	movie	should
allow	the	reader	or	viewer	to	influence	its	outcome.	A	good	story	that	makes
you	just	want	to	sit	there	for	a	few	hours	and	enjoy	it	is	wonderful
entertainment.	I	don't	want	to	choose	an	ending	for	The	Great	Gatsby	or	La
Dolce	Vita.	F.	Scott	Fitzgerald	and	Federico	Fellini	have	done	that	for	me.
The	suspension	of	disbelief	essential	to	the	enjoyment	of	great	fiction	is
fragile	and	may	not	hold	up	under	the	heavy-handed	use	of	interactivity.	You
can't	simultaneously	control	the	plot	and	surrender	your	imagination	to	it.
Interactive	fiction	is	as	similar	to	and	different	from	the	older	forms	as	poetry
is	similar	to	and	different	from	drama.
There	will	be	interactive	stories	and	games	available	on	the	network	too.	Such
applications	can	share	content	with	CD-ROMs,	but	at	least	for	a	while	the
software	will	have	to	be	carefully	prepared	so	the	CD-ROMs	won't	be	slow
when	used	on	a	network.	This	is	because,	as	discussed	earlier,	bandwidth,	or
the	speed	at	which	bits	are	transferred	from	the	CD-ROM	to	the	computer,	is
far	greater	than	the	bandwidth	of	the	existing	telephone	network.	Over	time,
the	networks	will	meet—then	exceed—the	speed	of	the	CD-ROM.	And	when
that	happens,	the	content	being	created	for	the	two	forms	will	be	the	same.
But	this	will	take	a	number	of	years,	because	improvements	are	also	being
made	in	CD-ROM	technology.	In	the	meantime	the	bit	rate	will	differentiate
the	two	forms	enough	so	that	they	will	remain	separate	technologies.

The	technologies	underlying	the	CD-ROM	and	on-line	services	have
improved	dramatically,	but	very	few	computer	users	are	creating	multi-media
documents	yet.	Too	much	effort	is	still	required.	Millions	of	people	have
camcorders	and	make	videos	of	their	kids	or======================================================== s	that.
IBM	was	such	a	great	company.	Why	should	it	have	so	much	trouble	with	PC
software	development?	One	answer	was	that	IBM	tended	to	promote	all	their
good	programmers	into	management	and	leave	the	less	talented	behind.	Even
more	significant,	IBM	was	haunted	by	its	successful	past.	Its	traditional
engineering	process	was	unsuitable	for	the	rapid	pace	and	market
requirements	of	PC	software.
In	April	1987,	IBM	unveiled	its	integrated	hardware/software,	which	was
supposed	to	beat	back	imitators.	The	"clone-killer"	hardware	was	called	PS/2
and	it	ran	the	new	operating	system,	OS/2.
The	PS/2	included	a	number	of	innovations.	The	most	celebrated	was	the	new
"microchannel	bus"	circuitry,	which	allowed	accessory	cards	to	connect	to	the
system	and	permitted	the	PC	hardware	to	be	extended	to	meet	such	particular
customer	requirements	as	sound	or	mainframe	communications	capabilities.
Every	compatible	computer	included	a	hardware-connection	"bus"	to	allow
these	cards	to	work	with	the	PC.	The	PS/2's	Microchannel	was	an	elegant
replacement	for	the	connection	bus	in	the	PC	AT.	But	it	solved	problems	that
most	customers	didn't	have.	It	was	potentially	much	faster	than	the	PC	AT's
bus.	But	in	actual	practice	the	speed	of	the	bus	hadn't	been	holding	anyone	up,
and	therefore	customers	couldn't	get	much	benefit	from	this	newly	available
speed.	More	important,	the	Microchannel	didn't	work	with	any	of	the
thousands	of	add-in	cards	that	worked	with	the	PC	AT	and	compatible	PCs.
Ultimately,	IBM	agreed	to	license	the	Microchannel,	for	a	royalty,	to
manufacturers	of	add-in	cards	and	PCs.	But	by	then	a	coalition	of
manufacturers	had	already	announced	a	new	bus	with	many	of	the	capabilities
of	the	Microchannel	but	compatible	with	the	PC	AT	bus.	Customers	rejected
Microchannel	in	favor	of	machines	with	the	old	PC	AT	bus.	The	complement
of	accessory	cards	for	the	PS/2	never	came	close	to	the	number	available	for
PC	AT-compatible	systems.	This	forced	IBM	to	continue	to	release	machines
that	supported	the	old	bus.	The	real	casualty	was	that	IBM	lost	control	of
personal-computer	architecture.	Never	again	would	they	be	able	to	move	the
industry	singlehanded	to	a	new	design.
Despite	a	great	deal	of	promotion	from	both	IBM	and	Microsoft,	customers
thought	OS/2	was	too	unwieldy	and	complicated.	The	worse	OS/2	looked,	the
better	Windows	seemed.	Because	we'd	lost	the	chances	both	for	compatibility
between	Windows	and	OS/2,	and	for	OS/2	to	run	on	modest	machines,	it	still

made	sense	to	us	to	continue	to	develop	Windows.	Windows	was	far
"smaller"—meaning	it	used	less	hard-disk	space	and	could	work	in	a	machine
with	less	memory,	so	there	would	be	a	place	for	it	on	machines	that	could
never	run	OS/2.	We	called	this	the	"family"	strategy.	In	other	words,	OS/2
would	be	the	high-end	system	and	Windows	would	be	the	junior	member	of
the	family,	for	smaller	machines.
IBM	was	never	happy	about	our	family	strategy,	but	it	had	its	own	plans.	In
the	spring	of	1988,	it	joined	other	computer	makers	in	establishing	the	Open
Software	Foundation	to	promote	UNIX,	an	operating	system	that	had
originally	been	developed	at	AT&T's	Bell	Labs	in	1969	but	over	the	years	had
splintered	into	a	number	of	versions.	Some	of	the	versions	were	developed	at
universities,	which	used	UNIX	as	a	working	laboratory	for	operating-systems
theory.	Other	versions	were	developed	by	computer	companies.	Each
company	enhanced	UNIX	for	its	own	computers,	which	made	their	operating
system	incompatible	with	everyone	else's.	This	meant	that	UNIX	had	become
not	a	single	open	system,	but	a	collection	of	operating	systems	competing
with	one	another.	All	the	differences	made	software	compatibility	harder	and
held	back	the	rise	of	a	strong	third-party	software	market	for	UNIX.	Only	a
few	software	companies	could	afford	to	develop	and	test	applications	for	a
dozen	different	versions	of	UNIX.	Also,	computer-software	stores	couldn't
afford	to	stock	all	the	different	versions.
The	Open	Software	Foundation	was	the	most	promising	of	several	attempts	to
"unify"	UNIX	and	create	a	common	software	architecture	that	would	work	on
various	different	manufacturers'	hardware.	In	theory,	a	unified	UNIX	could
get	a	positive-feedback	cycle	going.	But	despite	significant	funding,	it	turned
out	to	be	impossible	for	the	Open	Software	Foundation	to	mandate
cooperation	from	a	committee	of	vendors	who	were	competing	for	each	sale.
Its	members,	including	IBM,	DEC,	and	others,	continued	to	promote	the
benefits	of	their	particular	versions	of	UNIX.	The	UNIX	companies	suggested
their	systems	would	benefit	customers	by	offering	them	more	choices.	But	if
you	bought	a	UNIX	system	from	one	vendor,	your	software	couldn't
automatically	run	on	any	other	system.	This	meant	you	were	tied	to	that
vendor,	whereas	in	the	PC	world	you	have	a	choice	of	where	to	buy	your
hardware.
The	problems	of	the	Open	Software	Foundation	and	similar	initiatives	point
up	the	difficulty	of	trying	to	impose	a	standard	in	a	field	in	which	innovation
is	moving	rapidly	and	all	the	companies	that	make	up	the	standards
committee	are	competitors.	The	marketplace	(in	computers	or	consumer
electronics)	adopts	standards	because	customers	insist	on	standards.	Standards

are	to	ensure	interoperability,	minimize	user	training,	and	of	course	foster	the
largest	possible	software	industry.	Any	company	that	wants	to	create	a
standard	has	to	price	it	very	reasonably	or	it	won't	be	adopted.	The	market
effectively	chooses	a	reasonably	priced	standard	and	replaces	it	when	it	is
obsolete	or	too	expensive.
Microsoft	operating	systems	are	offered	today	by	more	than	nine	hundred
different	manufacturers,	which	gives	customers	choices	and	options.
Microsoft	has	been	able	to	provide	compatibility	because	hardware
manufacturers	have	agreed	not	to	allow	modifications	to	our	software	that
introduce	incompatibility.	This	means	that	hundreds	of	thousands	of	software
developers	don't	need	to	worry	about	what	PCs	their	software	will	run	on.
Although	the	term	"open"	is	used	in	many	different	ways,	to	me	it	means
offering	choice	in	hardware	and	software	applications	to	the	customer.
Consumer	electronics	has	also	benefited	from	standards	managed	by	private
companies.	Years	ago	consumer	electronics	companies	often	tried	to	restrict
competitors	from	using	their	technology,	but	now	all	of	the	major	consumer
electronics	makers	are	quite	open	to	licensing	their	patents	and	trade	secrets.
The	royalties	for	their	products	are	typically	under	5	percent	of	the	cost	of	the
device.	Audiocassettes,	VHS	tapes,	compact	discs,	televisions,	and	cellular
telephones	are	all	examples	of	technologies	that	were	created	by	private
companies	that	receive	royalties	from	everyone	who	makes	the	equipment.
Dolby	Laboratories'	algorithms,	for	example,	are	the	de	facto	standard	for
noise	reduction.
In	May	1990,	the	last	weeks	before	the	release	of	Windows	3.0,	we	tried	to
reach	an	agreement	with	IBM	for	it	to	license	Windows	to	use	on	its	personal
computers.	We	told	IBM	we	thought	that	although	OS/2	would	work	out	over
time,	for	the	moment	Windows	was	going	to	be	a	success	and	OS/2	would
find	its	niche	slowly.
In	1992,	IBM	and	Microsoft	stopped	their	joint	development	of	OS/2.	IBM
continued	to	develop	the	operating	system	alone.	The	ambitious	plan	for
OfficeVision	was	eventually	canceled.
Analysts	estimate	that	IBM	poured	more	than	$2	billion	into	OS/2,
OfficeVision,	and	related	projects.	If	IBM	and	Microsoft	had	found	a	way	to
work	together,	thousands	of	people-years—the	best	years	of	some	of	the	best
employees	at	both	companies—would	not	have	been	wasted.	If	OS/2	and
Windows	had	been	compatible,	graphical	computing	would	have	become
mainstream	years	sooner.

The	acceptance	of	graphical	interfaces	was	also	held	back	because	most	major
software-applications	companies	did	not	invest	in	them.	They	largely	ignored
the	Macintosh	and	ignored	or	ridiculed	Windows.	Lotus	and	WordPerfect,	the
market	leaders	for	spreadsheet	and	word-processing	applications,	made	only
modest	efforts	on	OS/2.	In	retrospect,	this	was	a	mistake,	and,	in	the	end,	a
costly	one.	When	Windows	finally	benefited	from	a	positive-feedback	cycle,
generated	by	applications	from	many	of	the	small	software	companies,	the	big
companies	fell	behind	because	they	didn't	move	to	Windows	fast	enough.
Windows,	like	the	PC,	continues	to	evolve.	Microsoft	has	continued
to	add	new	capabilities	to	various	versions.	Anyone	can	develop	application
software	that	runs	on	the	Windows	platform,	without	having	to	notify	or	get
permission	from	Microsoft.	In	fact,	today	there	are	tens	of	thousands	of
commercially	available	software	packages	for	the	platform,	including
offerings	that	compete	with	most	Microsoft	applications.
Customers	express	to	me	their	worry	that	Microsoft,	because	it	is,	by
definition,	the	only	source	for	Microsoft	operating-system	software,	could
raise	prices	and	slow	down	or	even	stop	its	innovation.	Even	if	we	did	we
wouldn't	be	able	to	sell	our	new	versions.	Existing	users	would	not	upgrade
and	we	wouldn't	get	any	new	users.	Our	revenue	would	fall	and	many	more
companies	would	compete	to	take	our	place.	The	positive-feedback
mechanism	helps	challengers	as	well	as	the	incumbent.	You	can't	rest	on	your
laurels,	because	there	is	always	a	competitor	coming	up	behind	you.
No	product	stays	on	top	unless	it	is	improved.	Even	the	VHS	standard	will	be
replaced	when	better	formats	appear	at	reasonable	prices.	In	fact,	the	era	of
VHS	is	almost	over.	Within	the	next	several	years	we	will	see	new	digital	tape
formats,	digital	movie	discs	that	put	feature	films	on	discs	like	a	music	CD,
and	eventually	the	information	highway	will	enable	new	services	such	as
video-on-demand,	and	VHS	will	be	unnecessary.
MS-DOS	is	being	replaced	now.	Despite	its	incredible	strength	as	the	leading
operating	system	for	personal	computers,	it	is	being	replaced	by	a	system	with
a	graphical	user	interface.	The	Macintosh	software	might	have	become	the
successor	to	MS-DOS.	So	might	OS/2	or	UNIX.	I======================================================== able	to	simulate	the	world	as
well	as	explain	it.	Creating	or	using	a	computer	model	can	be	a	great
educational	tool.	Several	years	ago,	a	teacher	at	Sunnyside	High	School	in
Tucson,	Arizona,	organized	a	club	of	students	to	create	computer	simulations
of	real-world	behaviors.	The	students	discovered	the	grim	consequences	of
gang	behavior	by	modeling	it	for	themselves	mathematically.	The	success	of
the	club	led	eventually	to	a	complete	reorganization	of	the	mathematics
curriculum	around	the	idea	that	education	is	not	about	making	kids	give	the
"right"	answer,	but	about	giving	kids	methods	by	which	to	decide	whether	an
answer	is	"right"
The	teaching	of	science	lends	itself	particularly	well	to	using	models.	Kids
now	learn	trigonometry	by	measuring	the	height	of	real	mountains.	They
triangulate	from	two	points	rather	than	just	doing	abstract	exercises.	There	are
already	a	number	of	computer	models	that	teach	biology.	SimLife,	a	popular
software	program,	simulates	evolution,	so	kids	get	to	experience	the	process
instead	of	just	getting	facts	about	it.	You	don't	have	to	be	a	child	to	enjoy	this
program,	which	lets	you	design	plants	and	animals	and	then	watch	how	they
interact	and	evolve	in	an	ecosystem	that	you	also	design.	Maxis	Software,	the
publisher	of	SimLife	also	produces	another	program,	SimCity,	which	lets	you
design	a	city	with	all	of	its	interrelated	systems,	such	as	roads	and	public
transportation.	As	a	player,	you	get	to	be	the	mayor	or	city	planner	of	a	virtual
community	and	to	challenge	yourself	to	meet	your	own	goals	for	the
community,	rather	than	goals	artificially	imposed	by	the	software's	design.
You	build	farms,	factories,	homes,	schools,	universities,	libraries,	museums,
zoos,	hospitals,	prisons,	marinas,	freeways,	bridges,	even	subways.	You	cope
with	urban	growth	or	natural	disasters,	such	as	fires.	You	change	the	terrain
too.	When	you	modify	your	simulated	city	by	building	an	airport	or	raising
taxes,	the	changes	can	have	a	predictable	or	unexpected	effect	on	the
simulated	society.	It	is	a	great,	fast	way	to	find	out	how	the	real	world	works.
Or	use	a	simulation	to	find	out	about	what	goes	on	out	of	this	world.	Kids	can
navigate	the	solar	system	or	galaxy	in	a	simulated	spaceship	by	playing	with	a
space	simulator.	Kids	who	may	think	they	aren't	interested	in	biology	or	urban
design	or	outer	space	can	discover	they	are	by	exploring	and	experimenting
with	computer	simulations.	When	science	is	made	more	interesting	in	these
ways,	it	should	appeal	to	a
broader	set	of	students.

In	the	future,	students	of	all	ages	and	capabilities	will	be	able	to	visualize	and
interact	with	information.	For	example,	a	class	studying	weather	will	be	able
to	view	simulated	satellite	images	based	on	a	model	of	hypothetical
meteorological	conditions.	Students	will	propose	"what	if?"	questions,	such	as
"What	would	happen	to	the	next	day's	weather	if	the	wind	speed	increased	by
15	MPH?"	The	computer	will	model	the	predicted	results,	displaying	the
simulated	weather	system	as	it	would	appear	from	space.	Simulation	games
will	get	much	better,	but	even	now	the	best	of	them	are	fascinating	and	highly
educational.
When	simulations	get	completely	realistic,	we	enter	the	realm	of	virtual
reality.	I'm	sure	that	at	some	point	schools	will	have	virtual-reality	equipment
—or	maybe	even	VR	rooms,	the	way	some	now	have	music	rooms	and
theaters—to	allow	students	to	explore	a	place,	an	object,	or	a	subject	in	this
engrossing,	interactive	way.
Technology	will	not,	however,	isolate	students.	One	of	the	most	important
educational	experiences	is	collaboration.	In	some	of	the	world's	most	creative
classrooms,	computers	and	communications	networks	are	already	beginning
to	change	the	conventional	relationships	among	students	themselves,	and
between	students	and	teachers,	by	facilitating	collaborative	learning.
Teachers	at	the	Ralph	Bunche	school	(P.S.	125)	in	Harlem	created	a
computer-assisted	teaching	unit	to	show	New	York	inner-city	students	how	to
use	the	Internet	for	research,	to	communicate	with	electronic	pen	pals
worldwide,	and	to	collaborate	with	volunteer	tutors	at	nearby	Columbia
University.	Ralph	Bunche	was	one	of	the	first	elementary	schools	in	the
nation	to	put	its	own	home	page	on	the	Internet's	World	Wide	Web.	Its	Web
home	page,	the	work	of	a	student,	includes	links	to	such	things	as	the	school
newspaper,	student	artwork,	and	a	lesson	on	the	Spanish	alphabet	illustrated.
Especially	at	the	college	level,	academic	research	has	been	aided	enormously
by	the	Internet,	which	has	made	it	easier	for	far-flung	institutions	and
individuals	to	collaborate.	Computer	innovation	has	always	taken	place	at
universities.	Several	universities	are	centers	for	advanced	research	into	new
computer	technologies,	and	many	others	maintain	large	computer	labs	that
students	use	for	collaboration	and	homework.	Also,	today	some	of	the	most
interesting	home	pages	on	the	Internet's	World	Wide	Web	are	posted	on	behalf
of	universities	around	the	world.
Some	universities	put	the	network	to	less	global	uses.	At	the	University	of
Washington,	lesson	plans	and	assignments	for	some	classes	are	posted	on	the

World	Wide	Web.	Lecture	notes	are	often	published	on	the	Web	too,	a	free
service	I	would	have	loved	in	my	college	days.	Elsewhere,	an	English	teacher
requires	all	his	students	to	have	e-mail	addresses	and	use	e-mail	to	participate
in	after-hours	electronic	discussions.	Class	members	are	graded	on	their	e-
mail	contributions,	just	as	they	are	on	classroom	contributions	and	homework.
College	students	everywhere	already	understand	the	joys	of	e-mail,	both	for
educational	purposes	and	to	keep	in	touch	inexpensively	with	family	and
friends,	including	high	school	friends	who	have	gone	to	other	universities.	A
growing	number	of	parents	of	college	students	have	become	regular	e-mail
users	because	it	seems	to	be	the	best	way	to	contact	their	kids.	Even	some
elementary	schools	allow	older	students	to	have	Internet	accounts.	At
Lakeside,	my	old	school,	the	school's	network	is	now	connected	to	the
Internet,	which	permits	kids	to	browse	for	on-line	information	and	exchange
national	and	international	e-mail.	Nearly	all	Lakeside	students	requested	e-
mail	accounts,	and	in	one	typical	twelve-week	period	they	received	a	total	of
259,587	messages—an	average	of	about	30	messages	per	student	each	week.
About	49,000	messages	were	from	the	Internet	during	the	twelve-week
period,	and	the	students	sent	about	7,200	messages.
1995:	World	Wide	Web	home	page	from	Arbor	Heights	Elementary	School
Lakeside	doesn't	know	how	many	messages	each	student	sends,	and	it	doesn't
know	what	the	messages	are	about.	Some	e-mail	relates	to	school	studies	and
activities,	but	doubtless	a	lot	of	it,	including	much	of	Lakeside's	traffic	on	the
Internet,	concerns	students'	outside	interests.	Lakeside	doesn't	view	this	as	an
abuse	of	the	electronic	mail	system,	but	as	another	way	to	learn.
A	number	of	secondary	school	students,	like	those	at	New	York's	P.S.	125,	are
discovering	how	the	long-distance	access	afforded	by	computer	networks	can
help	them	learn	from	students	from	other	cultures,	and	participate	in
discussions	all	over	the	world.	Many	classrooms,	in	different	states	and
countries,	are	already	linking	up	in	what	are	sometimes	called	"learning

circles."	The	purpose	of	most	learning	circles	is	to	let	students	study	a	specific
topic,	in	collaboration	with	faraway	counterparts.	In	1989,	as	the	Berlin	Wall
was	falling,	West	German	students	were	able	to	discuss	the	event	with	their
contemporaries	in	other	countries.	One	learning	circle	that	was	studying	the
whaling	industry	included	Alaskan	Inuit	students,	whose	Eskimo	villages	still
depend	on	whales	for	food.	Students	outside	the	village	got	so	interested,	they
invited	an	Inuit	tribal	elder	to	their	class	for	a	learning	circle	discussion.
One	ambitious	plan	for	students	using	computer	networks	is	the	GLOBE
Project,	an	initiative	pushed	by	Vice	President	Al	Gore.	GLOBE	stands	for
Global	Learning	and	Observations	to	Benefit	the	Environment.	The	hope	is
that	it	will	be	funded	by	a	variety	of	governments	as	well	as	by	private
contributions.	It	would	ask	grade-schoolers	to	collaborate	internationally	on
collecting	scientific	information	about	Earth.	Children	would	routinely	collect
statistics,	such	as	temperature	and	rainfall,	and	relay	them	across	the	Internet
and	satellites	to	a	central	database	at	the	National	Oceanic	and	Atmospheric
Administration	in	Maryland,	where	the	information	would	be	used	to	create
composite
pictures	of	the	planet.	The	composites	would	be	relayed	back	to	the	students,
as	well	as	to	scientists	and	the	general	public.	No	one	knows	how	much
scientific	value	the	data	would	have,	especially	the	data	collected	by	the	very
young,	but	gathering	the	facts	and	seeing	the	composite	pictures	would	be	a
fine	way	for	large	numbers	of	children	from	many	nations	to	learn	about
global	cooperation,	communication,	and	environmental	issues.
1995:	World	Wide	Web	home	page	from	the	University	of	Connecticut,
featuring	archeological	resources	drawn	from	many	sources
The	highway's	educational	possibilities	will	also	be	open	to	the	world's
unofficial	students.	People	anywhere	will	be	able	to	take	the	best	courses
taught	by	great	teachers.	The	highway	will	make	adult	education,	including
job	training	and	career-enhancement	courses,	more	readily	available.

A	lot	of	parents,	professionals,	and	community	or	political	leaders	will	have
the	opportunity	to	participate	in	the	teaching	process,	even	if	only	for	an	hour
here	or	there.	It	will	be	practical,	inexpensive,	and,	I	think,	commonplace	for
knowledgeable	guests	to	lead	or	join	discussions,	via	videoconferences,	from
their	homes	or	offices.
Having	students	connected	directly	to	limitless	information	and	to	each	other
will	raise	policy	questions	for	schools	and	for	society	at	large.	I	discussed	the
issue	of	regulation	of	the	Internet.	Will	students	routinely	be	allowed	to	bring
their	portable	PCs	with	them	int======================================================== l	it	into	quadrillions	of	atomistic	packets	of	data.	Once
digital	information	is	stored,	anyone	with	access	and	a	personal	computer	can
instantaneously	recall,	compare,	and	refashion	it.	What	characterizes	this
period	in	history	is	the	completely	new	ways	in	which	information	can	be
changed	and	manipulated,	and	the	increasing	speeds	at	which	we	can	handle
it.	The	computer's	abilities	to	provide	low-cost,	high-speed	processing	and
transmission	of	digital	data	will	transform	the	conventional	communication
devices	in	homes	and	offices.
The	idea	of	using	an	instrument	to	manipulate	numbers	isn't	new.	The	abacus
had	been	in	use	in	Asia	for	nearly	5,000	years	by	1642,	when	the	nineteen-
year-old	French	scientist	Blaise	Pascal	invented	a	mechanical	calculator.	It
was	a	counting	device.	Three	decades	later,	the	German	mathematician
Gottfried	von	Leibniz	improved	on	Pascal's	design.	His	"Stepped	Reckoner"
could	multiply,	divide,	and	calculate	square	roots.	Reliable	mechanical
calculators,	powered	by	rotating	dials	and	gears,	descendants	of	the	Stepped
Reckoner,	were	the	mainstay	of	business	until	their	electronic	counterparts
replaced	them.	When	I	was	a	boy,	a	cash	register	was	essentially	a	mechanical
calculator	linked	to	a	cash	drawer.
More	than	a	century	and	a	half	ago,	a	visionary	British	mathematician
glimpsed	the	possibility	of	the	computer	and	that	glimpse	made	him	famous
even	in	his	day.	Charles	Babbage	was	a	professor	of	mathematics	at
Cambridge	University	who	conceived	the	possibility	of	a	mechanical	device
that	would	be	able	to	perform	a	string	of	related	calculations.	As	early	as	the
1830s,	he	was	drawn	to	the	idea	that	information	could	be	manipulated	by	a
machine	if	the	information	could	be	converted	into	numbers	first.	The	steam-
powered	machine	Babbage	envisioned	would	use	pegs,	toothed	wheels,
cylinders,	and	other	mechanical	parts,	the	apparatus	of	the	then-new	Industrial
Age.	Babbage	believed	his	"Analytical	Engine"	would	be	used	to	take	the
drudgery	and	inaccuracy	out	of	calculating.

He	lacked	the	terms	we	now	use	to	refer	to	the	parts	of	his	machine.	He	called
the	central	processor,	or	working	guts	of	his	machine,	the	"mill."	He	referred
to	his	machine's	memory	as	the	"store."	Babbage	imagined	information	being
transformed	the	way	cotton	was—drawn	from	a	store	(warehouse)	and	milled
into	something	new.
His	Analytical	Engine	would	be	mechanical,	but	he	foresaw	how	it	would	be
able	to	follow	changing	sets	of	instructions	and	thus	serve	different	functions.
This	is	the	essence	of	software.	It	is	a	comprehensive	set	of	rules	a	machine
can	be	given	to	"instruct"	it	how	to	perform	particular	tasks.	Babbage	realized
that	to	create	these	instructions	he	would	need	an	entirely	new	kind	of
language,	and	he	devised	one	using	numbers,	letters,	arrows,	and	other
symbols.	The	language	was	designed	to	let	Babbage	"program"	the	Analytical
Engine	with	a	long	series	of	conditional	instructions,	which	would	allow	the
machine	to	modify	its	actions	in	response	to	changing	situations.	He	was	the
first	to	see	that	a	single	machine	could	serve	a	number	of	different	purposes.
For	the	next	century	mathematicians	worked	with	the	ideas	Babbage	had
outlined	and	finally,	by	the	mid-1940s,	an	electronic	computer	was	built	based
on	the	principles	of	his	Analytical	Engine.	It	is	hard	to	sort	out	the	paternity
of	the	modern	computer,	because	much	of	the	thinking	and	work	was	done	in
the	United	States	and	Britain	during	World	War	II	under	the	cloak	of	wartime
secrecy.	Three	major	contributors	were	Alan	Turing,	Claude	Shannon,	and
John	von	Neumann.
In	the	mid-1930s,	Alan	Turing,	like	Babbage	a	superlative	Cambridge-trained
British	mathematician,	proposed	what	is	known	today	as	a	Turing	machine.	It
was	his	version	of	a	completely	general-purpose	calculating	machine	that
could	be	instructed	to	work	with	almost	any	kind	of	information.
In	the	late	1930s,	when	Claude	Shannon	was	still	a	student,	he	demonstrated
that	a	machine	executing	logical	instructions	could	manipulate	information.
His	insight,	the	subject	of	his	master's	thesis,	was	about	how	computer
circuits—closed	for	true	and	open	for	false—could	perform	logical
operations,	using	the	number	1	to	represent	"true"	and	0	to	represent	"false."
This	is	a	binary	system.	It's	a	code.	Binary	is	the	alphabet	of	electronic
computers,	the	basis	of	the	language	into	which	all	information	is	translated,
stored,	and	used	within	a	computer.	It's	simple,	but	so	vital	to	the
understanding	of	the	way	computers	work	that	it's	worth	pausing	here	to
explain	it	more	fully.
Imagine	you	have	a	room	that	you	want	illuminated	with	as	much	as	250

watts	of	electric	lighting	and	you	want	the	lighting	to	be	adjustable,	from	0
watt	of	illumination	(total	darkness)	to	the	full	wattage.	One	way	to
accomplish	this	is	with	a	rotating	dimmer	switch	hooked	to	a	250-watt	bulb.
To	achieve	complete	darkness,	turn	the	knob	fully	counterclockwise	to	Off	for
0	watt	of	light.	For	maximum	brightness,	turn	the	knob	fully	clockwise	for	the
entire	250	watts.	For	some	illumination	level	in	between,	turn	the	knob	to	an
intermediate	position.
This	system	is	easy	to	use	but	has	limitations.	If	the	knob	is	at	an	intermediate
setting—if	lighting	is	lowered	for	an	intimate	dinner,	for	example—you	can
only	guess	what	the	lighting	level	is.	You	don't	really	know	how	many	watts
are	in	use,	or	how	to	describe	the	setting	precisely.	Your	information	is
approximate,	which	makes	it	hard	to	store	or	reproduce.
What	if	you	want	to	reproduce	exactly	the	same	level	of	lighting	next	week?
You	could	make	a	mark	on	the	switch	plate	so	that	you	know	how	far	to	turn
it,	but	this	is	hardly	exact,	and	what	happens	when	you	want	to	reproduce	a
different	setting?	What	if	a	friend	wants	to	reproduce	the	same	level	of
lighting?	You	can	say,	"Turn	the	knob	about	a	fifth	of	the	way	clockwise,"	or
"Turn	the	knob	until	the	arrow	is	at	about	two	o'clock"	but	your	friend's
reproduction	will	only	approximate	your	setting.	What	if	your	friend	then
passes	the	information	on	to	another	friend,	who	in	turn	passes	it	on	again?
Each	time	the	information	is	handed	on,	the	chances	of	its	remaining	accurate
decrease.
That	is	an	example	of	information	stored	in	"analog"	form.	The	dimmer's
knob	provides	an	analogy	to	the	bulb's	lighting	level.	If	it's	turned	halfway,
presumably	you	have	about	half	the	total	wattage.	When	you	measure	or
describe	how	far	the	knob	is	turned,	you're	actually	storing	information	about
the	analogy	(the	knob)	rather	than	about	the	lighting	level.	Analog
information	can	be	gathered,	stored,	and	reproduced,	but	it	tends	to	be
imprecise—and	runs	the	risk	of	becoming	less	precise	each	time	it	is
transferred.
Now	let's	look	at	an	entirely	different	way	of	describing	how	to	light	the
room,	a	digital	rather	than	analog	method	of	storing	and	transmitting
information.	Any	kind	of	information	can	be	converted	into	numbers	using
only	0s	and	1s.	These	are	called	binary	numbers—numbers	composed	entirely
of	0s	and	1s.	Each	0	or	1	is	called	a	bit.	Once	the	information	has	been
converted,	it	can	be	fed	to	and	stored	in	computers	as	long	strings	of	bits.
Those	numbers	are	all	that's	meant	by	"digital	information."

Instead	of	a	single	250-watt	bulb,	let's	say	you	have	eight	bulbs,	each	with	a
wattage	double	the	one	preceding	it,	from	1	to	128.	Each	of	these	bulbs	is
hooked	to	its	own	switch,	with	the	lowest-watt	bulb	on	the	right.	Such	an
arrangement	can	be	diagrammed	like	this:
By	turning	these	switches	on	and	off,	you	can	adjust	the	lighting	level	in	1-
watt	increments	from	0	watt	(all	switches	off)	to	255	watts	(all	switches	on).
This	gives	you	256	possibilities.	If	you	want	1	watt	of	light,	you	turn	on	only
the	rightmost	switch,	which	turns	on	the	1-watt	bulb.	If	you	want	2	watts	of
light,	you	turn	on	only	the	2-watt	bulb.	If	you	want	3	watts	of	light,	you	turn
on	both	the	1-watt	and	2-watt	bulbs,	because	1	plus	2	equals	the	desired	3
watts.	If	you	want	4	watts	of	light,	you	turn	on	the	4-watt	bulb.	If	you	want	5
watts,	you	turn	on	just	the	4-watt	and	1-watt	bulbs.	If	you	want	250	watts	of
light,	you	turn	on	all	but	the	4-watt	and	1-watt	bulbs.
If	you	have	decided	the	ideal	illumination	level	for	dining	is	137	watts	of
light,	you	turn	on	the	128-,	8-,	and	1-watt	bulbs,	like	this:
This	system	makes	it	easy	to	record	an	exact	lighting	level	for	later	use	or	to
communicate	it	to	others	who	have	the	same	light-switch	setup.	Because	the
way	we	record	binary	information	is	universal—low	number	to	the	right,	high
number	to	the	left,	always	doubling—you	don't	have	to	write	down	the	values
of	the	bulbs.	You	simply	record	the	pattern	of	switches:	on,	off,	off,	off,	on,
off,	off,	on.	With	that	information	a	friend	can	faithfully	reproduce	the	137
watts	of	light	in	your	room.	In	fact,	as	long	as	everyone	involved	double-
checks	the	accuracy	of	what	he	does,	the	message	can	be	passed	through	a

million	hands	and	at	the	end	every	person	will	have	the	same	information	and
be	able	to	achieve	exactly	137	watts	of	light.
To	shorten	the	notation	further,	you	can	record	each	"off"	as	0	and	each	"on"
as	1.	This	means	that	instead	of	writing	down	"on,	off,	off,	off,	on,	off,	off,
on,"	meaning	turn	on	the	first,	the	fourth,	and	the	eighth	of	the	eight	bulbs,
and	leave	the	others	off,	you	write	the	same	information	as	1,	0,	0,	0,	1,	0,	0,
1,	or	10001001,	a	binary	number.	In	this	case	it's	137.	You	call	your	friend
and	say:	"I've	got	the	perfect	lighting	level!	It's	10001001.	Try	it."	Your	friend
gets	it	exactly	right,	by	flipping	a	switch	on	for	each	1	and	off	for	each	0.
This	may	seem	like	a	complicated	way	to	describe	the	brightness	of	a	light
source,	but	it	is	an	example	of	the	theory	behind	binary	expression,	the	basis
of	all	modern	computers.
Binary	expression	made	it	possible	to	take	advantage	of	electric	circuits	to
build	calculators.	This	happened	during	World	War	II	when	a	group	of
mathematicians	led	by	J.	Presper	Eckert	and	John	Mauchly	at	the	University
of	Pennsylvania======================================================== re	limited,
Minitel's	success	has	fostered	innovations	and	provided	lessons.	France
Telecom	is	investing	in	a	packet	switch	data	network.
In	Germany,	Deutsche	Telekom	lowered	the	price	of	ISDN	service
dramatically	in	1995.	This	has	led	to	a	significant	increase	in	the	number	of
users	connecting	personal	computers.	Bringing	down	ISDN	prices	was	clever,
because	lower	prices	will	foster	the	development	of	applications	that	will	help
hasten	the	arrival	of	a	broadband	system.
The	level	of	PC	penetration	in	business	is	even	higher	in	the	Nordic	countries
than	in	the	United	States.	These	countries	understand	that	their	highly
educated	workforces	will	benefit	from	having	high-speed	connections	to	the
rest	of	the	world.
Although	the	interest	in	high-tech	communications	systems	is	probably
greater	in	Japan	than	in	any	other	country,	it	is	very	difficult	to	predict	the	fate
of	the	information	highway	there.	The	use	of	personal	computers	in
businesses,	schools,	and	homes	is	significantly	less	widespread	in	Japan	than
in	other	developed	countries.	This	is	partly	because	of	the	difficulty	of
entering	kanji	characters	on	a	keyboard,	but	also	because	of	Japan's	large	and
entrenched	market	for	dedicated	word-processing	machines.
Japan	is	second	only	to	the	United	States	in	the	number	of	companies
investing	in	developing	both	highway	building	blocks	and	the	highway's
content.	Many	large	Japanese	companies	have	excellent	technology	and	a
record	of	taking	long-term	approaches	to	their	investments.	Sony	owns	Sony
Music	and	Sony	Pictures,	which	includes	Columbia	Records	and	Columbia
Studios.	Toshiba	has	a	large	investment	in	Time	Warner.	NEC's	corporate
slogan,	"Computers	&	Communication,"	coined	in	1984,	anticipating	the
highway,	is	an	indication	of	its	commitment.
The	cable	industry	in	Japan	was	overregulated	until	quite	recently,	but	the	rate
of	change	is	impressive.	The	Japanese	phone	company,	NTT,	has	the	largest
valuation	of	any	public	company	in	the	world	and	will	play	a	leadership	role
in	every	aspect	of	the	highway	system.
In	South	Korea,	although	significantly	fewer	PCs	per	capita	are	being	sold
there	than	in	the	United	States,	more	than	25	percent	of	the	machines	are
going	into	homes.	This	statistic	demonstrates	how	countries	with	a	strong
family	structure	that	put	great	emphasis	on	getting	ahead	by	educating

children	will	be	fertile	ground	for	products	that	provide	educational
advantages.	One	appropriate	use	of	governmental	authority	will	be	the
creation	of	incentives	to	encourage	low-cost	connections	for	schools	and	to
ensure	that	the	highway	reaches	rural	areas	and	low-income	areas	too.
Australia	and	New	Zealand	are	also	interested	in	the	highway,	partly	because
of	the	great	geographic	distance	between	them	and	other	developed	countries.
The	phone	companies	in	Australia	are	being	privatized	and	the	market	opened
to	competitors,	encouraging	forward-looking	plans.	New	Zealand	has	the
most	open	telecommunications	market	in	the	world,	and	its	newly	privatized
phone	company	has	set	an	example	of	how	effective	privatization	can	be.
I	doubt	that	any	of	the	developed	countries,	including	all	of	Western	Europe,
North	America,	Australia,	New	Zealand,	and	Japan,	will	end	up	more	than	a
year	or	two	ahead	of	or	behind	the	others	unless	poor	political	decisions	are
made.	Within	each	country	some	communities	will	get	service	earlier	than
others	because	of	their	economic	demographics.	Networks	will	go	into	richer
neighborhoods	first	because	that's	where	residents	are	likely	to	spend	more.
Local	regulators	may	even	find	themselves	competing	to	create	favorable
environments	for	the	early	deployment	of	the	highway.	No	taxpayer	money
will	be	needed	to	build	the	highway	in	industrialized	countries	with	pro-
competition	regulations.	The	speed	with	which	the	highway	is	brought
directly	into	homes	will	correlate	in	large	part	with	the	per	capita	gross
domestic	product	(GDP)	of	a	country.	Despite	this,	even	in	developing
countries	the	connections	into	businesses	and	schools	will	have	a	huge	impact
and	reduce	the	income	gap	between	these	countries	and	developed	ones.
Areas	such	as	Bangalore	in	India,	or	Shanghai	and	Guangzhou	in	China,	will
install	highway	connections	to	businesses	that	they	will	use	to	offer	the
services	of	their	highly	educated	workers	to	the	global	market.
In	many	countries	nowadays,	the	top	political	leaders	are	making	plans	to
encourage	highway	investment.	The	competition	among	nations	trying	either
to	take	the	lead	in	development	or	to	make	sure	they	don't	fall	behind	is
creating	a	very	positive	dynamic.	As	different	countries	try	different
approaches,	everyone	will	watch	to	see	what	works	best.	Some	national
governments	may	rationalize	that	if	they	decide	they	must	have	a	network
right	away	and	private	enterprise	is	not	willing	to	build	it,	they	will	have	to
help	build	or	fund	pieces	of	their	information	highway.	A	government
bootstrap	could,	in	principle,	cause	an	information	highway	to	be	built	sooner
than	might	happen	otherwise,	but	the	very	real	possibility	of	an	unattractive
outcome	has	to	be	considered	carefully.	Such	a	country	might	end	up	with	a
boondoggle,	white-elephant	information	highway	built	by	engineers	out	of

touch	with	the	rapid	pace	of	technological	development.
Something	like	this	happened	in	Japan	with	the	Hi-Vision	high-definition
television	project.	MITI,	the	powerful	Ministry	of	International	Trade	and
Industry,	and	broadcasting	company,	and	NHK,	the	government-run	TV
broadcasting	company,	coordinated	an	effort	among	Japanese	consumer-
electronics	companies	to	build	a	new	analog	HDTV	system.	NHK	committed
to	broadcasting	shows	a	few	hours	a	day	in	the	new	format.	Unfortunately,	the
system	was	rendered	obsolete	before	it	was	ever	deployed,	when	it	became
clear	that	digital	technology	was	superior.	Many	Japanese	companies	found
themselves	in	a	difficult	position.	Privately,	they	knew	the	system	was	not	a
good	investment,	but	they	had	to	maintain	their	public	commitments	to	the
government-sponsored	format.	As	I	write	this,	the	"plan	of	record"	in	Japan
remains	to	move	to	this	analog	system,	although	nobody	actually	expects	it	to
happen.	Japan	will,	however,	benefit	from	the	investment	in	developing	high-
definition	cameras	and	displays	that	the	Hi-Vision	project	encouraged.
Building	the	information	highway	will	not	be	as	simple	as	saying	"Run	fiber
everywhere."	Any	government	or	company	getting	involved	will	need	to	track
new	developments	and	be	prepared	to	shift	directions.	Such	flexibility
requires	technological	expertise	that,	with	the	attendant	risks,	is	better
covered	by	industry.
Competition	in	the	private	sector	will	be	fierce	on	many	fronts.	Cable,	phone,
and	other	companies	will	compete	to	provide	the	fiber,	wireless,	and	satellite
infrastructure.	Hardware	companies	will	fight	to	sell	servers,	ATM	switches,
and	set-top	boxes	to	network	companies,	and	PCs,	digital	TVs,	telephones,
and	other	information	appliances	to	consumers.	At	the	same	time	companies
in	the	software	business,	including	Apple,	AT&T,	IBM,	Microsoft,	Oracle,
and	Sun	Microsystems,	will	be	offering	software	components	to	network
providers.	Eventually,	millions	of	companies	and	individuals	will	be	selling
software	applications	and	information,	including	entertainment,	across	the
network	that	springs	up.
I've	discussed	at	some	length	how	critical	it	is	that	the	physical	infrastructure
be	built	out	to	provide	broadband	connections	to	homes.	I	described	the
competition	in	the	United	States,	and	the	strategies	of	the	telephone	and	cable
industries,	the	major	players.	The	cable	companies	are	younger	and	smaller
than	the	big	telephone	companies	and	tend	to	be	more	entrepreneurial.	Cable
television	networks	provide	customers	with	one-way	broadband	video
through	a	web	of	coaxial,	and	sometimes	fiber-optic,	cable.	Although	the
penetration	rate	worldwide	is	quite	low—189	million	subscribers—cable

systems	run	past	nearly	70	percent	of	all	American	homes,	and	into	63	million
of	them.	Already,	cable	systems	are	gradually	being	converted	to	carry	a
digital	signal,	and	a	number	of	cable	companies	are	working	to	provide	PC
users	with	connections	to	the	Internet	and	on-line	services.	They're	gambling
that	many	PC	users	accustomed	to	downloading	information	on	a	telephone
line	at	28,800	bits	per	second	will	be	willing	to	pay	more	to	download
information	through	their	television	cable	at	3	million	bits	per	second.
As	for	the	phone	companies,	they	are	much	stronger	financially.	The
American	telephone	system	is	the	world's	largest	switched-distributed
network	providing	point-to-point	connections.	The	combined	local	telephone
exchange	market,	with	annual	revenues	of	about	$100	billion,	is	far	more
profitable	than	the	$20	billion	U.S.	cable	business.	The	seven	regional	Bell
operating	companies	(RBOCs)	will	compete	with	their	former	parent,	AT&T,
to	provide	long-distance,	cellular,	and	new	services.	But,	like	phone
companies	around	the	world,	the	RBOCs	are	new	to	the	competitive	world,
just	emerging	from	their	heritage	as	heavily	regulated	utilities.
The	local	phone	companies	will	be	motivated	by	increased	competition.	They
are	in	a	defensive	position.	Other	phone	companies	and	cable	companies	are
going	to	want	to	offer	telephone	as	well	as	other	communications	services	in
their	areas.	New	regulations	will	unleash	this	competition	and,	as	I've	already
noted,	the	cost	of	long-distance	voice-telephone	service	will	drop
dramatically.	If	that	happens,	phone	companies	will	be	deprived	of	much	of
their	current	profitable	revenue.
The	companies	providing	local	service	have	slowly	been	introducing
advanced	digital	transmission	capabilities	into	their	networks.	They	haven't
felt	pressure	to	hurry,	because	until	now	it	seemed	they	were	protected	from
competition	by	the	large	financial	barriers	to	market	entry.	They	knew	a
potential	rival	would	have	to	make	a	duplicate	investment	of,	say,	$100
million	in	equipment	in	order	to	compete	in	a	given	community.	But======================================================== our	kids	when	you're	out	of	town	or
showing	your	veterinarian	the	way	your	dog	or	cat	limps.	But	when	you're	at
home,	chances	are	you'll	keep	cameras	off	during	most	calls,	especially	with
strangers.	You	may	choose	to	transmit	a	canned	photograph	of	yourself,	your
family,	or	something	else	you	believe	expresses	your	individuality	yet
protects	your	visual	privacy.	It	will	be	something	like	choosing	a	message	for
your	answering	machine.	Live	video	could	be	switched	on	for	a	friend	or
when	business	required	it.
All	of	the	synchronous	and	asynchronous	images	I	have	discussed	up	to	this
point—photographs,	videos,	or	documents—have	been	pictures	of	real	things.
As	computers	become	more	powerful,	it	will	be	possible	for	a	standard	PC	to
fabricate	realistic	synthetic	images.	Your	phone	or	computer	will	be	able	to
generate	a	lifelike	digital	image	of	your	face,	showing	you	listening	or	even
talking.	You	really	will	be	talking	it's	just	that	you've	taken	the	call	at	home
and	are	dripping	wet	from	the	shower.	As	you	talk,	your	phone	will	synthesize
an	image	of	you	in	your	most	businesslike	suit.	Your	facial	expressions	will
match	your	words	(remember,	small	computers	are	going	to	get	very

powerful).	Just	as	easily,	your	phone	will	be	able	to	transmit	an	image	of	your
words	issuing	from	the	mouth	of	someone	else,	or	from	an	idealized	version
of	you.	If	you	are	talking	to	someone	you've	never	met,	and	you	don't	want	to
show	a	mole	or	a	flabby	chin,	your	caller	won't	be	able	to	tell	if	you	really
look	so	much	like	Cary	Grant	(or	Meg	Ryan)	or	whether	you're	getting	a	little
help	from	your	computer.
All	of	these	electronic	innovations—e-mail,	shared	screens,
videoconferencing,	and	video	phone	calls—are	ways	of	overcoming	physical
separation.	By	the	time	they	become	commonplace,	they	will	have	changed
not	just	the	way	we	work	together	but	also	distinctions	now	made	between	the
workplace	and	everywhere	else.
In	1994	in	the	United	States	there	were	more	than	7	million	"telecommuters"
who	didn't	travel	daily	to	offices	but	instead	"commuted"	via	fax	machines,
telephones,	and	e-mail.	Some	writers,	engineers,	attorneys,	and	others	whose
jobs	are	relatively	autonomous	already	stay	at	home	for	a	portion	of	their
work	hours.	Salespersons	are	judged	on	results;	so	as	long	as	a	professional
salesperson	is	productive,	it	doesn't	much	matter	whether	he	or	she	is	working
in	the	office,	at	home,	or	on	the	road	somewhere.	Many	people	who
telecommute	find	it	liberating	and	convenient,	but	some	find	it	claustrophobic
to	be	at	home	all	the	time.	Others	discover	they	don't	have	the	self-discipline
to	make	it	effective.	In	the	years	ahead,	millions	of	additional	people	will
telecommute	at	least	part-time,	using	the	information	highway.
Employees	who	do	most	of	their	work	on	the	telephone	are	strong	candidates
for	telecommuting	because	calls	can	be	routed	to	them.	Telemarketers,
customer-service	representatives,	reservation	agents,	and	product-support
specialists	will	have	access	to	as	much	information	on	a	screen	at	home	as
they	would	on	a	screen	at	an	office.	A	decade	from	now,	advertisements	for
many	jobs	will	list	how	many	hours	a	week	of	work	are	expected	and	how
many	of	those	hours,	if	any,	are	"inside"	hours	at	a	designated	location	such	as
an	office.	Some	jobs	will	require	that	the	employee	already	have	a	PC	so	he
can	work	at	home.	Customer-service	organizations	will	be	able	to	use	part-
time	labor	very	easily.
When	employees	and	supervisors	are	physically	apart,	management	will	have
to	adapt,	and	each	individual	will	have	to	learn	to	be	a	productive	employee
on	his	or	her	own.	New	feedback	mechanisms	will	have	to	evolve	too,	so	that
both	employer	and	employee	can	determine	the	quality	of	work	being	done.
An	employee	in	an	office	is	assumed	to	be	working	the	whole	time,	but	the

same	employee	working	at	home	might	be	credited	(perhaps	at	a	different
rate)	only	for	the	time	he	or	she	is	actually	performing	work.	If	the	baby	starts
crying,	Dad	or	Mom	would	click	"Not	Available,"	and	take	care	of	the	child
with	unpaid	minutes	away	from	the	job.	When	the	employee	was	ready	once
again	to	focus	on	the	job,	he	or	she	would	signal	availability,	and	the	network
would	start	delivering	work	that	needed	attention.	Part-time	work	and	job
sharing	will	take	on	new	meanings.
The	number	of	offices	a	company	needs	might	be	reduced.	A	single	office	or
cubicle	could	serve	several	people	whose	inside	hours	were	staggered	or
irregular.	Already,	the	major	accounting	firms	Arthur	Andersen	and	Ernst	&
Young	are	among	the	companies	that	have	replaced	large	numbers	of
expensive	private	offices	with	a	smaller	number	of	generic	offices,	which	can
be	reserved	by	accountants	who	are	in	from	the	field.	Tomorrow,	a	shared
office's	computers,	phones,	and	digital	white	boards	could	be	configured	for
that	day's	occupant.	For	part	of	a	day	an	office's	white-board	walls	would
display	one	employee's	calendar,	family	photos,	and	favorite	cartoons,	and
later	on	the	same	whiteboard	walls	would	feature	the	personal	photos	or
artwork	of	a	different	employee.	Wherever	a	worker	logged	on,	his	or	her
familiar	office	surroundings	could	follow,	courtesy	of	digital	white	boards	and
the	information	highway.
Information	technology	will	affect	much	more	than	the	physical	location	and
supervision	of	employees.	The	very	nature	of	almost	every	business
organization	will	have	to	be	reexamined.	This	should	include	its	structure	and
the	balance	between	inside,	full-time	staff	and	outside	consultants	and	firms.
The	corporate	reengineering	movement	starts	with	the	premise	that	there	are
better	ways	to	design	companies.	To	date,	most	reengineering	has	focused	on
moving	information	inside	the	company	in	new	ways.	The	next	movement
will	be	to	redefine	the	boundary	between	the	company	and	its	customers	and
suppliers.	Key	questions	to	reexamine	include:	How	will	customers	find	out
about	products?	How	will	customers	order?	What	new	competitors	will
emerge	as	geography	becomes	less	of	a	barrier?	How	can	the	company	do	the
best	job	of	keeping	customers	happy	after	the	sale?
Corporate	structures	will	evolve.	E-mail	is	a	powerful	force	for	flattening	the
hierarchies	common	to	large	companies.	If	communications	systems	are	good
enough,	companies	don't	need	as	many	levels	of	management.	Intermediaries
in	middle	management,	who	once	passed	information	up	and	down	the	chain
of	command,	already	aren't	as	important	today	as	they	once	were.	Microsoft
was	born	an	Information	Age	company,	and	its	hierarchy	has	always	been

relatively	flat.	Our	goal	is	to	have	no	more	than	six	levels	of	management
between	me	and	anyone	in	the	company.	In	a	sense,	because	of	e-mail,	there
are	no	levels	between	me	and	anyone	in	the	company.
As	technology	makes	it	easier	for	a	business	to	find	and	collaborate	with
outside	expertise,	a	huge	and	competitive	market	for	consultants	will	arise.	If
you	want	someone	to	help	design	a	piece	of	direct-response	advertising,	you'll
ask	a	software	application	running	on	the	information	highway	to	list
consultants	with	certain	qualifications	who	are	willing	to	work	for	no	more
than	a	certain	rate	and	have	an	appropriate	time	period	free.	Software	will
check	references	for	you	preliminarily	and	help	you	filter	out	people	who
aren't	qualified.	You'll	be	able	to	ask,	"Have	any	of	these	candidates	worked
for	us	before	and	gotten	a	rating	above	eight?"	This	system	will	become	so
inexpensive	to	use	that	you'll	eventually	rely	on	it	to	find	baby-sitters	and
people	to	cut	your	lawn.	If	you're	looking	for	work	as	an	employee	or
contractor,	the	system	will	match	you	with	potential	employers	and	be	able	to
send	your	résumé	electronically	with	the	click	of	a	button.
Companies	will	reevaluate	such	employment	issues	as	how	extensive	a	legal
or	finance	department	they	should	keep,	based	on	the	relative	benefits	of
having	expertise	inside	an	organization	versus	outside	it.	For	particularly	busy
periods	a	company	will	be	able	to	get	more	help	easily	without	adding	more
employees	and	the	associated	office	space.	Businesses	that	successfully	draw
on	the	resources	available	across	the	network	will	be	more	efficient,	which
will	challenge	others	to	do	the	same.
Lots	of	companies	will	eventually	be	far	smaller	because	using	the
information	highway	will	make	it	easy	to	find	and	work	with	outside
resources.	Big	is	not	necessarily	good	when	it	comes	to	business.	Hollywood
studios	are	surprisingly	small	in	terms	of	permanent	employees,	because	they
contract	for	services—including	actors	and	often	facilities—on	a	movie-by-
movie	basis.	Some	software	companies	follow	a	similar	model,	hiring
programmers	as	needed.	Of	course,	companies	will	still	reserve	many
functions	for	full-time	employees.	It	would	be	immensely	inefficient	to	have
to	bid	for	the	time	of	an	outside	professional	whenever	a	company	needed
something	done,	especially	if	the	outside	consultant	had	to	come	up	to	speed.
But	a	number	of	functions	will	be	dispersed,	both	structurally	and
geographically.
Geographic	dispersion	will	affect	much	more	than	corporate	structure.	Many
of	today's	major	social	problems	have	arisen	because	the	population	has	been
crowded	into	urban	areas.	The	drawbacks	of	city	life	are	obvious	and

substantial—traffic,	cost	of	living,	crime,	and	limited	access	to	the	outdoors,
among	others.	The	advantages	of	city	life	include	access	to	work,	services,
education,	entertainment,	and	friends.	Over	the	past	hundred	years	most	of	the
population	of	the	industrialized	world	has	chosen	to	live	in	urban	areas,	after
consciously	or	unconsciously	balancing	the	pluses	and	minuses.
The	information	highway	changes	that	balance.	For	those	who	have	a
connection	to	it,	the	highway	will	substantially	reduce	the	drawbacks	of	living
outside	a	big	city.	As	a	consultant	or	employee	involved	in	a	service-related
field,	you	will	be	able	to	collaborate	easily	from	virtually	anywhere.	As	a
consumer,	you	will	be	able	to	get	advice—financial,	legal,	even	some	medical
—withou======================================================== omputers	at	an	early
age	we	can	ensure	that	they	play	their	rightful	role	in	all	the	work	that	benefits
from	computer	expertise.
My	own	experience	as	a	child,	and	that	of	my	friends	raising	children	today,
is	that	once	a	kid	is	exposed	to	computing,	he	or	she	is	hooked.	But	we	have
to	create	the	opportunity	for	that	exposure.	Schools	should	have	low-cost
access	to	computers	connected	to	the	information	highway,	and	teachers	need
to	become	comfortable	with	the	new	tools.
One	of	the	wonderful	things	about	the	information	highway	is	that	virtual
equity	is	far	easier	to	achieve	than	real-world	equity.	It	would	take	a	massive
amount	of	money	to	give	every	grammar	school	in	every	poor	area	the	same
library	resources	as	the	schools	in	Beverly	Hills.	However,	when	you	put
schools	on-line	they	all	get	the	same	access	to	information,	wherever	it	might
be	stored.	We	are	all	created	equal	in	the	virtual	world,	and	we	can	use	this
equality	to	help	address	some	of	the	sociological	problems	that	society	has	yet
to	solve	in	the	physical	world.	The	network	will	not	eliminate	barriers	of
prejudice	or	inequality,	but	it	will	be	a	powerful	force	in	that	direction.
The	question	of	how	to	price	intellectual	property,	such	as	entertainment	and
educational	materials,	is	fascinating.	Economists	understand	a	lot	about	how
the	pricing	of	classical	manufactured	goods	works.	They	can	show	how
rational	pricing	should	reflect	cost	structure	in	a	very	direct	manner.	In	a
market	with	multiple	competing	qualified	manufacturers,	prices	tend	to	drop
to	the	marginal	cost	of	making	one	more	of	whatever	they	are	selling.	But	this
model	doesn't	work	when	applied	to	intellectual	property.
A	basic	economics	course	describes	the	curves	of	supply	and	demand,	which
intersect	at	the	price	appropriate	for	a	product.	But	supply-and-demand
economics	gets	into	trouble	when	it	comes	to	intellectual	property,	because
ordinary	rules	regarding	manufacturing	costs	don't	apply.	Typically	there	are
huge	up-front	development	costs	for	intellectual	property.	These	fixed	costs
are	the	same	regardless	of	whether	one	copy	or	a	million	copies	of	the	work
are	sold.	George	Lucas's	next	movie	in	the	Star	Wars	series	will	cost	millions
to	make,	regardless	of	how	many	people	pay	to	see	it	in	theaters.

The	pricing	of	intellectual	property	is	more	complicated	than	most	pricing
because	today	it	is	relatively	inexpensive	to	manufacture	copies	of	most
intellectual	property.	Tomorrow,	on	the	information	highway,	the	cost	of
delivering	a	copy	of	a	work—which	will	amount	to	the	same	thing	as
manufacturing	it—will	be	even	lower,	and	dropping	every	year	because	of
Moore's	Law.	When	you	buy	a	new	medicine,	you're	paying	mostly	for	what
the	drug	company	spent	for	research,	development,	and	testing.	Even	if	the
marginal	cost	of	making	each	pill	is	minimal,	the	pharmaceutical	company
still	may	have	to	charge	quite	a	bit	for	each,	especially	if	the	market	is	not
huge.	The	revenue	from	the	average	patient	has	to	cover	a	sufficient	share	of
the	development	expenses	and	generate	enough	profit	to	make	investors	glad
they	took	the	substantial	financial	risks	involved	in	developing	a	new	drug.
When	a	poor	country	wants	the	medicine,	the	manufacturer	faces	a	moral
dilemma.	If	the	pharmaceutical	company	doesn't	waive	or	drastically	reduce
its	patent-licensing	fees,	the	medicine	won't	be	available	to	poor	countries.
However,	if	a	manufacturer	is	to	be	able	to	invest	in	R&D,	some	users	must
pay	more	than	the	marginal	cost.	Prices	for	drugs	vary	greatly	from	country	to
country	and	discriminate	against	poor	people	in	rich	countries	except	where
governments	cover	medical	costs.
One	possible	solution,	a	scheme	whereby	a	rich	person	pays	more	to	buy	a
new	medicine,	to	see	a	movie	or	to	read	a	book,	may	seem	inequitable;
however,	it	is	identical	to	a	system	already	in	place	today—taxation.	Through
the	income	tax	and	other	taxes,	people	with	high	incomes	pay	more	for	roads,
schools,	the	army,	and	every	other	government	facility	than	the	average
person	does.	It	cost	me	more	than	$100	million	last	year	to	get	those	services
because	I	paid	a	significant	capital	gains	tax	after	selling	some	Microsoft
shares.	I	have	no	complaint,	but	it	is	an	example	of	the	same	services	being
provided	at	vastly	different	prices.
The	pricing	for	highway	access	may	be	set	politically	rather	than	on	the	basis
of	costs.	It	is	going	to	be	expensive	to	enfranchise	people	in	remote	locations
because	the	cost	of	bringing	wiring	to	far-flung	homes	and	even	small
communities	is	very	high.	Companies	may	not	be	eager	to	make	the	necessary
investment,	and	the	geographically	disenfranchised	may	not	be	in	a	position
to	make	the	investment	on	their	own	behalf.	We	should	expect	heated	debate
about	whether	the	government	should	subsidize	connections	to	rural	areas,	or
impose	regulations	that	cause	urban	users	to	subsidize	rural	ones.	The
precedent	for	this	is	a	doctrine	known	as	"universal	service"	which	was
created	to	subsidize	rural	mail,	phone,	and	electrical	services	in	the	United
States.	It	dictates	a	single	price	for	the	delivery	of	a	letter,	a	phone	call,	or
electrical	power	regardless	of	where	you	live.	It	applies	even	though	it	is

more	expensive	to	deliver	services	in	rural	areas,	where	homes	and	businesses
are	farther	apart	than	in	areas	of	concentrated	population.
There	was	no	equivalent	policy	for	the	delivery	of	newspapers	or	radio	or
television	reception.	Nonetheless,	these	services	are	widely	available,	so
clearly	under	some	circumstances	government	intervention	isn't	necessary	to
ensure	high	availability.	The	U.S.	Postal	Service	was	founded	as	part	of	the
government	on	the	assumption	that	that	was	the	only	way	to	provide	truly
universal	service.	UPS	and	Federal	Express	might	disagree	on	this	point,
however,	because	they	have	managed	to	provide	broad	coverage	and	make
money.	The	debate	as	to	whether,	or	to	what	degree,	government	needs	to	be
involved	to	guarantee	broad	access	to	the	information	highway	is	certain	to
rage	on	for	many	years.
The	highway	will	let	those	who	live	in	remote	places	consult,	collaborate,	and
be	involved	with	the	rest	of	the	world.	Because	many	people	will	find	the
combination	of	rural	lifestyle	and	urban	information	attractive,	network
companies	will	have	an	incentive	to	run	fiber-optic	lines	to	high-income
remote	areas.	It	is	likely	that	some	states,	or	communities,	or	even	private	real
estate	developers	will	promote	their	areas	by	providing	great	connectivity.
This	will	lead	to	what	one	might	call	the	"Aspen-ization"	of	parts	of	the
country.	Interesting	rural	communities	with	high	marks	for	quality	of	life	will
deliberately	set	out	to	attract	a	new	class	of	sophisticated	urban	citizen.	Taken
as	a	whole,	urban	areas	will	tend	to	get	their	connections	before	rural	ones.
The	highway	will	spread	information	and	opportunity	across	borders	to
developing	nations,	too.	Cheap	global	communications	can	bring	people
anywhere	into	the	mainstream	of	the	world	economy.	An	English-speaking
Ph.D.	in	China	will	be	able	to	bid	against	colleagues	in	London	for	consulting
work.	Knowledge	workers	in	industrialized	countries	will,	in	a	sense,	face
new	competition—just	as	some	manufacturing	workers	in	industrialized
countries	have	experienced	competition	from	developing	nations	over	the	past
decade.	This	will	make	the	information	highway	a	powerful	force	for
international	trade	in	intellectual	goods	and	services,	just	as	the	availability	of
relatively	inexpensive	air	cargo	and	containerized	shipping	helped	propel
international	trade	in	physical	goods.
The	net	effect	will	be	a	wealthier	world,	which	should	be	stabilizing.
Developed	nations,	and	workers	in	those	nations,	are	likely	to	maintain	a
sizable	economic	lead.	However,	the	gap	between	the	have	and	have-not
nations	will	diminish.	Starting	out	behind	is	sometimes	an	advantage.	It	lets
those	who	adopt	late	skip	steps,	and	avoid	the	mistakes	of	the	trailblazers.

Some	countries	will	never	have	industrialization.	They	will	move	directly	into
the	Information	Age.	Europe	didn't	adopt	television	until	several	years	after
the	United	States.	The	result	was	higher	picture
quality,	because	by	the	time	Europe	set	its	standard	a	better	choice	was
available.	As	a	result,	Europeans	have	enjoyed	better-looking	television
pictures	for	decades.
Telephone	systems	are	another	example	of	how	starting	late	can	provide	an
advantage.	In	Africa,	China,	and	other	parts	of	the	developing	world,	many
citizens	who	have	phones	use	cellular	instruments.	Cellular	telephone	service
is	spreading	rapidly	in	Asia,	Latin	America,	and	other	developing	regions,
because	it	does	not	require	that	copper	wires	be	strung.	Many	people	in	the
cellular	industry	predict	that	improvements	in	technology	will	mean	that	these
areas	may	never	get	a	conventional	copper	wire-based	telephone	system.
These	countries	will	never	have	to	cut	down	a	million	trees	for	telephone
poles	or	string	a	hundred	thousand	miles	of	telephone	lines	only	to	rip	them
all	down	and	bury	the	entire	network.	The	wireless	telephone	system	will	be
their	first	telephone	system.	They	will	get	increasingly	better	cellular	systems
wherever	they	can't	afford	a	full	broadband	connection.
The	presence	of	advanced	communications	systems	promises	to	make	nations
more	alike	and	reduce	the	importance	of	national	boundaries.	The	fax
machine,	the	portable	videocamera,	and	Cable	News	Network	are	among	the
forces	that	brought	about	the	end	of	communist	regimes	and	the	Cold	War,
because	they	allowed	news	to	pass	both	ways	through	what	was	called	the
Iron	Curtain.
Now,	commercial	satellite	broadcasts	to	nations	such	as	China	and	Iran	offer
citizens	glimpses	of	the	outside	world	that	are	not	necessarily	sanctioned	by
their	governments.	This	new	access	to	information	can	draw	people	together
by	increasing	their	understanding	of	other	cultures.	Some	believe	it	will	cause
discontent	and	worse,	a	"Revolution	of	Expectations,"	when	disenfranchised
people	get	enough	data	a======================================================== han	Traf-O-Data:	the	Altair	8800	("Altair"	was	a	destination	in	a	Star	Trek
episode).	It	was	being	sold	for	$397	as	a	kit.	When	it	was	assembled,	it	had	no
keyboard	or	display.	It	had	sixteen	address	switches	to	direct	commands	and
sixteen	lights.	You	could	get	the	little	lights	on	the	front	panel	to	blink,	but
that	was	about	all.	Part	of	the	problem	was	that	the	Altair	8800	lacked
software.	It	couldn't	be	programmed,	which	made	it	more	a	novelty	than	a
tool.
What	the	Altair	did	have	was	an	Intel	8080	microprocessor	chip	as	its	brain.
When	we	saw	that,	panic	set	in.	"Oh	no!	It's	happening	without	us!	People	are
going	to	go	write	real	software	for	this	chip"	I	was	sure	it	would	happen
sooner	rather	than	later,	and	I	wanted	to	be	involved	from	the	beginning.	The
chance	to	get	in	on	the	first	stages	of	the	PC	revolution	seemed	the
opportunity	of	a	lifetime,	and	I	seized	it.
Twenty	years	later	I	feel	the	same	way	about	what's	going	on	now.	Then	I	was
afraid	others	would	have	the	same	vision	we	did;	today	I	know	thousands	do.
The	legacy	of	the	earlier	revolution	is	that	50	million	PCs	are	sold	each	year
worldwide,	and	that	fortunes	have	been	completely	reordered	in	the	computer
industry.	There	have	been	plenty	of	winners	and	losers.	This	time	lots	of
companies	are	rushing	to	get	in	early	while	change	is	taking	place	and	there
are	endless	opportunities.

When	we	look	back	at	the	last	twenty	years	it	is	obvious	that	a	number	of
large	companies	were	so	set	in	their	ways	that	they	did	not	adapt	properly	and
lost	out	as	a	result.	Twenty	years	from	now	we'll	look	back	and	see	the	same
pattern.	I	know	that	as	I	write	this	there's	at	least	one	young	person	out	there
who	will	create	a	major	new	company,	convinced	that	his	or	her	insight	into
the	communications	revolution	is	the	right	one.	Thousands	of	innovative
companies	will	be	founded	to	exploit	the	coming	changes.
In	1975,	when	Paul	and	I	naively	decided	to	start	a	company,	we	were	acting
like	characters	in	all	those	Judy	Garland	and	Mickey	Rooney	movies	who
crowed,	"We'll	put	on	a	show	in	the	barn!"	There	was	no	time	to	waste.	Our
first	project	was	to	create	BASIC	for	the	little	computer.
We	had	to	squeeze	a	lot	of	capability	into	the	computer's	small	memory.	The
typical	Altair	had	about	4,000	characters	of	memory.	Today	most	personal
computers	have	4	or	8	million	characters	of	memory.	Our	task	was	further
complicated	because	we	didn't	actually	own	an	Altair,	and	had	never	even
seen	one.	That	didn't	really	matter	because	what	we	were	really	interested	in
was	the	new	Intel	8080	microprocessor	chip,	and	we'd	never	seen	that,	either.
Undaunted,	Paul	studied	a	manual	for	the	chip,	then	wrote	a	program	that
made	a	big	computer	at	Harvard	mimic	the	little	Altair.	This	was	like	having	a
whole	orchestra	available	and	using	it	to	play	a	simple	duet,	but	it	worked.
Writing	good	software	requires	a	lot	of	concentration,	and	writing	BASIC	for
the	Altair	was	exhausting.	Sometimes	I	rock	back	and	forth	or	pace	when	I'm
thinking,	because	it	helps	me	focus	on	a	single	idea	and	exclude	distractions.	I
did	a	lot	of	rocking	and	pacing	in	my	dorm	room	the	winter	of	1975.	Paul	and
I	didn't	sleep	much	and	lost	track	of	night	and	day.	When	I	did	fall	asleep,	it
was	often	at	my	desk	or	on	the	floor.	Some	days	I	didn't	eat	or	see	anyone.
But	after	five	weeks,	our	BASIC	was	written—and	the	world's	first
microcomputer	software	company	was	born.	In	time	we	named	it
"Microsoft."
We	knew	getting	a	company	started	would	mean	sacrifice.	But	we	also
realized	we	had	to	do	it	then	or	forever	lose	the	opportunity	to	make	it	in
microcomputer	software.	In	the	spring	of	1975,	Paul	quit	his	programming
job	and	I	decided	to	go	on	leave	from	Harvard.
I	talked	it	over	with	my	parents,	both	of	whom	were	pretty	savvy	about
business.	They	saw	how	much	I	wanted	to	try	starting	a	software	company
and	they	were	supportive.	My	plan	was	to	take	time	off,	start	the	company,
and	then	go	back	later	and	finish	college.	I	never	really	made	a	conscious

decision	to	forgo	a	degree.	Technically,	I'm	just	on	a	really	long	leave.	Unlike
some	students,	I	loved	college.	I	thought	it	was	fun	to	sit	around	and	talk	with
so	many	smart	people	my	own	age.	However,	I	felt	the	window	of
opportunity	to	start	a	software	company	might	not	open	again.	So	I	dove	into
the	world	of	business	when	I	was	nineteen	years	old.
From	the	start,	Paul	and	I	funded	everything	ourselves.	Each	of	us	had	saved
some	money.	Paul	had	been	well	paid	at	Honeywell,	and	some	of	the	money	I
had	came	from	late-night	poker	games	in	the	dorm.	Fortunately,	our	company
didn't	require	massive	funding.
People	often	ask	me	to	explain	Microsoft's	success.	They	want	to	know	the
secret	of	getting	from	a	two-man,	shoestring	operation	to	a	company	with
17,000	employees	and	more	than	$6	billion	a	year	in	sales.	Of	course,	there	is
no	simple	answer,	and	luck	played	a	role,	but	I	think	the	most	important
element	was	our	original	vision.
We	glimpsed	what	lay	beyond	that	Intel	8080	chip,	and	then	acted	on	it.	We
asked,	"What	if	computing	were	nearly	free?"	We	believed	there	would	be
computers	everywhere	because	of	cheap	computing	power	and	great	new
software	that	would	take	advantage	of	it.	We	set	up	shop	betting	on	the	former
and	producing	the	latter	when	no	one	else	was.	Our	initial	insight	made
everything	else	a	bit	easier.	We	were	in	the	right	place	at	the	right	time.	We
got	there	first	and	our	early	success	gave	us	the	chance	to	hire	many	smart
people.	We	built	a	worldwide	sales	force	and	used	the	revenue	it	generated	to
fund	new	products.	From	the	beginning	we	set	off	down	a	road	that	was
headed	in	the	right	direction.
Now	there	is	a	new	horizon,	and	the	relevant	question	is,	"What	if
communicating	were	almost	free?"	The	idea	of	interconnecting	all	homes	and
offices	to	a	high-speed	network	has	ignited	this	nation's	imagination	as
nothing	has	since	the	space	program.	And	not	just	this	nation's—imaginations
around	the	world	have	caught	fire.	Thousands	of	companies	are	committed	to
the	same	vision,	so	individual	focus,	understanding	of	the	intermediate	steps,
and	execution	will	determine	their	relative	successes.
I	spend	a	good	deal	of	time	thinking	about	business	because	I	enjoy	my	work
so	much.	Today,	a	lot	of	my	thoughts	are	about	the	highway.	Twenty	years
ago,	when	I	was	thinking	about	the	future	of	microchip	personal	computers,	I
couldn't	be	certain	where	they	were	leading	me	either.	I	kept	to	my	course,
however,	and	had	confidence	we	were	moving	in	the	right	direction	to	be
where	we	wanted	to	be	when	everything	became	clear.	There's	a	lot	more	at

stake	now,	but	I	feel	that	same	way	again.	It's	nerve-wracking,	but
exhilarating	too.
All	sorts	of	individuals	and	companies	are	betting	their	futures	on	building	the
elements	that	will	make	the	information	highway	a	reality.	At	Microsoft,
we're	working	hard	to	figure	out	how	to	evolve	from	where	we	are	today	to
the	point	where	we	can	unleash	the	full	potential	of	the	new	advances	in
technology.	These	are	exciting	times,	not	only	for	the	companies	involved	but
for	everyone	who	will	realize	the	benefits	of	this	revolution.

2
THE	BEGINNING	OF
THE	INFORMATION	AGE
The	first	time	I	heard	the	term	"Information	Age"	I	was	tantalized.	I	knew
about	the	Iron	Age	and	the	Bronze	Age,	periods	of	history	named	for	the	new
materials	men	used	to	make	their	tools	and	weapons.	Those	were	specific
eras.	Then	I	read	academics	predicting	that	countries	will	be	fighting	over	the
control	of	information,	not	natural	resources.	This	sounded	intriguing	too,	but
what	did	they	mean	by	information?
The	claim	that	information	would	define	the	future	reminded	me	of	the
famous	party	scene	in	the	1967	movie	The	Graduate.	A	businessman
buttonholes	Benjamin,	the	college	graduate	played	by	Dustin	Hoffman,	and
offers	him	a	single	word	of	unsolicited	career	advice:	"Plastics."	I	wondered
whether,	if	the	scene	had	been	written	a	few	decades	later,	the	businessman's
advice	would	have	been:	"One	word,	Benjamin.	'Information.'	"
I	imagined	nonsensical	conversations	around	a	future	office	watercooler:
"How	much	information	do	you	have?"	"Switzerland	is	a	great	country
because	of	all	the	information	they	have	there!"	"I	hear	the	Information	Price
Index	is	going	up!"
It	sounds	nonsensical	because	information	isn't	as	tangible	or	measurable	as
the	materials	that	defined	previous	ages,	but	information	has	become
increasingly	important	to	us.	The	information	revolution	is	just	beginning.
The	cost	of	communications	will	drop	as	precipitously	as	the	cost	of
computing	already	has.	When	it	gets	low	enough	and	is	combined	with	other
advances	in	technology,	"information	highway"	will	no	longer	be	just	a	phrase
for	eager	executives	and	excited	politicians.	It	will	be	as	real	and	as	far-
reaching	as	"electricity."	To	understand	why	information	is	going	to	be	so
central,	it's	important	to	know	how	technology	is	changing	the	ways	we
handle	information.
The	majority	of	this	chapter	is	devoted	to	such	an	explanation.	The	material
that	follows	is	to	give	less-informed	readers	without	a	background	in
computer	principles	and	history	sufficient	information	to	enjoy	the	rest	of	the
material	in	the	book.	If	you	understand	how	digital	computers	work,	you

probably	already	know	the	material	cold,	so	feel	free	to	skip	to	chapter	3.
The	most	fundamental	difference	we'll	see	in	future	information	is	that	almost
all	of	it	will	be	digital.	Whole	printed	libraries	are	already	being	scanned	and
stored	as	electronic	data	on	disks	and	CD-ROMs.	Newspapers	and	magazines
are	now	often	completely	composed	in	electronic	form	and	printed	on	paper
as	a	convenience	for	distribution.	The	electronic	information	is	stored
permanently—or	for	as	long	as	anyone	wants	it—in	computer	databases:
giant	banks	of	journalistic	data	accessible	through	on-line	services.
Photographs,	films,	and	videos	are	all	being	converted	into	digital
information.	Every	year,	better	methods	are	being	devised	to	quantify
information	and	distil======================================================== itches	to	handle	ISDN
with	very	little	idea	of	how	it	would	be	used.	The	good	news	is	that	the	PC
will	drive	explosive	demand.	An	add-in	card	for	a	PC	to	support	ISDN	costs
$500	in	1995,	but	the	price	should	drop	to	less	than	$200	over	the	next	few
years.	The	line	costs	vary	by	location	but	are	generally	about	$50	per	month
in	the	United	States.	I	expect	this	will	drop	to	less	than	$20,	not	much	more
than	a	regular	phone	connection.	We	are	among	companies	working	to
convince	phone	companies	all	over	the	world	to	lower	these	charges	in	order
to	encourage	PC	owners	to	connect,	using	ISDN.
Cable	companies	have	interim	technologies	and	strategies	of	their	own.	They
want	to	use	their	existing	coaxial	cable	networks	to	compete	with	the	phone
companies	to	provide	local	telephone	service.	They	have	also	already
demonstrated	that	special	cable	modems	can	connect	personal	computers	to
cable	networks.	This	allows	cable	companies	to	offer	bandwidth	somewhat
greater	than	ISDN's.
For	cable	companies	another	interim	step	will	be	to	increase	the	number	of
broadcast	channels	they	carry	five-	to	tenfold.	They'll	do	it	by	using	digital-
compression	technology	to	squeeze	more	channels	onto	existing	cables.

This	so-called	500-channel	approach—which	often	will	really	only	have	150
channels—makes	possible	near-video-on-demand,	although	only	for	a	limited
number	of	television	shows	and	movies.	You	would	choose	from	a	list	on-
screen	rather	than	selecting	a	numbered	channel.	A	popular	movie	might	run
on	twenty	of	the	channels,	with	the	starting	time	staggered	at	five-minute
intervals	so	that	you	could	begin	watching	it	within	five	minutes	of	whenever
you	wanted.	You	would	choose	from	among	the	available	starting	times	for
movies	and	television	programs,	and	the	set-top	box	would	switch	to	the
appropriate	channel.	The	half-hour-long	CNN	Headline	News	might	be
offered	on	six	channels	instead	of	one,	with	the	6:00	P.M.	broadcast	shown
again	at	6:05,	6:10,	6:15,	6:20,	and	6:25.	There	would	be	a	new,	live
broadcast	every	half	hour,	just	as	there	is	now.	Five	hundred	channels	will	get
used	up	pretty	fast	this	way.
The	cable	companies	are	under	pressure	to	add	channels	partly	as	a	reaction	to
competition.	Direct-broadcast	satellites	such	as	Hughes	Electronics'
DIRECTV	are	already	beaming	hundreds	of	channels	directly	into	homes.
Cable	companies	want	to	increase	their	channel	lineup	rapidly	to	avoid	losing
customers.	If	the	only	reason	for	the	information	highway	were	to	deliver	a
limited	number	of	movies,	then	a	500-channel	system	would	be	adequate.
A	500-channel	system	will	still	be	mostly	synchronous,	will	limit	your
choices,	and	will	provide	only	a	low-bandwidth	back	channel,	at	best.	A
"back	channel"	is	an	information	path	dedicated	to	carrying	instructions	and
other	information	from	a	consumer's	information	appliance	back	up	the	cable
to	the	network.	A	back	channel	on	a	500-channel	system	might	let	you	use
your	television	set-top	box	to	order	products	or	programs,	respond	to	polls	or
game-show	questions,	and	participate	in	certain	kinds	of	multiplayer	games.
But	a	low-bandwidth	back	channel	can't	offer	the	full	flexibility	and
interactivity	the	most	interesting	applications	will	require.	It	won't	let	you
send	a	video	of	your	children	to	their	grandparents,	or	play	truly	interactive
games.
Cable	and	phone	companies	around	the	world	will	progress	along	four
parallel	paths.	First,	each	will	be	going	after	the	others'	business.	Cable
companies	will	offer	telephone	service,	and	phone	companies	will	offer	video
services,	including	television.	Second,	both	systems	will	be	providing	better
ways	to	connect	PCs	with	either	ISDN	or	cable	modems.	Third,	both	will	be
converting	to	digital	technology	in	order	to	provide	more	television	channels
and	higher-quality	signals.	Fourth,	both	will	be	conducting	trials	of	broadband
systems	connected	to	television	sets	and	PCs.	Each	of	the	four	strategies	will
motivate	investment	in	digital	network	capacity.	There	will	be	intense

competition	between	the	telephone	companies	and	cable	television	networks
to	be	the	first	network	provider	in	a	neighborhood.
Eventually,	the	Internet	and	the	other	transitional	technologies	will	be
subsumed	within	the	real	information	highway.	The	highway	will	combine	the
best	qualities	of	both	the	telephone	and	the	cable	network	systems:	Like	the
telephone	network,	it	will	offer	private	connections	so	that	everyone	using	the
network	can	pursue	his	or	her	own	interests,	on	his	or	her	own	schedule.	It
will	also	be	fully	two-way	like	the	telephone	network,	so	that	rich	forms	of
interaction	are	possible.	Like	the	cable	television	network,	it	will	be	high
capacity,	so	there	will	be	sufficient	bandwidth	to	allow	multiple	televisions	or
personal	computers	in	a	single	household	to	connect	simultaneously	to
different	video	programs	or	sources	of	information.
Most	of	the	wires	connecting	servers	with	one	another,	and	with	the
neighborhoods	of	the	world,	will	be	made	of	incredibly	clear	fiber-optic
cable,	the	"asphalt"	of	the	information	highway.	All	of	the	major	long-
distance	trunk	lines	that	carry	telephone	calls	within	the	United	States	today
use	fiber,	but	the	lines	that	connect	our	homes	to	these	data	thoroughfares	are
still	copper	wire.	Telephone	companies	will	replace	the	copper-wire,
microwave,	and	satellite	links	in	their	networks	with	fiber-optic	cable	so	they
will	have	the	bandwidth	to	carry	enough	bits	to	deliver	high-quality	video.
Cable	television	companies	will	increase	the	amount	of	fiber	they	use.	At	the
same	time	fiber	is	being	deployed,	telephone	and	cable	companies	will	be
incorporating	new	switches	into	their	networks	so	that	digital	video	signals
and	other	information	can	be	routed	from	any	point	to	any	other	point.	The
costs	of	upgrading	the	existing	networks	to	prepare	for	the	highway	will	be
less	than	a	quarter	of	what	they	would	be	to	run	new	wires	into	every	home.
You	can	think	of	a	fiber	trunk	as	being	like	the	foot-wide	water	main	that
carries	water	up	your	street.	It	doesn't	come	directly	to	your	house;	instead,	a
smaller	pipe	at	the	curb	connects	the	main	to	your	home.	At	first,	the	fiber
will	probably	run	only	to	neighborhood	distribution	points	and	the	signals	will
be	carried	from	the	neighborhood	fiber	on	either	the	coaxial	cable	that	brings
you	cable	television	or	on	the	"twisted-pair"	copper-wire	connections	that
provide	telephone	service.	Eventually,	though,	fiber	connections	may	run
directly	into	your	home	if	you	use	lots	of	data.
Switches	are	the	sophisticated	computers	that	shunt	streams	of	data	from	one
track	to	another,	like	boxcars	in	a	train	yard.	Millions	of	simultaneous	streams
of	communications	will	flow	on	large	networks,	and	no	matter	how	many
intermediate	waypoints	are	required,	all	the	different	bits	of	information	will

have	to	be	guided	to	their	destinations,	with	an	assurance	they	will	arrive	in
the	right	places	and	on	time.	To	grasp	how	big	the	task	will	be	in	the	era	of
the	information	highway,	imagine	billions	of	boxcars	that	have	to	be	routed
along	railroad	tracks	through	vast	systems	of	switches	and	arrive	at	their
destinations	on	schedule.	Because	the	cars	are	attached	to	one	another,
switchyards	get	clogged	waiting	for	long,	multicar	trains	to	pass	through.
There	would	be	fewer	tie-ups	if	each	boxcar	could	travel	independently	and
find	its	own	way	through	the	switches,	then	reassemble	as	a	train	at	the
destination.
Information	traversing	the	information	highway	will	be	broken	up	into	tiny
packets,	and	each	packet	will	be	routed	independently	through	the	network,
the	way	individual	automobiles	navigate	roads.	When	you	order	a	movie,	it
will	be	broken	into	millions	of	tiny	pieces,	each	one	of	which	will	find	its	way
through	the	network	to	your	television.
This	routing	of	packets	will	be	accomplished	through	the	use	of	a
communications	protocol	known	as	asynchronous	transfer	mode,	or	ATM
(not	to	be	confused	with	"automatic	teller	machine").	It	will	be	one	of	the
building	blocks	of	the	information	highway.	Phone	companies	around	the
world	are	already	beginning	to	rely	on	ATM,	because	it	takes	great	advantage
of	fiber's	amazing	bandwidth.	One	strength	of	ATM	is	its	ability	to	guarantee
timely	delivery	of	information.	ATM	breaks	each	digital	stream	into	uniform
packets,	each	of	which	contains	48	bytes	of	the	information	to	be	transported
and	5	bytes	of	control	information	that	allow	the	highway's	switches	to	route
the	packets	very	quickly	to	their	destinations.	At	their	destinations	the	packets
are	recombined	into	a	stream.
ATM	delivers	streams	of	information	at	very	high	speeds—up	to	155	million
bits	per	second	at	first,	later	jumping	to	622	million	bits	per	second	and
eventually	to	2	billion	bits	per	second.	This	technology	will	make	it	possible
to	send	video	as	easily	as	voice	calls,	and	at	very	low	cost.	Just	as	advances	in
chip	technology	have	driven	down	the	cost	of	computing,	ATM,	because	it
will	also	be	able	to	carry	enormous	numbers	of	old-fashioned	voice	calls,	will
drive	down	the	cost	of	long-distance	phone	calls.
High-bandwidth	cable	connections	will	link	most	information	appliances	to
the	highway,	but	some	devices	will	connect	wirelessly.	We	already	use	a
number	of	wireless	communication	devices—cellular	telephones,	pagers,	and
consumer-electronics	remote	controls.	They	send	radio	signals	and	allow	us
mobility,	but	the	bandwidth	is	limited.	The	wireless	networks	of	the	future
will	be	faster,	but	unless	there	is	a	major	breakthrough,	wired	networks	will

have	far	greater	bandwidth.	Mobile	devices	will	be	able	to	send	and	receive
messages,	but	it	will	be	expensive	and	unusual	to	use	them	to	receive	an
individual	video	stream.
The	wireless	networks	that	will	allow	us	to	communicate	when	we	are	mobile
will	grow	out	of	today's	cellular-telephone	systems	and	the	new	alternative
wireless	phone	service,	called	PCS.	When	you	are	on	the	road	and	want
information	from	your	home	or	office	computer,	your	portable	information
appliance======================================================== rted	by	posts	of	Douglas	fir.	The	house	has	lots	of	exposed
horizontal	beams	and	vertical	supports.	You'll	have	a	great	view	of	the	lake.
My	hope	is	that	the	view	and	the	Douglas	fir,	rather	than	the	electronic	pin,

will	be	what	interest	you	most	as	you	descend	toward	the	ground	floor.	Most
of	the	wood	came	from	an	eighty-year-old	Weyerhaeuser	lumber	mill	that	was
being	torn	down	out	on	the	Columbia	River.	This	wood,	harvested	nearly	a
hundred	years	ago,	came	from	trees	that	were	as	much	as	350	feet	tall,
between	8	and	15	feet	in	diameter.	Douglas	fir	is	one	of	the	strongest	woods
in	the	world	for	its	weight.	Unfortunately,	new-growth	Douglas	fir	tends	to
split	if	you	try	to	mill	it	into	beams,	because	the	grain	is	not	as	tight	in	a
seventy-year-old	tree	as	it	is	in	a	five-hundred-year-old	one.	Almost	all	of	the
old-growth	Douglas	fir	has	been	harvested	now,	and	any	that	remains	should
be	preserved.	I	was	lucky	to	find	old-growth	timbers	that	could	be	reused.
The	fir	beams	support	the	two	floors	of	private	living	spaces	you'll	be
descending	past.	Privacy	is	important.	I	want	a	house	that	will	still	feel	like
home	even	when	guests	are	enjoying	other	parts	of	it.
At	the	bottom	of	the	stairs,	the	theater	will	be	on	the	right,	and	to	the	left,	on
the	south	side,	will	be	the	reception	hall.	As	you	step	into	the	reception	hall,
on	your	right	will	be	a	series	of	sliding	glass	doors	that	open	onto	a	terrace
leading	to	the	lake.	Recessed	into	the	east	wall	will	be	twenty-four	video
monitors,	each	with	a	40-inch	picture	tube,	stacked	four	high	and	six	across.
These	monitors	will	work	cooperatively	to	display	large	images	for	artistic,
entertainment,	or	business	purposes.	I	had	hoped	that	when	the	monitors
weren't	in	use	they	could	literally	disappear	into	the	woodwork.	I	wanted	the
screens	to	display	woodgrain	patterns	that	matched	their	surroundings.
Unfortunately	I	could	never	achieve	anything	convincing	with	current
technology,	because	a	monitor	emits	light	while	real	wood	reflects	it.	So	I
settled	for	having	the	monitors	disappear	behind	wood	panels	when	they're
not	in	use.
The	electronic	pin	you	wear	will	tell	the	house	who	and	where	you	are,	and
the	house	will	use	this	information	to	try	to	meet	and	even	anticipate	your
needs—all	as	unobtrusively	as	possible.	Someday,	instead	of	needing	the	pin,
it	might	be	possible	to	have	a	camera	system	with	visual-recognition
capabilities,	but	that's	beyond	current	technology.	When	it's	dark	outside,	the
pin	will	cause	a	moving	zone	of	light	to	accompany	you	through	the	house.
Unoccupied	rooms	will	be	unlit.	As	you	walk	down	a	hallway,	you	might	not
notice	the	lights	ahead	of	you	gradually	coming	up	to	full	brightness	and	the
lights	behind	you	fading.	Music	will	move	with	you,	too.	It	will	seem	to	be
everywhere,	although,	in	fact,	other	people	in	the	house	will	be	hearing
entirely	different	music	or	nothing	at	all.	A	movie	or	the	news	will	be	able	to
follow	you	around	the	house,	too.	If	you	get	a	phone	call,	only	the	handset

nearest	you	will	ring.
Computer	rendering	of	the	Gateses'	future	home,	showing	the	staircase	and
formal	dining	room
You	won't	be	confronted	by	the	technology,	but	it	will	be	readily	and	easily
available.	Handheld	remote	controls	will	put	you	in	charge	of	your	immediate
environment	and	of	the	house's	entertainment	system.	The	remote	will	extend
the	capabilities	of	the	pin.	It	will	not	only	let	the	house	identify	and	locate
you,	it	will	also	allow	you	to	give	instructions.	You'll	use	the	controls	to	tell
the	monitors	in	a	room	to	become	visible	and	what	to	display.	You'll	be	able
to	choose	from	among	thousands	of	pictures,	recordings,	movies,	and
television	programs,	and	you'll	have	all	sorts	of	options	available	for	selecting
information.
A	console,	which	will	be	the	equivalent	of	a	keyboard	that	lets	you	give	very
specific	instructions,	will	be	discreetly	visible	in	each	room.	I	want	consoles
that	are	noticeable	to	those	who	need	them,	but	that	don't	invite	attention.	A
characteristic,	easy-to-identify	feature	will	alert	the	user	to	the	identity	and
whereabouts	of	the	consoles.	The	telephone	has	already	made	this	transition.
It	doesn't	attract	particular	attention	to	itself;	most	of	us	are	comfortable
putting	a	nondescript	phone	on	an	end	table.
Every	computerized	system	should	be	made	so	simple	and	natural	to	use	that
people	don't	give	it	a	second	thought.	But	simple	is	difficult.	Still,	computers
get	easier	to	use	every	year,	and	trial-and-error	in	my	house	will	help	us	learn
how	to	create	a	really	simple	system.	You	will	be	able	to	be	indirect	about
your	instructions	and	requests.	For	example,	you	won't	have	to	ask	for	a	song
by	name.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	the	house	to	play	the	latest	hits,	or	songs	by
a	particular	artist,	or	songs	that	were	performed	at	Woodstock,	or	music
composed	in	eighteenth-century	Vienna,	or	songs	with	the	word	"yellow"	in
their	titles.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	for	songs	that	you	have	categorized	with	a
certain	adjective,	or	songs	that	haven't	been	played	before	when	a	particular

person	was	visiting	the	house.	I	might	program	classical	music	as	background
for	contemplating	and	something	more	modern	and	energetic	to	play	while
I'm	exercising.	If	you	want	to	watch	the	movie	that	won	the	1957	Academy
Award	for	best	picture,	you	can	ask	for	it	that	way—and	see	The	Bridge	on
the	River	Kwai.	You	could	find	the	same	movie	by	asking	for	films	starring
Alec	Guinness	or	William	Holden	or	ones	about	prison	camps.
Prototype	of	a	home	control	console
If	you're	planning	to	visit	Hong	Kong	soon,	you	might	ask	the	screen	in	your
room	to	show	you	pictures	of	the	city.	It	will	seem	to	you	as	if	the
photographs	are	displayed	everywhere,	although	actually	the	images	will
materialize	on	the	walls	of	rooms	just	before	you	walk	in	and	vanish	after	you
leave.	If	you	and	I	are	enjoying	different	things	and	one	of	us	walks	into	a
room	where	the	other	is	sitting,	the	house	will	follow	predetermined	rules
about	what	to	do.	For	example,	the	house	might	continue	the	audio	and	visual
imagery	for	the	person	who	was	in	the	room	first,	or	it	might	change
programming	to	something	it	knows	both	of	us	like.
A	house	that	tracks	its	occupants	in	order	to	meet	their	particular	needs
combines	two	traditions.	The	first	is	the	tradition	of	unobtrusive	service,	and
the	other	is	that	an	object	we	carry	entitles	us	to	be	treated	in	a	certain	way.
You're	already	used	to	the	idea	that	an	object	can	authenticate	you.	It	can
inform	people	or	machinery	that	you	have	permission	to	do	something	such	as
open	a	locked	door,	get	on	an	airplane,	or	use	a	specific	line	of	credit—yours
—to	make	a	purchase.	Keys,	electronic	entry	cards,	driver's	licenses,
passports,	name	badges,	credit	cards,	and	tickets	are	all	forms	of
authentication.	If	I	give	you	the	key	to	my	car,	the	car	allows	you	to	get	in,
start	the	engine,	and	drive	away.	You	might	say	that	the	car	trusts	you	because
you	carry	its	keys.	If	I	give	a	parking	attendant	a	key	that	fits	my	automobile's
ignition	but	not	its	trunk,	the	car	lets	him	drive	but	not	open	the	trunk.	It's	no
different	with	my	house,	which	will	make	various	amenities	available	to	you
based	on	the	electronic	key	you	carry.

None	of	this	is	really	so	radical.	Some	visionaries	are	predicting	that	within
the	next	ten	years	there	will	be	lots	of	robots	wandering	around	helping	us	out
with	various	household	chores.	I	am	certainly	not	preparing	for	that,	because	I
think	it	will	be	many	decades	before	robots	are	practical.	The	only	ones	I
expect	to	see	in	widespread	use	soon	are	intelligent	toys.	Kids	will	be	able	to
program	them	to	respond	to	different	situations	and	even	to	speak	in	the
voices	of	favorite	characters.	These	toy	robots	will	be	able	to	be	programmed
in	a	limited	number	of	ways.	They	will	have	limited	vision,	know	the	distance
to	the	wall	in	each	direction,	the	time,	the	lighting	conditions,	and	accept
limited	speech	input.	I	think	it	would	have	been	cool	to	have	had	a	toy-size
car	I	could	have	talked	to	and	programmed	to	respond	to	my	instructions.
Other	than	toys,	the	other	major	uses	for	robotic	devices	I	see	are	for	military
applications.	The	reason	I	doubt	intelligent	robots	will	provide	much	help	in
actual	housework	in	the	foreseeable	future	is	that	it	takes	a	great	deal	of	visual
intelligence	and	dexterity	to	prepare	food	or	change	diapers.	Pool	cleaning,
lawn	mowing,	and	perhaps	even	vacuum	cleaning	can	be	done	with	a
relatively	dumb	system,	but	once	we	get	beyond	tasks	where	you	just	push
something	around,	it	is	very	hard	to	design	a	machine	that	would	be	able	to
recognize	and	respond	to	all	of	the	contingencies	that	come	along.
The	systems	I	am	building	into	the	house	are	designed	to	make	it	easier	to	live
in,	but	I	won't	know	for	sure	if	they	are	worthwhile	until	I	move	in.	I'm
experimenting	and	learning	all	the	time.	The	design	team	used	my	guest
cottage,	which	was	built	before	the	house,	as	a	sort	of	test	laboratory	for	home
instrumentation.	Because	some	people	like	the	temperature	warmer	than
others	do,	the	cottage's	software	sets	its	temperature	in	reaction	to	who	is
inside,	and	the	time	of	day.	The	cottage	knows	to	make	the	temperature	toasty
on	a	cold	morning	before	a	guest	is	out	of	bed.	In	the	evening,	when	it's	dark
outside,	the	cottage's	lights	dim	if	a	television	is	on.	If	someone	is	in	the
cottage	during	the	day,	the	cottage	matches	its	inside	brightness	to	that	of	the
outdoors.	Of	course	the	occupant	can	always	give	explicit	directions	to
overrule	the	settings.
This	sort	of	instrumentation	can	provide	significant	energy	savings.	A	number
of	electric	utilities	are	testing	a	network	to	monitor	the	use	of	energy	in
individual	homes.	This	would	end	the	expensive	practice	of	having	meter
readers	come	to	each	home	every	month	or	two,	but	more	important,
computers	in	the	home	and	at	the	utility	company	will	be	able	to	manage	the
minute-by-minute	demand	for	power	at	various	times	of	the	day.	Energy-
demand	management	can	save	a	lot======================================================== 's	Moore	School	of	Electrical	Engineering	began	developing
an	electronic	computational	machine,	the	Electronic	Numerical	Integrator
And	Calculator,	called	ENIAC.	Its	purpose	was	to	speed	up	the	calculations
for	artillery-aiming	tables.	ENIAC	was	more	like	an	electronic	calculator	than
a	computer,	but	instead	of	representing	a	binary	number	with	on	and	off
settings	on	wheels	the	way	a	mechanical	calculator	did,	it	used	vacuum	tube
"switches."
Soldiers	assigned	by	the	army	to	the	huge	machine	wheeled	around	squeaking
grocery	carts	filled	with	vacuum	tubes.	When	one	burned	out,	ENIAC	shut
down	and	the	race	began	to	locate	and	replace	the	burned-out	tube.	One
explanation,	perhaps	somewhat	apocryphal,	for	why	the	tubes	had	to	be
replaced	so	often	was	that	their	heat	and	light	attracted	moths,	which	would
fly	into	the	huge	machine	and	cause	short	circuits.	If	this	is	true,	it	gives	new
meaning	to	the	term	"bugs"	for	the	little	glitches	that	can	plague	computer
hardware	or	software.
When	all	the	tubes	were	working,	a	staff	of	engineers	could	set	up	ENIAC	to
solve	a	problem	by	laboriously	plugging	in	6,000	cables	by	hand.	To	make	it
perform	another	function,	the	staff	had	to	reconfigure	the	cabling—every
time.	John	von	Neumann,	a	brilliant	Hungarian-born	American,	who	is	known
for	many	things,	including	the	development	of	game	theory	and	his
contributions	to	nuclear	weaponry,	is	credited	with	the	leading	role	in	figuring
out	a	way	around	this	problem.	He	created	the	paradigm	that	all	digital

computers	still	follow.	The	"von	Neumann	architecture,"	as	it	is	known	today,
is	based	on	principles	he	articulated	in	1945—including	the	principle	that	a
computer	could	avoid	cabling	changes	by	storing	instructions	in	its	memory.
As	soon	as	this	idea	was	put	into	practice,	the	modern	computer	was	born.
Today	the	brains	of	most	computers	are	descendants	of	the	microprocessor
Paul	Allen	and	I	were	so	knocked	out	by	in	the	seventies,	and	personal
computers	often	are	rated	according	to	how	many	bits	of	information	(one
switch	in	the	lighting	example)	their	microprocessor	can	process	at	a	time,	or
how	many	bytes	(a	cluster	of	eight	bits)	of	memory	or	disk-based	storage	they
have.	ENIAC	weighed	30	tons	and	filled	a	large	room.	Inside,	the
computational	pulses	raced	among	1,500	electro-mechanical	relays	and
flowed	through	17,000	vacuum	tubes.	Switching	it	on	consumed	150,000
watts	of	energy.	But	ENIAC	stored	only	the	equivalent	of	about	80	characters
of	information.
By	the	early	1960s,	transistors	had	supplanted	vacuum	tubes	in	consumer
electronics.	This	was	more	than	a	decade	after	the	discovery	at	Bell	Labs	that
a	tiny	sliver	of	silicon	could	do	the	same	job	as	a	vacuum	tube.	Like	vacuum
tubes,	transistors	act	as	electrical	switches,	but	they	require	significantly	less
power	to	operate	and	as	a	result	generate	much	less	heat	and	require	less
space.	Multiple	transistor	circuits	could	be	combined	onto	a	single	chip,
creating	an	integrated	circuit.	The	computer	chips	we	use	today	are	integrated
circuits	containing	the	equivalent	of	millions	of	transistors	packed	onto	less
than	a	square	inch	of	silicon.
In	a	1977	Scientific	American	article,	Bob	Noyce,	one	of	the	founders	of	Intel,
compared	the	$300	microprocessor	to	ENIAC,	the	moth-infested	mastodon
from	the	dawn	of	the	computer	age.	The	wee	microprocessor	was	not	only
more	powerful,	but	as	Noyce	noted,	"It	is	twenty	times	faster,	has	a	larger
memory,	is	thousands	of	times	more	reliable,	consumes	the	power	of	a
lightbulb	rather	than	that	of	a	locomotive,	occupies	1/30,000	the	volume	and
costs	1/10,000	as	much.	It	is	available	by	mail	order	or	at	your	local	hobby
shop."

1946:	A	view	inside	a	part	of	the	ENIAC	computer
Of	course,	the	1977	microprocessor	seems	like	a	toy	now.	And,	in	fact,	many
inexpensive	toys	contain	computer	chips	that	are	more	powerful	than	the
1970s	chips	that	started	the	microcomputer	revolution.	But	all	of	today's
computers,	whatever	their	size	or	power,	manipulate	information	stored	as
binary	numbers.
Binary	numbers	are	used	to	store	text	in	a	personal	computer,	music	on	a
compact	disc,	and	money	in	a	bank's	network	of	cash	machines.	Before
information	can	go	into	a	computer	it	has	to	be	converted	into	binary.
Machines,	digital	devices,	convert	the	information	back	into	its	original,
useful	form.	You	can	imagine	each	device	throwing	switches,	controlling	the
flow	of	electrons.	But	the	switches	involved,	which	are	usually	made	of
silicon,	are	extremely	small	and	can	be	thrown	by	applying	electrical	charges
extraordinarily	quickly—to	produce	text	on	the	screen	of	a	personal
computer,	music	from	a	CD	player,	and	the	instructions	to	a	cash	machine	to
dispense	currency.
The	light-switch	example	demonstrated	how	any	number	can	be	represented
in	binary.	Here's	how	text	can	be	expressed	in	binary.	By	convention,	the
number	65	represents	a	capital	A,	the	number	66	represents	a	capital	B,	and
so	forth.	On	a	computer	each	of	these	numbers	is	expressed	in	binary	code:
the	capital	letter	A,	65,	becomes	01000001.	The	capital	B,	66,	becomes
01000010.	A	space	break	is	represented	by	the	number	32,	or	00100000.	So
the	sentence	"Socrates	is	a	man"	becomes	this	136-digit	string	of	ls	and	Os:
01010011	01101111	01100011	01110010	01100101	01110011	00100000
01101001	01100001	00100000	01101101	01100001
01100001	01110011	01101110
01110100	00100000
It's	easy	to	follow	how	a	line	of	text	can	become	a	set	of	binary	numbers.	To
understand	how	other	kinds	of	information	are	digitized,	let's	consider	another
example	of	analog	information.	A	vinyl	record	is	an	analog	representation	of
sound	vibrations.	It	stores	audio	information	in	microscopic	squiggles	that
line	the	record's	long,	spiral	groove.	If	the	music	has	a	loud	passage,	the
squiggles	are	cut	more	deeply	into	the	groove,	and	if	there	is	a	high	note	the
squiggles	are	packed	more	tightly	together.	The	groove's	squiggles	are
analogs	of	the	original	vibrations—sound	waves	captured	by	a	microphone.

When	a	turntable's	needle	travels	down	the	groove,	it	vibrates	in	resonation
with	the	tiny	squiggles.	This	vibration,	still	an	analog	representation	of	the
original	sound,	is	amplified	and	sent	to	loudspeakers	as	music.
Like	any	analog	device	for	storing	information,	a	record	has	drawbacks.	Dust,
fingerprints,	or	scratches	on	the	record's	surface	can	cause	the	needle	to
vibrate	inappropriately	and	create	clicks	or	other	noises.	If	the	record	is	not
turning	at	exactly	the	right	speed,	the	pitch	of	the	music	won't	be	accurate.
Each	time	a	record	is	played,	the	needle	wears	away	some	of	the	subtleties	of
the	squiggles	in	the	groove	and	the	reproduction	of	the	music	deteriorates.	If
you	record	a	song	from	a	vinyl	record	onto	a	cassette	tape,	any	of	the	record's
imperfections	will	be	permanently	transferred	to	the	tape,	and	new
imperfections	will	be	added	because	conventional	tape	machines	are
themselves	analog	devices.	The	information	loses	quality	with	each
generation	of	rerecording	or	retransmission.
On	a	compact	disc,	music	is	stored	as	a	series	of	binary	numbers,	each	bit	(or
switch)	of	which	is	represented	by	a	microscopic	pit	on	the	surface	of	the
disc.	Today's	CDs	have	more	than	5	billion	pits.	The	reflected	laser	light
inside	the	CD	player—a	digital	device—reads	each	of	the	pits	to	determine	if
it	is	switched	to	the	0	or	the	1	position,	and	then	reassembles	that	information
back	into	the	original	music	by	generating	specified	electrical	signals	that	are
converted	by	the	speakers	into	sound	waves.	Each	time	the	disc	is	played,	the
sounds	are	exactly	the	same.
It's	convenient	to	be	able	to	convert	everything	into	digital	representations,
but	the	number	of	bits	can	build	up	quite	quickly.	Too	many	bits	of
information	can	overflow	the	computer's	memory	or	take	a	long	time	to
transmit	between	computers.	This	is	why	a	computer's	capacity	to	compress
digital	data,	store	or	transmit	it,	then	expand	it	back	into	its	original	form	is	so
useful	and	will	become	more	so.
Quickly,	here's	how	the	computer	accomplishes	these	feats.	It	goes	back	to
Claude	Shannon,	the	mathematician	who	in	the	1930s	recognized	how	to
express	information	in	binary	form.	During	World	War	II,	he	began
developing	a	mathematical	description	of	information	and	founded	a	field	that
later	became	known	as	information	theory.	Shannon	defined	information	as
the	reduction	of	uncertainty.	By	this	definition,	if	you	already	know	it	is
Saturday	and	someone	tells	you	it	is	Saturday,	you	haven't	been	given	any
information.	On	the	other	hand,	if	you're	not	sure	of	the	day	and	someone	tells
you	it	is	Saturday,	you've	been	given	information,	because	your	uncertainty
has	been	reduced.

Shannon's	information	theory	eventually	led	to	other	break-throughs.	One	was
effective	data-compression,	vital	to	both	computing	and	communications.	On
the	face	of	it	what	he	said	is	obvious:	Those	parts	of	data	that	don't	provide
unique	information	are	redundant	and	can	be	eliminated.	Headline	writers
leave	out	nonessential	words,	as	do	people	paying	by	the	word	to	send	a
telegraph	message	or	place	a	classified	advertisement.	One	example	Shannon
gave	was	the	letter	u,	redundant	in	English	whenever	it	follows	the	letter	q.
You	know	a	u	will	follow	each	q,	so	the	u	needn't	actually	be	included	in	the
message.
Shannon's	principles	have	been	applied	to	the	compression	of	both	sound	and
pictures.	There	is	a	great	deal	of	redundant	information	in	the	thirty	frames
that	make	up	a	second	of	video.	The	information	can	be	compressed	from
about	27	million	to	about	1	million	bits	for	transmission	and	still	make	sense
and	be	pleasant	to	watch.
However,	there	are	limits	to	compression	and	in	the	near	future	we'll	be
moving	ever-increasing	numbers	of	bits	from	place	to	place.	The	bits	will
travel	through	copper	wires,	through	the	air,	and	through	the	structure	of	the
information	highway,	most	of	which	will	be	fiber-optic	cable	(or	just	"fiber"
for	short).	Fiber	is	cable	made	of	glass	or	plastic	so	smooth	and	pure	that	if
you	loo======================================================== up	when	we	could	or	making	the	games	more
difficult.	A	friend	at	Lakeside	developed	a	program	in	BASIC	that	simulated
the	play	of	Monopoly.	BASIC	(Beginner's	All-purpose	Symbolic	Instruction

Code)	is,	as	its	name	suggests,	a	relatively	easy-to-learn	programming
language	we	used	to	develop	increasingly	complex	programs.	He	figured	out
how	to	make	the	computer	play	hundreds	of	games	really	fast.	We	fed	it
instructions	to	test	out	various	methods	of	play.	We	wanted	to	discover	what
strategies	won	most.	And—chug-a-chug,	chug-a-chug—the	computer	told	us.
Like	all	kids,	we	not	only	fooled	around	with	our	toys,	we	changed	them.	If
you've	ever	watched	a	child	with	a	cardboard	carton	and	a	box	of	crayons
create	a	spaceship	with	cool	control	panels,	or	listened	to	their	improvised
rules,	such	as	"Red	cars	can	jump	all	others,"	then	you	know	that	this	impulse
to	make	a	toy	do	more	is	at	the	heart	of	innovative	childhood	play.	It	is	also
the	essence	of	creativity.
Of	course,	in	those	days	we	were	just	goofing	around,	or	so	we	thought.	But
the	toy	we	had—well,	it	turned	out	to	be	some	toy.	A	few	of	us	at	Lakeside
refused	to	quit	playing	with	it.	In	the	minds	of	a	lot	of	people	at	school	we
became	linked	with	the	computer,	and	it	with	us.	I	was	asked	by	a	teacher	to
help	teach	computer	programming,	and	that	seemed	to	be	OK	With	everyone.
But	when	I	got	the	lead	in	the	school	play,	Black	Comedy,	some	students	were
heard	muttering,	"Why	did	they	pick	the	computer	guy?"	That's	still	the	way	I
sometimes	get	identified.
1968:	Bill	Gates	(Standing)	and	Paul	Allen	working	at	the	computer	terminal
at	Lakeside	School.
It	seems	there	was	a	whole	generation	of	us,	all	over	the	world,	who	dragged
that	favorite	toy	with	us	into	adulthood.	In	doing	so,	we	caused	a	kind	of
revolution—peaceful,	mainly—and	now	the	computer	has	taken	up	residence
in	our	offices	and	homes.	Computers	shrank	in	size	and	grew	in	power,	as
they	dropped	dramatically	in	price.	And	it	all	happened	fairly	quickly.	Not	as
quickly	as	I	once	thought,	but	still	pretty	fast.	Inexpensive	computer	chips
now	show	up	in	engines,	watches,	antilock	brakes,	facsimile	machines,
elevators,	gasoline	pumps,	cameras,	thermostats,	treadmills,	vending

machines,	burglar	alarms,	and	even	talking	greeting	cards.	School	kids	today
are	doing	amazing	things	with	personal	computers	that	are	no	larger	than
textbooks	but	outperform	the	largest	computers	of	a	generation	ago.
Now	that	computing	is	astoundingly	inexpensive	and	computers	inhabit	every
part	of	our	lives,	we	stand	at	the	brink	of	another	revolution.	This	one	will
involve	unprecedentedly	inexpensive	communication;	all	the	computers	will
join	together	to	communicate	with	us	and	for	us.	Interconnected	globally,	they
will	form	a	network,	which	is	being	called	the	information	highway.	A	direct
precursor	is	the	present	Internet,	which	is	a	group	of	computers	joined	and
exchanging	information	using	current	technology.
The	reach	and	use	of	the	new	network,	its	promise	and	perils,	is	the	subject	of
this	book.
Every	aspect	of	what's	about	to	happen	seems	exciting.	When	I	was	nineteen	I
caught	a	look	at	the	future,	based	my	career	on	what	I	saw,	and	I	turned	out	to
have	been	right.	But	the	Bill	Gates	of	nineteen	was	in	a	very	different	position
from	the	one	I'm	in	now.	In	those	days,	not	only	did	I	have	all	the	self-
assurance	of	a	smart	teenager,	but	also	nobody	was	watching	me,	and	if	I
failed—so	what?	Today	I'm	much	more	in	the	position	of	the	computer	giants
of	the	seventies,	but	I	hope	I've	learned	some	lessons	from	them.
At	one	time	I	thought	I	might	want	to	major	in	economics	in	college.	I
eventually	changed	my	mind,	but	in	a	way	my	whole	experience	with	the
computer	industry	has	been	a	series	of	economics	lessons.	I	saw	firsthand	the
effects	of	positive	spirals	and	inflexible	business	models.	I	watched	the	way
industry	standards	evolved.	I	witnessed	the	importance	of	compatibility	in
technology,	of	feedback,	and	of	constant	innovation.	And	I	think	we	may	be
about	to	witness	the	realization	of	Adam	Smith's	ideal	market,	at	last.
But	I'm	not	using	those	lessons	just	for	theorizing	about	this	future—I'm
betting	on	it.	Back	when	I	was	a	teenager,	I	envisioned	the	impact	that	low-
cost	computers	could	have.	"A	computer	on	every	desk	and	in	every	home"
became	Microsoft's	corporate	mission,	and	we	have	worked	to	help	make	that
possible.	Now	those	computers	are	being	connected	to	one	another,	and	we're
building	software—the	instructions	that	tell	the	computer	hardware	what	to
do—that	will	help	individuals	get	the	benefits	of	this	connected
communication	power.	It	is	impossible	to	predict	exactly	what	it	will	be	like
to	use	the	network.	We'll	communicate	with	it	through	a	variety	of	devices,
including	some	that	look	like	television	sets,	some	like	today's	PCs;	some	will
look	like	telephones,	and	some	will	be	the	size	and	something	like	the	shape

of	a	wallet.	And	at	the	heart	of	each	will	be	a	powerful	computer,	invisibly
connected	to	millions	of	others.
There	will	be	a	day,	not	far	distant,	when	you	will	be	able	to	conduct
business,	study,	explore	the	world	and	its	cultures,	call	up	any	great
entertainment,	make	friends,	attend	neighborhood	markets,	and	show	pictures
to	distant	relatives—without	leaving	your	desk	or	armchair.	You	won't	leave
your	network	connection	behind	at	the	office	or	in	the	classroom.	It	will	be
more	than	an	object	you	carry	or	an	appliance	you	purchase.	It	will	be	your
passport	into	a	new,	mediated	way	of	life.
Firsthand	experiences	and	pleasures	are	personal	and	unmediated.	No	one,	in
the	name	of	progress,	will	take	away	from	you	the	experience	of	lying	on	a
beach,	walking	in	the	woods,	sitting	in	a	comedy	club,	or	shopping	at	a	flea
market.	But	firsthand	experiences	aren't	always	rewarding.	For	example,
waiting	in	line	is	a	firsthand	experience,	but	we	have	been	trying	to	invent
ways	to	avoid	it	ever	since	we	first	queued	up.
Much	of	human	progress	has	come	about	because	someone	invented	a	better
and	more	powerful	tool.	Physical	tools	speed	up	work	and	rescue	people	from
hard	labor.	The	plow	and	the	wheel,	the	crane	and	the	bulldozer,	amplify	the
physical	abilities	of	those	using	them.
Informational	tools	are	symbolic	mediators	that	amplify	the	intellect	rather
than	the	muscle	of	their	users.	You're	having	a	mediated	experience	as	you
read	this	book:	We're	not	actually	in	the	same	room,	but	you	are	still	able	to
find	out	what's	on	my	mind.	A	great	deal	of	work	now	involves	decision
making	and	knowledge,	so	information	tools	have	become,	and	will	continue
increasingly	to	be,	the	focus	of	inventors.	Just	as	any	text	could	be
represented	with	an	arrangement	of	letters,	these	tools	allow	information	of
all	types	to	be	represented	in	digital	form,	in	a	pattern	of	electrical	pulses	that
is	easy	for	computers	to	deal	with.	The	world	today	has	more	than	100	million
computers	whose	purpose	is	to	manipulate	information.	They	are	helping	us
now	by	making	it	much	easier	to	store	and	transmit	information	that	is	already
in	digital	form,	but	in	the	near	future	they	will	allow	us	access	to	almost	any
information	in	the	world.
In	the	United	States,	the	connecting	of	all	these	computers	has	been	compared
to	another	massive	project:	the	gridding	of	the	country	with	interstate
highways,	which	began	during	the	Eisenhower	era.	This	is	why	the	new
network	was	dubbed	the	"information	superhighway."	The	term	was
popularized	by	then-senator	Al	Gore,	whose	father	sponsored	the	1956

Federal	Aid	Highway	Act.
The	highway	metaphor	isn't	quite	right	though.	The	phrase	suggests	landscape
and	geography,	a	distance	between	points,	and	embodies	the	implication	that
you	have	to	travel	to	get	from	one	place	to	another.	In	fact,	one	of	the	most
remarkable	aspects	of	this	new	communications	technology	is	that	it	will
eliminate	distance.	It	won't	matter	if	someone	you're	contacting	is	in	the	next
room	or	on	another	continent,	because	this	highly	mediated	network	will	be
unconstrained	by	miles	and	kilometers.
The	term	"highway"	also	suggests	that	everyone	is	driving	and	following	the
same	route.	This	network	is	more	like	a	lot	of	country	lanes	where	everyone
can	look	at	or	do	whatever	his	individual	interests	suggest.	Another
implication	is	that	perhaps	it	should	be	built	by	the	government,	which	I	think
would	be	a	major	mistake	in	most	countries.	But	the	real	problem	is	that	the
metaphor	emphasizes	the	infrastructure	of	the	endeavor	rather	than	its
applications.	At	Microsoft	we	talk	about	"Information	At	Your	Fingertips,"
which	spotlights	a	benefit	rather	than	the	network	itself.	A	different	metaphor
that	I	think	comes	closer	to	describing	a	lot	of	the	activities	that	will	take
place	is	that	of	the	ultimate	market.	Markets	from	trading	floors	to	malls	are
fundamental	to	human	society,	and	I	believe	this	new	one	will	eventually	be
the	world's	central	department	store.	It	will	be	where	we	social	animals	will
sell,	trade,	invest,	haggle,	pick	stuff	up,	argue,	meet	new	people,	and	hang
out.	When	you	hear	the	phrase	"information	highway,"	rather	than	seeing	a
road,	imagine	a	marketplace	or	an	exchange.	Think	of	the	hustle	and	bustle	of
the	New	York	Stock	Exchange	or	a	farmers'	market	or	of	a	bookstore	full	of
people	looking	for	fascinating	stories	and	information.	All	manner	of	human
activity	takes	place,	from	billion-dollar	deals	to	flirtations.	Many	transactions
will	involve	money,	tendered	in	digital	form	rather	than	currency.	Digital
information	of	all	kinds,	not	just	as	money,	will	be	the	new	medium	of
exchange	in	this	market.
The	global	information	market	will	be	huge	and	will	combine	all	the	various
ways	human	goods,	services,	and	ideas	are	exchanged.	On	a	practical	level,
this	will	give	you	broader	choices	about	most	things,	including	how	you	earn
and	invest,	what	you	buy	and	how	much	you	pay	for	it,	who	your	friends	are
and	how	you	spend	your	time	with	them,	and	where	and	how	securely	you
and	your	family	live.	Your	workplace	and	your	idea	of	what	it======================================================== he	telegraph	and,	later,	ticker	services	was	to	deliver	racetrack
results.	Satellite	television	broadcasts	contributed	to	off-track	betting.	Slot
machine	designs	have	always	tracked	the	progress	in	mechanical	calculators
and,	more	recently,	computers.	The	information	highway	will	have	an	even
more	significant	effect	on	both	legal	and	illegal	gambling.	We	are	sure	to	see
current	odds	posted	on	servers,	and	e-mail	as	a	way	to	make	bets.	Electronic
currency	will	be	used	to	place	bets	and	make	payoffs.
Gambling	is	a	highly	regulated	business,	so	it's	difficult	to	predict	what	forms
will	be	allowed	on	the	highway.	Maybe	air	travelers	who	are	stuck	on	a	plane
with	nothing	else	to	do	will	be	able	to	gamble	with	each	other.	Perhaps
gambling	games	will	have	to	provide	full	disclosure	of	the	odds	against	you.
The	technology	will	allow	people	to	bet	on	anything	they	choose	to,	and	if	it's
legal	someone	is	sure	to	set	up	a	service.	It	will	be	possible	to	bring	horse
races,	dog	races,	or	any	other	kind	of	live	sports	event	into	your	home	in	real-
time,	so	some	of	the	excitement	of	the	track	or	stadium	will	be	made
available.	Many	governments	raise	revenue	with	lotteries	and	in	the	future
could	provide	plug-into	electronic	lotteries.	The	highway	will	make	gambling
far	more	difficult	to	control	than	it	is	today.
We	can	be	sure	we'll	use	the	highway's	unique	capabilities	to	help	us	find
communities	of	others	with	common	interests.	Today	you	may	belong	to	the
local	ski	club	so	you	can	meet	other	people	who	like	to	ski.	You	may	also

subscribe	to	Recreational	Skier	so	you	can	get	information	about	new	ski
products.	Tomorrow	you	will	be	able	to	join	such	a	community	on	the
information	highway.	It	will	not	only	provide	you	with	up-to-date	information
about	weather	conditions	instantly,	but	will	also	be	a	way	for	you	to	stay	in
touch	with	other	enthusiasts.
The	greater	the	number	of	people	who	join	an	electronic	community,	the	more
valuable	it	will	be	to	everyone	who	uses	it.	Most	of	the	world's	skiing
enthusiasts	will	participate,	at	least	occasionally.	In	time,	the	world's	best
information	about	skis	and	skiing	will	be	available	electronically.	If	you	join,
you	will	find	the	best	slopes	near	Munich,	the	lowest	price	anywhere	for	a
particular	set	of	poles,	and	the	latest	news	and	advertising	about	all	ski-related
products.	If	people	have	taken	photos	or	made	videos	of	a	race	or	a	trip,	they
can	share	them.	Books	about	skiing	will	be	reviewed	by	anyone	who	has	an
opinion.	Laws	and	safety	practices	will	be	debated.	Instructional	videos	will
be	available	on	a	moment's	notice.	These	multi-media	documents	will	be
available	free	or	for	a	charge,	to	one	person	or	to	hundreds	of	thousands.	This
community	on	the	information	highway	will	become	the	place	to	go	if	you	are
interested	in	skiing.
If	you	want	to	get	yourself	in	better	physical	condition	before	trying	a	hard
slope,	you	might	find	training	more	fun	if	you	are	in	close	electronic	touch
with	a	dozen	other	people	who	are	your	size,	weight,	and	age,	and	who	share
your	specific	goals	for	exercise	and	weight	reduction.	You	would	have	less	to
be	self-conscious	about	in	an	exercise	program	in	which	everyone	else	is	like
you.	And	if	you	still	were	uncomfortable,	you	could	turn	your	video	camera
off.	Members	of	this	community	could	get	together	to	encourage	each	other
and	even	work	out	at	the	same	time.
The	community	of	skiers	is	quite	large	and	easy	to	define.	On	the	information
highway	there	will	be	applications	to	help	you	find	people	and	information
that	intersect	with	your	interests,	no	matter	how	specific.	If	you're	thinking	of
visiting	Berlin,	the	highway	will	make	vast	amounts	of	historical,	touristic,
and	sociological	information	available.	But	there	will	also	be	applications	to
let	you	find	fellow	enthusiasts	there.	You'll	be	invited	to	register	your	interests
in	databases	that	can	be	analyzed	by	the	applications.	These	applications	will
even	suggest	people	you	might	like	to	meet.	If	you	have	a	collection	of
Venetian	glass	paperweights,	you'll	probably	choose	to	be	a	member	of	one	or
more	world	communities	of	people	who	share	this	interest.	Some	of	those
people	may	live	in	Berlin	and	have	collections	they'd	be	delighted	to	show
you.	If	you	have	a	ten-year-old	daughter	you'll	be	taking	with	you	to	Berlin,
you	might	query	whether	there	is	anyone	in	Berlin	who	has	a	ten-year-old,

shares	your	language,	and	is	willing	to	spend	time	with	you	during	your	visit.
If	you	find	two	or	three	suitable	people,	you	have	created	a	small—and
probably	temporary—community	of	interest.
I	recently	visited	Africa	and	took	a	lot	of	pictures	of	chimpanzees.	If	the
information	highway	were	available	now,	I	would	put	out	a	message	saying
that	if	anyone	else	from	the	safari	wanted	to	exchange	photographs,	he	or	she
should	put	them	on	the	same	bulletin	board	where	I	had	posted	my
chimpanzee	photos.	I	would	be	able	to	set	it	up	so	only	fellow	safari	members
could	have	access	to	that	bulletin	board.
Already,	thousands	of	newsgroups	on	the	Internet	and	countless	forums	on
commercial	on-line	services	have	been	set	up	as	locations	for	small
communities	to	share	information.	For	example,	on	the	Internet	there	are
lively	text-based	discussion	groups	with	such	names	as	alt.agriculture.fruit,
alt.animals.raccoons,	alt.asian-movies,	alt.coffee,	bionet.-
biology.cardiovascular,	soc.religion.islam,	and	talk.philosophy,	misc.	But
these	topics	aren't	nearly	so	specialized	as	some	of	the	subjects	I	expect
electronic	communities	will	address	in	the	future.	Some	communities	will	be
very	local,	and	some	will	be	global.	You	won't	be	overwhelmed	by	the
number	of	choices	of	communities	any	more	than	you	are	now	by	the
telephone	system.	You'll	look	for	a	group	that	interests	you	in	general,	and
then	you'll	search	through	it	for	the	small	segment	you	want	to	join.	I	can
imagine	the	administration	of	every	municipality,	for	example,	becoming	the
focus	of	an	electronic	community.
Sometimes	I	get	annoyed	by	a	traffic	light	near	my	office	that	always	stays
red	longer	than	I	think	it	should.	I	could	write	a	letter	to	the	city,	telling	the
folks	who	program	the	lights	that	the	timing	isn't	optimal,	but	that	would	just
be	one	cranky	letter.	On	the	other	hand,	if	I	could	find	the	"community"	of
people	who	drive	the	route	I	do,	we	could	send	a	strong	complaint	to	the	city.
I	could	find	these	others	by	sending	a	message	to	people	who	live	near	me	or
by	posting	a	message	on	a	community	affairs	bulletin	board	that	showed	a
map	of	the	intersection	accompanied	by	the	message:	"During	the	morning
rush	hours	hardly	anyone	goes	left	at	this	intersection.	Does	anyone	else	think
the	cycle	should	be	shortened?"	Anyone	who	agreed	with	me	could	add	to	my
message.	It	would	make	it	easier	to	fight	City	Hall.
As	on-line	communities	grow	in	importance,	they	will	increasingly	be	where
people	will	turn	to	find	out	what	the	public	is	really	thinking.	People	like	to
know	what's	popular,	which	movies	friends	are	watching,	and	what	news
others	think	is	interesting.	I	want	to	read	the	same	"newspaper	front	page"	as

those	I'm	going	to	meet	with	later	today,	so	we	can	have	something	in
common	to	talk	about.	You	will	be	able	to	see	what	places	on	the	network	are
being	looked	at	often.	There	will	be	all	sorts	of	"hot	lists"	of	the	coolest
places.
Electronic	communities,	with	all	the	information	they	reveal,	will	also	create
problems.	Some	institutions	will	have	to	make	big	changes	as	on-line
communities	gain	power.	Doctors	and	medical	researchers	are	already	having
to	contend	with	patients	who	explore	medical	literature	electronically	and
compare	notes	with	other	patients	who	have	the	same	serious	disease.	Word
of	unorthodox	or	unapproved	treatments	spreads	fast	in	these	communities.
Some	patients	in	drug	trials	have	been	able	to	figure	out,	by	communicating
with	other	patients	in	the	trial,	that	they	are	receiving	a	placebo	rather	than	the
real	medication.	The	discovery	has	prompted	some	of	them	to	drop	out	of	the
trials	or	to	seek	alternate,	simultaneous	remedies.	This	undermines	the
research,	but	it	is	hard	to	fault	patients	who	are	trying	to	save	their	lives.
It's	not	just	medical	researchers	who	will	be	affected	by	so	much	access	to
information.	One	of	the	biggest	concerns	is	parents	having	to	contend	with
children	who	can	find	out	about	almost	anything	they	want	to,	right	from	a
home	information	appliance.	Already,	rating	systems	are	being	designed	to
allow	parental	control	over	what	kids	have	access	to.	This	could	become	a
major	political	issue	if	the	information	publishers	don't	handle	it	properly.
On	balance,	the	advantages	will	greatly	outweigh	the	problems.	The	more
information	there	is	available,	the	more	choices	we	will	have.	Today,	devoted
fans	plan	their	evenings	around	the	broadcast	times	of	their	favorite	television
shows,	but	once	video-on-demand	gives	us	the	opportunity	to	watch	whatever
we	like	whenever	we	like,	family	or	social	activities,	rather	than	a
broadcaster's	time	slots,	will	control	our	entertainment	schedules.	Before	the
telephone,	people	thought	of	their	neighbors	as	their	only	community.	Almost
everything	was	done	with	others	who	lived	nearby.	The	telephone	and	the
automobile	allowed	us	to	stretch	out.	We	may	visit	face-to-face	less	often	than
we	did	a	century	ago	because	we	can	pick	up	the	telephone,	but	this	doesn't
mean	we	have	become	isolated.	It	has	made	it	easier	for	us	to	talk	to	each
other	and	stay	in	touch.	Sometimes	it	may	seem	too	easy	for	people	to	reach
you.
A	decade	from	now,	you	may	shake	your	head	that	there	was	ever	a	time
when	any	stranger	or	a	wrong	number	could	interrupt	you	at	home	with	a
phone	call.	Cellular	phones,	pagers,	and	fax	machines	have	already	made	it
necessary	for	businesspeople	to	make	explicit	decisions	that	used	to	be

implicit.	A	decade	ago	we	didn't	have	to	decide	whether	we	wanted	to	receive
documents	at	home	or	take	calls	on	the	road.	It	was	easy	to	withdraw	to	your
house,	or	certainly	to	you======================================================== and	so	can't	carry	many	bits
per	second.	"Modems"	(shorthand	for	modulator-demodulators)	are	the
devices	that	connect	phone	lines	to	PCs.	Modems,	by	converting	to	0s	and	1s
into	different	tones,	allow	computers	to	connect	over	phone	lines.	In	the	early
days	of	the	IBM	PC,	modems	typically	carried	data	at	the	rate	of	300	or	1,200
bits	per	seconds	(also	known	as	300	or	1,200	"baud").	Most	of	the	data
transmitted	through	phone	lines	at	these	speeds	was	text,	because	transmitting
pictures	was	painfully	slow	when	so	little	information	could	be	transferred
each	second.	Faster	modems	have	gotten	much	more	affordable.	Today,	many
modems	that	connect	PCs	to	other	computers	via	the	phone	system	can	send
and	receive	14,400	(14.4K)	or	28,800	(28.8K)	bits	per	second.	From	a
practical	standpoint,	this	is	still	insufficient	bandwidth	for	many	kinds	of
transmissions.	A	page	of	text	is	sent	in	a	second,	but	a	complete,	screen-sized
photograph,	even	if	compressed,	requires	perhaps	ten	seconds	at	these	baud
rates.	It	takes	minutes	to	send	a	color	photograph	with	enough	resolution	for	it
to	be	made	into	a	slide.	Motion	video	would	take	so	much	time	to	transmit	it
just	isn't	practical	at	these	speeds.
Already,	anyone	can	send	anyone	else	a	message	on	the	Internet	for	business,

education,	or	just	the	fun	of	it.	Students	around	the	world	can	send	messages
to	one	another.	Shut-ins	can	carry	on	animated	conversations	with	friends
they	might	never	get	out	to	meet.	Correspondents	who	might	be
uncomfortable	talking	to	each	other	in	person	have	forged	bonds	across	a
network.	The	information	highway	will	add	video,	which	unfortunately	will
do	away	with	the	social,	racial,	gender,	and	species	blindness	that	text-only
exchanges	permit.
The	Internet	and	other	information	services	carried	on	telephone	networks
suggest	some	aspects	of	how	the	information	highway	will	operate.	When	I
send	you	a	message,	it	is	transmitted	by	phone	line	from	my	computer	to	the
server	that	has	my	"mailbox,"	and	from	there	it	passes	directly	or	indirectly	to
whichever	server	stores	your	mailbox.	When	you	connect	to	your	server,	via
the	telephone	network	or	a	corporate	computer	network,	you	are	able	to
retrieve	("download")	the	contents	of	your	mailbox,	including	my	message.
That's	how	electronic	mail	works.	You	can	type	a	message	once	and	send	it	to
one	person	or	twenty-five,	or	post	it	on	what	is	called	a	"bulletin	board."
Like	its	namesake,	an	electronic	bulletin	board	is	where	messages	are	left	for
anyone	to	read.	Public	conversations	result,	as	people	respond	to	messages.
These	exchanges	are	usually	asynchronous.	Bulletin	boards	typically	are
organized	by	topics	to	serve	specific	communities	of	interest.	This	makes
them	effective	ways	to	reach	targeted	groups.	Commercial	services	offer
bulletin	boards	for	pilots,	journalists,	teachers,	and	much	smaller
communities.	On	the	Internet,	where	the	often	unedited	and	unmoderated
bulletin	boards	are	called	"usenet	newsgroups,"	there	are	thousands	of
communities	devoted	to	topics	as	narrow	as	caffeine,	Ronald	Reagan,	and
neckties.	You	can	download	all	the	messages	on	a	topic,	or	just	recent
messages,	or	all	messages	from	a	certain	person,	or	those	that	respond	to	a

particular	other	message,	or	that	contain	a	specific	word	in	their	subject	line,
and	so	forth.
In	addition	to	electronic	mail	and	file	exchange,	the	Internet	supports	"Web
browsing,"	one	of	its	most	popular	applications.	The	"World	Wide	Web"
(abbreviated	as	the	Web	or	WWW)	refers	to	those	servers	connected	to	the
Internet	that	offer	graphical	pages	of	information.	When	you	connect	to	one
of	those	servers,	a	screen	of	information	with	a	number	of	hyperlinks	appears.
When	you	activate	a	hyperlink	by	clicking	on	it	with	your	mouse,	you	are
taken	to	another	page	containing	additional	information	and	other	hyperlinks.
That	page	may	be	stored	on	the	same	server	or	any	other	server	on	the
Internet.
1995:	U.S.	Library	of	Congress	home	page	on	the	World	Wide	Web,	showing
hyperlinks
The	main	page	for	a	company	or	an	individual	is	called	the	"home"	page.	If
you	create	one,	you	register	its	electronic	address,	then	Internet	users	can	find
you	by	typing	in	the	address.	In	advertisements	today	we	are	starting	to	see
home	page	citations	as	part	of	the	address	information.	The	software	to	set	up
a	Web	server	is	very	cheap	and	available	for	almost	all	computers.	The
software	to	browse	the	Web	is	also	available	for	all	machines,	generally	for
free.	You	can	Web	browse	using	the	CD	that	comes	with	this	book.	In	the
future,	operating	systems	will	integrate	Internet	browsing.
The	ease	with	which	companies	and	individuals	can	publish	information	on
the	Internet	is	changing	the	whole	idea	of	what	it	means	to	"publish."	The
Internet	has,	on	its	own,	established	itself	as	a	place	to	publish	content.	It	has
enough	users	so	that	it	is	benefiting	from	positive	feedback:	the	more
subscribers	it	gets,	the	more	content	it	gets,	and	the	more	content	it	gets,	the
more	subscribers	it	gets.
The	Internet's	unique	position	arises	from	a	number	of	elements.	The	TCP/IP

protocols	that	define	its	transport	level	support	distributed	computing	and	also
scale	incredibly	well.	The	protocols	that	define	Web	browsing	are	extremely
simple	and	have	allowed	servers	to	handle	immense	amounts	of	traffic
reasonably	well.	Many	of	the	predictions	about	interactive	books	and
hyperlinks—made	decades	ago	by	pioneers	like	Ted	Nelson—are	coming	true
on	the	Web.
Today's	Internet	is	not	the	information	highway	I	imagine,	although	you	can
think	of	it	as	the	beginning	of	the	highway.	An	analogy	is	the	Oregon	Trail.
Between	1841	and	the	early	1860s,	more	than	300,000	hardy	souls	rode
wagon	trains	out	of	Independence,	Missouri,	for	a	dangerous	2,000-mile
journey	across	the	wilderness	to	the	Oregon	Territories	or	the	gold	fields	of
California.	An	estimated	20,000	succumbed	to	marauders,	cholera,	starvation,
or	exposure.	Their	route	was	named	the	Oregon	Trail.	You	could	easily	say
the	Oregon	Trail	was	the	start	of	today's	highway	system.	It	crossed	many
boundaries	and	provided	two-way	traffic	to	travelers	in	wheeled	vehicles.	The
modern	path	of	Interstate	84	and	several	other	highways	follows	the	Oregon
Trail	for	much	of	its	length.	However,	many	conclusions	drawn	from
descriptions	of	the	Oregon	Trail	would	be	misleading	if	applied	to	the	future
system.	Cholera	and	starvation	aren't	a	problem	on	Interstate	84.	Tailgating
and	drunk	drivers	weren't	much	of	a	hazard	for	the	wagon	trains.
The	trail	blazed	by	the	Internet	will	direct	many	elements	of	the	highway.	The
Internet	is	a	wonderful,	critical	development	and	a	very	clear	element	of	the
final	system,	but	it	will	change	significantly	in	the	years	ahead.	The	current
Internet	lacks	security	and	needs	a	billing	system.	Much	of	the	Internet
culture	will	seem	as	quaint	to	future	users	of	the	information	highway	as
stories	of	wagon	trains	and	pioneers	on	the	Oregon	Trail	do	to	us	today.
In	fact,	the	Internet	of	today	is	not	the	Internet	of	even	a	short	time	ago.	The
pace	of	its	evolution	is	so	rapid	that	a	description	of	the	Internet	as	it	existed	a
year	or	even	six	months	ago	might	be	seriously	out-of-date.	This	adds	to	the
confusion.	It	is	very	hard	to	stay	up-to-date	with	something	so	dynamic.
Many	companies,	including	Microsoft,	are	working	together	to	define
standards	in	order	to	extend	the	Internet	and	overcome	its	limitations.
Because	the	Internet	originated	as	a	computer-science	proiect	rather	than	a
communications	utility,	it	has	always	been	a	magnet	for	hackers—
programmers	who	turn	their	talents	toward	mischief	or	malice	by	breaking
into	the	computer	systems	of	others.
On	November	2,	1988,	thousands	of	computers	connected	to	the	network

began	to	slow	down.	Many	eventually	ground	to	a	temporary	halt.	No	data
were	destroyed,	but	millions	of	dollars	of	computing	time	were	lost	as
computer	system	administrators	fought	to	regain	control	of	their	machines.
Much	of	the	public	may	have	heard	of	the	Internet	for	the	first	time	when	this
story	was	widely	covered.	The	cause	turned	out	to	be	a	mischievous	computer
program,	called	a	"worm,"	that	was	spreading	from	one	computer	to	another
on	the	network,	replicating	as	it	went.	(It	was	designated	a	worm	rather	than	a
virus	because	it	didn't	infect	other	programs.)	It	used	an	unnoticed	"back
door"	in	the	systems'	software	to	access	directly	the	memory	of	the	computers
it	was	attacking.	There	it	hid	itself	and	passed	around	misleading	information
that	made	it	harder	to	detect	and	counteract.	Within	a	few	days	The	New	York
Times	identified	the	hacker	as	Robert	Morris,	Jr.,	a	twenty-three-year-old
graduate	student	at	Cornell	University.	Morris	later	testified	that	he	had
designed	and	then	unleashed	the	worm	to	see	how	many	computers	it	would
reach,	but	a	mistake	in	his	programming	caused	the	worm	to	replicate	far
faster	than	he	had	expected.	Morris	was	convicted	of	violating	the	1986
Computer	Fraud	and	Abuse	Act,	a	federal	offense.	He	was	sentenced	to	three
years	of	probation,	a	fine	of	$10,000,	and	400	hours	of	community	service.
There	have	been	occasional	breakdowns	and	security	problems,	but	not	many,
and	the	Internet	has	become	a	reasonably	reliable	communications	channel
for	millions	of	people.	It	provides	worldwide	connections	between	servers,
facilitating	the	exchange	of	electronic	mail,	bulletin	board	items,	and	other
data.	The	exchanges	range	from	short	messages	of	a	few	dozen	characters	to
multimillion-byte	transfers	of	photographs,	software,	and	other	kinds	of	data.
It	costs	no	more	to	request	data	from	a	server	that	is	a	mile	away	than	from
one	that	is	thousands	of	miles	distant.
Already	the	Internet's	pricing	model	has	changed	the	notion	that
communication	has	to	be	paid	for	by	time	and	distance.	The	same	thing
happened	with	computing.	If	you	couldn't	afford	a	big	computer	you	used	to
pay	for	computer	time	by	the	hour.	PCs	changed	that.
Because	the	Internet	is	inexpensive	to	use,	people	assume	it	is	government
funded.	Th======================================================== logy.	As	she	scrolls	through	the	document,	the
two	of	you	would	discuss	your	needs.	Then,	if	she	was	particularly	adept,	you
might	even	watch	her	do	the	editing.	However,	if	you	wanted	a	hand	in
editing	the	document	instead	of	just	watching	it	run	on	your	lawyer's
computer,	you	could	join	in	and	work	together.	You	would	be	able	not	only	to
talk	to	each	other	but	also	to	see	the	same	image	on	your	computer	screens.

You	won't	need	to	have	the	same	software.	The	application	just	has	to	run	on
one	end	of	the	connection,	the	lawyer's	end	in	this	case.	On	your	end,	you
would	need	only	an	appropriate	modem	and	DSVD	software.
Another	important	use	of	voice/data	connections	will	be	to	improve	product
support.	Microsoft	has	thousands	of	employees	whose	job	is	to	answer
product-support	questions	about	Microsoft	software.	In	fact,	we	have	as	many
product-support	people	answering	questions	about	our	software	as	we	have
engineers	building	it.	This	is	wonderful,	because	we	log	all	that	feedback	and
use	it	to	improve	our	products.	We	get	lots	of	these	questions	by	e-mail,	but
most	of	our	customers	still	telephone	us.	These	phone	conversations	are
inefficient.	A	customer	calls	in	to	say	his	particular	computer	is	configured	in
a	specific	way	and	is	giving	a	certain	error	message.	The	product-support
specialist	listens	to	this	description,	and	then	suggests	something,	which	it
takes	the	caller	a	few	minutes	to	do.	Then	the	conversation	resumes.	The
average	call	takes	fifteen	minutes,	and	some	take	an	hour.	But	once	everyone
is	using	DSVD,	the	product-support	specialist	will	be	able	to	see	what's	on	the
caller's	computer	screen	(with	the	caller's	explicit	permission,	of	course)	and
examine	the	caller's	computer	directly	rather	than	having	to	rely	on	the	caller
to	explain	what	he	is	seeing.	This	will	have	to	be	done	carefully,	to	ensure	that
no	one's	privacy	is	invaded.	The	process	will	reduce	the	length	of	the	average
call	by	30	or	40	percent,	which	will	make	customers	a	lot	happier	and	will	cut
costs	and	product	prices.
The	picture	transmitted	during	a	DSVD	(or	ISDN)	telephone	connection
won't	necessarily	have	to	be	of	a	document.	One	or	both	people	participating
will	also	be	able	to	transmit	still	images	of	themselves.	If	you	are	calling	in	to
buy	a	product,	you	might	expect	the	company's	service	representative	to	be
there,	smiling.	But	you,	as	the	customer,	might	choose	to	transmit	only	your
voice.	You	can	select	images	of	yourself	dressed	appropriately	for	the
occasion,	so	it	won't	matter	what	you	are	actually	wearing.	Or	you	might
decide	to	have	available	several	pictures	of	yourself,	one	smiling,	one
laughing,	one	contemplative,	and	maybe	one	that	is	angry.	During	the	course
of	the	conversation,	you	could	change	the	image	to	suit	your	mood	or	the
point	you	were	making.
Electronic	mail	and	shared	screens	will	eliminate	the	need	for	many	meetings.
Presentation	meetings,	called	primarily	so	participants	can	listen	and	learn,
can	be	replaced	with	e-mail	messages	with	spreadsheets	and	other	exhibits
enclosed	as	attachments.	When	face-to-face	meetings	do	take	place,	they	will
be	more	efficient	because	participants	will	already	have	exchanged
background	information	by	e-mail.

It	will	also	be	easier	to	schedule	meetings	because	software	will	handle	it.	For
example,	if	you	want	to	sit	down	face-to-face	with	your	lawyer,	your
scheduling	program	and	hers	will	be	able	to	communicate	across	the	network
—even	the	phone	network—and	pick	a	date	and	time	that	you	both	have	free.
Then	the	appointment	would	just	show	up	on	your	respective	electronic
calendars.
This	will	also	be	an	efficient	way	to	schedule	restaurant	or	theater
reservations,	but	it	raises	an	interesting	issue.	Let's	say	a	restaurant	isn't
getting	much	business,	or	tickets	to	a	show	aren't	selling	well,	or	your	lawyer
doesn't	want	you	to	know	that	you're	her	only	client.	Such	companies	and
individuals	might	instruct	their	scheduling	programs	just	to	respond	to
meeting	requests.	Your	scheduling	program	wouldn't	be	able	to	ask	your
lawyer's	program	to	list	all	the	times	she	is	free.	However,	if	it	asked	for	a
specific	two-hour	block,	the	response	would	be:	"Yes,	we	can	schedule	you
for	Tuesday	at	eleven	o'clock."
Clients	will	expect	their	lawyers,	dentists,	accountants,	and	other
professionals	to	be	able	to	schedule	appointments	and	exchange	documents
electronically.	You	might	have	a	quick	follow-up	question	for	your	doctor—
for	instance,	whether	a	generic	version	of	a	drug	is	acceptable.	It	is	hard	to
interrupt	a	doctor,	but	you'll	expect	to	be	able	to	trade	e-mail	with	all	of	the
professionals	you	work	with.	We're	going	to	see	competition	based	on	how
effectively	one	professional	group	has	adopted	these	communications	tools
and	how	much	more	accessible	and	efficient	this	makes	them.	I'm	sure	we'll
then	begin	seeing	ads	in	which	a	firm	will	tout	how	much	more	advanced	it
has	become	in	the	use	of	PC	communications.
When	the	information	highway	is	available,	people	won't	be	limited	to	audio
and	still	images,	because	the	highway	will	also	transmit	high-quality	video.
The	meetings	they	schedule	will	more	and	more	often	be	conducted
electronically,	using	shared-screen	videoconferencing.	Each	electronic
participant,	wherever	he	or	she	is,	will	look	at	a	different	physical	screen:	a
video	white	board,	a	television	set,	or	a	PC,	but	each	screen	will	show	much
the	same	image.	Part	of	the	screen	might	show	someone's	face,	while	another
part	might	display	a	document.	If	anyone	modifies	the	document,	the	change
will	appear	almost	immediately	on	all	the	screens.	Geographically	distant
collaborators	will	be	able	to	work	together	in	rich	ways.	This	is	synchronous
or	real-time	sharing,	which	means	that	the	computer	screens	will	keep	up	with
the	people	using	them.
If	a	group	were	to	meet	electronically	to	collaborate	on	a	press	release,	each

member	would	be	able	to	use	his	or	her	PC	or	notebook	computer	to	move
paragraphs	around	and	drop	in	a	photograph	or	a	video.	The	rest	of	the	group
would	be	able	to	look	at	the	result	on	their	individual	screens	and	see	each
contributor's	work	as	it	is	actually	happening.
We're	already	accustomed	to	watching	video	meetings.	Anyone	who	tunes	in
to	television	news	shows,	such	as	Nightline,	which	feature	long-distance
debates,	is	seeing	a	videoconference.	The	host	and	guests	may	be	separated
by	continents,	yet	they	engage	in	give-and-take	as	if	they	were	in	the	same
room,	and	to	viewers	it	almost	appears	that	they	are.
Today,	in	order	to	videoconference,	it	is	necessary	to	go	to	a	specially
equipped	facility	with	special	phone	lines.	Microsoft	has	at	least	one
dedicated	videoconference	room	in	each	of	its	sales	offices	around	the	world.
They're	used	quite	a	bit,	but	the	setting	is	fairly	formal.	These	facilities	have
saved	us	lots	of	traveling.	Employees	in	other	offices	"sit	in"	on	staff
meetings,	and	customers	and	vendors	have	"visited"	us	without	traveling	to
our	headquarters	outside	Seattle.	Such	meetings	will	become	very	popular
because	they	save	time	and	money	and	are	often	more	productive	than	audio-
only	phone	conferences	or	even	face-to-face	meetings,	because	people	seem
to	be	more	attentive	if	they	know	they	are	on-camera.
I've	noticed	that	it	does	take	some	getting	used	to,	though.	If	one	person	is	on
a	videoconference	screen,	he	or	she	tends	to	get	much	more	attention	than
others	in	the	meeting.	I	first	noticed	this	when	a	bunch	of	us	in	Seattle	were
videoconferencing	with	Steve	Ballmer,	who	was	in	Europe.	It	was	as	if	we
were	all	glued	to	The	Steve	Ballmer	Show.	If	Steve	took	off	his	shoes,	we'd
all	look	at	each	other's	reactions.	When	the	meeting	was	over	I	could	have
told	you	all	about	Steve's	new	haircut	but	I	might	not	have	been	able	to	name
the	other	people	who'd	been	in	the
room	with	me.	I	think	this	distortion	will	go	away	as	videoconferences
become	commonplace.
It's	currently	fairly	expensive	to	set	up	a	videoconference	room—it	costs	at
least	$40,000.	However,	desktop	systems	that	attach	to	PCs	are	coming,	and
they	will	reduce	the	cost—and	the	formality—dramatically.	Our	facilities	are
generally	connected	with	ISDN	lines	operating	at	384,000	bits	per	second,
which	provide	reasonable	picture	and	sound	quality	for	about	$20	to	$35	an
hour	for	connections	within	the	United	States	and	about	$250	to	$300	an	hour
for	an	international	connection.
The	cost	of	videoconferencing,	like	that	of	almost	every	other	computer-

driven	service,	is	going	to	drop	as	technology	and	communications	costs	do.
Small	video	devices	using	cameras	attached	to	personal	computers	or
television	sets	will	allow	us	to	meet	readily	across	the	information	highway
with	much	higher	quality	pictures	and	sound	for	lower	prices.	As	ISDN
connected	to	PCs	becomes	popular,	videoconferences	will	be	as	standard	a
business	procedure	as	using	a	copier	to	duplicate	a	document	for	distribution
is	now.
Some	people	worry	that,	by	eliminating	the	subtlety	of	human	dynamics	in	a
meeting,	videoconferences	and	shared	screens	will	give	corporate	gatherings
all	the	spontaneity	of	a	congressional	photo	opportunity.	How	will	people
whisper,	roll	their	eyes	at	a	tedious	speaker,	or	pass	notes?	Actually,
clandestine	communication	will	be	simpler	at	a	video	meeting	because	the
network	will	facilitate	individual	communications	on	the	side.	Meetings	have
always	had	unwritten	rules,	but	when	the	network	is	mediating
videoconferences,	some	rules	will	have	to	become	explicit.	Will	people	be
able	to	signal,	publicly	or	privately,	individually	or	collectively,	that	they	are
bored?	To	what	degree	should	a	participant	be	allowed	to	block	his	or	her
video	or	audio	from	others?	Should	private	side	conversations,	one	PC	to
another,	be	permitted?	Over	time,	as	we	use	these	facilities,	new	rules	of
meeting	etiquette	will	emerge.
Home	videoconferences	will	naturally	be	somewhat	different.	If	the
conference	has	only	two	participants,	it	will	amount	to	a	video	phone	call.
That	will	be	great	for	saying	hello	to	y======================================================== han	Traf-O-Data:	the	Altair	8800	("Altair"	was	a	destination	in	a	Star	Trek
episode).	It	was	being	sold	for	$397	as	a	kit.	When	it	was	assembled,	it	had	no
keyboard	or	display.	It	had	sixteen	address	switches	to	direct	commands	and
sixteen	lights.	You	could	get	the	little	lights	on	the	front	panel	to	blink,	but
that	was	about	all.	Part	of	the	problem	was	that	the	Altair	8800	lacked
software.	It	couldn't	be	programmed,	which	made	it	more	a	novelty	than	a
tool.
What	the	Altair	did	have	was	an	Intel	8080	microprocessor	chip	as	its	brain.
When	we	saw	that,	panic	set	in.	"Oh	no!	It's	happening	without	us!	People	are
going	to	go	write	real	software	for	this	chip"	I	was	sure	it	would	happen
sooner	rather	than	later,	and	I	wanted	to	be	involved	from	the	beginning.	The
chance	to	get	in	on	the	first	stages	of	the	PC	revolution	seemed	the
opportunity	of	a	lifetime,	and	I	seized	it.
Twenty	years	later	I	feel	the	same	way	about	what's	going	on	now.	Then	I	was
afraid	others	would	have	the	same	vision	we	did;	today	I	know	thousands	do.
The	legacy	of	the	earlier	revolution	is	that	50	million	PCs	are	sold	each	year
worldwide,	and	that	fortunes	have	been	completely	reordered	in	the	computer
industry.	There	have	been	plenty	of	winners	and	losers.	This	time	lots	of
companies	are	rushing	to	get	in	early	while	change	is	taking	place	and	there
are	endless	opportunities.

When	we	look	back	at	the	last	twenty	years	it	is	obvious	that	a	number	of
large	companies	were	so	set	in	their	ways	that	they	did	not	adapt	properly	and
lost	out	as	a	result.	Twenty	years	from	now	we'll	look	back	and	see	the	same
pattern.	I	know	that	as	I	write	this	there's	at	least	one	young	person	out	there
who	will	create	a	major	new	company,	convinced	that	his	or	her	insight	into
the	communications	revolution	is	the	right	one.	Thousands	of	innovative
companies	will	be	founded	to	exploit	the	coming	changes.
In	1975,	when	Paul	and	I	naively	decided	to	start	a	company,	we	were	acting
like	characters	in	all	those	Judy	Garland	and	Mickey	Rooney	movies	who
crowed,	"We'll	put	on	a	show	in	the	barn!"	There	was	no	time	to	waste.	Our
first	project	was	to	create	BASIC	for	the	little	computer.
We	had	to	squeeze	a	lot	of	capability	into	the	computer's	small	memory.	The
typical	Altair	had	about	4,000	characters	of	memory.	Today	most	personal
computers	have	4	or	8	million	characters	of	memory.	Our	task	was	further
complicated	because	we	didn't	actually	own	an	Altair,	and	had	never	even
seen	one.	That	didn't	really	matter	because	what	we	were	really	interested	in
was	the	new	Intel	8080	microprocessor	chip,	and	we'd	never	seen	that,	either.
Undaunted,	Paul	studied	a	manual	for	the	chip,	then	wrote	a	program	that
made	a	big	computer	at	Harvard	mimic	the	little	Altair.	This	was	like	having	a
whole	orchestra	available	and	using	it	to	play	a	simple	duet,	but	it	worked.
Writing	good	software	requires	a	lot	of	concentration,	and	writing	BASIC	for
the	Altair	was	exhausting.	Sometimes	I	rock	back	and	forth	or	pace	when	I'm
thinking,	because	it	helps	me	focus	on	a	single	idea	and	exclude	distractions.	I
did	a	lot	of	rocking	and	pacing	in	my	dorm	room	the	winter	of	1975.	Paul	and
I	didn't	sleep	much	and	lost	track	of	night	and	day.	When	I	did	fall	asleep,	it
was	often	at	my	desk	or	on	the	floor.	Some	days	I	didn't	eat	or	see	anyone.
But	after	five	weeks,	our	BASIC	was	written—and	the	world's	first
microcomputer	software	company	was	born.	In	time	we	named	it
"Microsoft."
We	knew	getting	a	company	started	would	mean	sacrifice.	But	we	also
realized	we	had	to	do	it	then	or	forever	lose	the	opportunity	to	make	it	in
microcomputer	software.	In	the	spring	of	1975,	Paul	quit	his	programming
job	and	I	decided	to	go	on	leave	from	Harvard.
I	talked	it	over	with	my	parents,	both	of	whom	were	pretty	savvy	about
business.	They	saw	how	much	I	wanted	to	try	starting	a	software	company
and	they	were	supportive.	My	plan	was	to	take	time	off,	start	the	company,
and	then	go	back	later	and	finish	college.	I	never	really	made	a	conscious

decision	to	forgo	a	degree.	Technically,	I'm	just	on	a	really	long	leave.	Unlike
some	students,	I	loved	college.	I	thought	it	was	fun	to	sit	around	and	talk	with
so	many	smart	people	my	own	age.	However,	I	felt	the	window	of
opportunity	to	start	a	software	company	might	not	open	again.	So	I	dove	into
the	world	of	business	when	I	was	nineteen	years	old.
From	the	start,	Paul	and	I	funded	everything	ourselves.	Each	of	us	had	saved
some	money.	Paul	had	been	well	paid	at	Honeywell,	and	some	of	the	money	I
had	came	from	late-night	poker	games	in	the	dorm.	Fortunately,	our	company
didn't	require	massive	funding.
People	often	ask	me	to	explain	Microsoft's	success.	They	want	to	know	the
secret	of	getting	from	a	two-man,	shoestring	operation	to	a	company	with
17,000	employees	and	more	than	$6	billion	a	year	in	sales.	Of	course,	there	is
no	simple	answer,	and	luck	played	a	role,	but	I	think	the	most	important
element	was	our	original	vision.
We	glimpsed	what	lay	beyond	that	Intel	8080	chip,	and	then	acted	on	it.	We
asked,	"What	if	computing	were	nearly	free?"	We	believed	there	would	be
computers	everywhere	because	of	cheap	computing	power	and	great	new
software	that	would	take	advantage	of	it.	We	set	up	shop	betting	on	the	former
and	producing	the	latter	when	no	one	else	was.	Our	initial	insight	made
everything	else	a	bit	easier.	We	were	in	the	right	place	at	the	right	time.	We
got	there	first	and	our	early	success	gave	us	the	chance	to	hire	many	smart
people.	We	built	a	worldwide	sales	force	and	used	the	revenue	it	generated	to
fund	new	products.	From	the	beginning	we	set	off	down	a	road	that	was
headed	in	the	right	direction.
Now	there	is	a	new	horizon,	and	the	relevant	question	is,	"What	if
communicating	were	almost	free?"	The	idea	of	interconnecting	all	homes	and
offices	to	a	high-speed	network	has	ignited	this	nation's	imagination	as
nothing	has	since	the	space	program.	And	not	just	this	nation's—imaginations
around	the	world	have	caught	fire.	Thousands	of	companies	are	committed	to
the	same	vision,	so	individual	focus,	understanding	of	the	intermediate	steps,
and	execution	will	determine	their	relative	successes.
I	spend	a	good	deal	of	time	thinking	about	business	because	I	enjoy	my	work
so	much.	Today,	a	lot	of	my	thoughts	are	about	the	highway.	Twenty	years
ago,	when	I	was	thinking	about	the	future	of	microchip	personal	computers,	I
couldn't	be	certain	where	they	were	leading	me	either.	I	kept	to	my	course,
however,	and	had	confidence	we	were	moving	in	the	right	direction	to	be
where	we	wanted	to	be	when	everything	became	clear.	There's	a	lot	more	at

stake	now,	but	I	feel	that	same	way	again.	It's	nerve-wracking,	but
exhilarating	too.
All	sorts	of	individuals	and	companies	are	betting	their	futures	on	building	the
elements	that	will	make	the	information	highway	a	reality.	At	Microsoft,
we're	working	hard	to	figure	out	how	to	evolve	from	where	we	are	today	to
the	point	where	we	can	unleash	the	full	potential	of	the	new	advances	in
technology.	These	are	exciting	times,	not	only	for	the	companies	involved	but
for	everyone	who	will	realize	the	benefits	of	this	revolution.

2
THE	BEGINNING	OF
THE	INFORMATION	AGE
The	first	time	I	heard	the	term	"Information	Age"	I	was	tantalized.	I	knew
about	the	Iron	Age	and	the	Bronze	Age,	periods	of	history	named	for	the	new
materials	men	used	to	make	their	tools	and	weapons.	Those	were	specific
eras.	Then	I	read	academics	predicting	that	countries	will	be	fighting	over	the
control	of	information,	not	natural	resources.	This	sounded	intriguing	too,	but
what	did	they	mean	by	information?
The	claim	that	information	would	define	the	future	reminded	me	of	the
famous	party	scene	in	the	1967	movie	The	Graduate.	A	businessman
buttonholes	Benjamin,	the	college	graduate	played	by	Dustin	Hoffman,	and
offers	him	a	single	word	of	unsolicited	career	advice:	"Plastics."	I	wondered
whether,	if	the	scene	had	been	written	a	few	decades	later,	the	businessman's
advice	would	have	been:	"One	word,	Benjamin.	'Information.'	"
I	imagined	nonsensical	conversations	around	a	future	office	watercooler:
"How	much	information	do	you	have?"	"Switzerland	is	a	great	country
because	of	all	the	information	they	have	there!"	"I	hear	the	Information	Price
Index	is	going	up!"
It	sounds	nonsensical	because	information	isn't	as	tangible	or	measurable	as
the	materials	that	defined	previous	ages,	but	information	has	become
increasingly	important	to	us.	The	information	revolution	is	just	beginning.
The	cost	of	communications	will	drop	as	precipitously	as	the	cost	of
computing	already	has.	When	it	gets	low	enough	and	is	combined	with	other
advances	in	technology,	"information	highway"	will	no	longer	be	just	a	phrase
for	eager	executives	and	excited	politicians.	It	will	be	as	real	and	as	far-
reaching	as	"electricity."	To	understand	why	information	is	going	to	be	so
central,	it's	important	to	know	how	technology	is	changing	the	ways	we
handle	information.
The	majority	of	this	chapter	is	devoted	to	such	an	explanation.	The	material
that	follows	is	to	give	less-informed	readers	without	a	background	in
computer	principles	and	history	sufficient	information	to	enjoy	the	rest	of	the
material	in	the	book.	If	you	understand	how	digital	computers	work,	you

probably	already	know	the	material	cold,	so	feel	free	to	skip	to	chapter	3.
The	most	fundamental	difference	we'll	see	in	future	information	is	that	almost
all	of	it	will	be	digital.	Whole	printed	libraries	are	already	being	scanned	and
stored	as	electronic	data	on	disks	and	CD-ROMs.	Newspapers	and	magazines
are	now	often	completely	composed	in	electronic	form	and	printed	on	paper
as	a	convenience	for	distribution.	The	electronic	information	is	stored
permanently—or	for	as	long	as	anyone	wants	it—in	computer	databases:
giant	banks	of	journalistic	data	accessible	through	on-line	services.
Photographs,	films,	and	videos	are	all	being	converted	into	digital
information.	Every	year,	better	methods	are	being	devised	to	quantify
information	and	distil