======================================================== around.	Another	time,	when	the	team
thought	they	had	created	a	program	that	worked,	they	came	proudly	to
demonstrate	their	achievement	to	me.	It	didn't	work	at	the	demonstration.
Everyone	on	the	project	happened	to	be	right-handed,	and	the	computer,
which	was	programmed	to	look	at	the	strokes	in	the	writing,	couldn't	interpret
the	very	different	ones	in	my	left-handed	penmanship.	It	turned	out	that
getting	a	computer	to	recognize	handwriting	is	as	difficult	as	getting	one	to
recognize	speech.	But	I	remain	optimistic	that	as	computer	performance
increases	we'll	have	computers	able	to	do	this	too.
Whether	you	give	the	command	by	voice,	in	writing,	or	by	pointing,	the
selections	you're	going	to	want	to	make	will	involve	more	complicated
choices	than	just	which	movie	to	watch,	and	you'll	want	to	be	able	to	make
them	easily.	Users	won't	stand	for	being	confused	or	frustrated	or	for	having
their	time	wasted.	The	highway's	software	platform	will	have	to	make	it
almost	infallibly	easy	to	find	information,	even	if	users	don't	know	what
they're	looking	for.	There	will	be	lots	of	information.	The	highway	will	have
access	to	everything	in	hundreds	of	libraries	and	to	all	types	of	merchandise.
One	of	the	worries	most	often	expressed	about	the	highway	concerns
"information	overload."	It	is	usually	voiced	by	someone	who	imagines,	rather
aptly,	that	the	fiber-optic	cables	of	the	information	highway	will	be	like
enormous	pipes	spewing	out	large	quantities	of	information.
Information	overload	is	not	unique	to	the	highway,	and	it	needn't	be	a
problem.	We	already	cope	with	astonishing	amounts	of	information	by	relying
on	an	extensive	infrastructure	that	has	evolved	to	help	us	be	selective—
everything	from	library	catalogs	to	movie	reviews	to	the	Yellow	Pages	to
recommendations	from	friends.	When	people	worry	about	the	information-
overload	problem,	ask	them	to	consider	how	they	choose	what	to	read.	When
we	visit	a	bookstore	or	a	library	we	don't	worry	about	reading	every	volume.
We	get	by	without	reading	everything	because	there	are	navigational	aids	that
point	to	information	of	interest	and	help	us	find	the	print	material	we	want.
These	pointers	include	the	corner	newsstand,	the	Dewey	decimal	system	in
libraries,	and	book	reviews	in	the	local	newspaper.
On	the	information	highway,	technology	and	editorial	services	will	combine
to	offer	a	number	of	ways	to	help	us	find	information.	The	ideal	navigation
system	will	be	powerful,	expose	seemingly	limitless	information,	and	yet
remain	very	easy	to	use.	Software	will	offer	queries,	filters,	spatial	navigation,
hyperlinks,	and	agents	as	the	primary	selection	techniques.

One	way	to	understand	the	different	selection	methods	is	to	think	of	them
metaphorically.	Imagine	specific	information—a	collection	of	facts,	a
breaking	news	story,	a	list	of	movies—all	placed	in	an	imaginary	warehouse.
A	query	does	a	search	through	every	item	in	the	warehouse	to	see	if	it	meets
some	criterion	you	have	established.	A	filter	is	a	check	on	everything	new	that
comes	into	the	warehouse	to	see	if	it	matches	that	criterion.	Spatial	navigation
is	a	way	you	can	walk	around	inside	the	warehouse	checking	on	inventory	by
location.	Perhaps	the	most	intriguing	approach,	and	the	one	that	promises	to
be	the	easiest	of	all	to	use,	will	be	to	enlist	the	aid	of	a	personal	agent	who
will	represent	you	on	the	highway.	The	agent	will	actually	be	software,	but	it
will	have	a	personality	you'll	be	able	to	talk	to	in	one	form	or	another.	This
will	be	like	delegating	an	assistant	to	look	at	the	inventory	for	you.
Here's	how	the	different	systems	will	work.	A	query,	as	its	name	indicates,	is
a	question.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	a	wide	range	of	questions	and	get	complete
answers.	If	you	can't	recall	the	name	of	a	movie	but	you	remember	that	it
starred	Spencer	Tracy	and	Katharine	Hepburn	and	that	there	is	a	scene	in
which	he's	asking	a	lot	of	questions	and	she's	shivering,	then	you	could	type
in	a	query	that	asks	for	all	movies	that	match:"Spencer	Tracy,"	"Katharine
Hepburn,"	"cold,"	and	"questions"	In	reply,	a	server	on	the	highway	would	list
the	1957	romantic	comedy	Desk	Set,	in	which	Tracy	quizzes	a	shivering
Hepburn	on	a	rooftop	terrace	in	the	middle	of	winter.	You	could	watch	the
scene,	watch	the	whole	film,	read	the	script,	examine	reviews	of	the	movie,
and	read	any	comments	that	Tracy	or	Hepburn	might	have	made	publicly
about	the	scene.	If	a	dubbed	or	subtitled	print	had	been	made	for	release
outside	English-speaking	countries,	you	could	watch	the	foreign	versions.
They	might	be	stored	on	servers	in	various	countries	but	would	be	instantly
available	to	you.
The	system	will	accommodate	straightforward	queries	such	as	"Show	me	all
the	articles	that	ran	worldwide	about	the	first	test-tube	baby,"	or	"List	all	the
stores	that	carry	two	or	more	kinds	of	dog	food	and	will	deliver	a	case	within
sixty	minutes	to	my	home	address,"	or	"Which	of	my	relatives	have	I	been	out
of	touch	with	for	more	than	three	months?"	It	will	also	be	able	to	deliver
answers	to	much	more	complex	queries.	You	might	ask,	"Which	major	city
has	the	greatest	percentage	of	the	people	who	watch	rock	videos	and	regularly
read	about	international	trade?"	Generally,	queries	won't	require	much
response	time,	because	most	of	the	questions	are	likely	to	have	been	asked
before	and	the	answers	will	already	have	been	computed	and	stored.
You'll	also	be	able	to	set	up	"filters,"	which	are	really	just	standing	queries.
Filters	will	work	around	the	clock,	watching	for	new	information	that	matches

an	interest	of	yours,	filtering	out	everything	else.	You	will	be	able	to	program
a	filter	to	gather	information	on	your	particular	interests,	such	as	news	about
local	sports	teams	or	particular	scientific	discoveries.	If	the	most	important
thing	to	you	is	the	weather,	your	filter	will	put	that	at	the	top	of	your
personalized	newspaper.	Some	filters	will	be	created	automatically	by	your
computer,	based	on	its	information	about	your	background	and	areas	of
interest.	Such	a	filter	might	alert	me	to	an	important	event	regarding	a	person
or	institution	from	my	past:	"Meteorite	crashes	into	Lakeside	School."	You
will	also	be	able	to	create	an	explicit	filter.	That	will	be	an	on-going	request
for	something	particular,	such	as	"Wanted:	1990	Nissan	Maxima	for	parts"	or
"Tell	me	about	anybody	selling	memorabilia	from	the	last	World	Cup"	or	"Is
anyone	around	here	looking	for	someone	to	bicycle	with	on	Sunday
afternoons,	rain	or	shine?"	The	filter	will	keep	looking	until	you	call	off	the
search.	If	a	filter	finds	a	potential	Sunday	bicycling	companion,	for	instance,
it	will	automatically	check	on	any	other	information	the	person	might	have
published	on	the	network.	It	will	try	to	answer	the	question	"What's	he
like?"—which	is	the	first	question	you'd	be	likely	to	ask	about	a	potential	new
friend.
Spatial	navigation	will	be	modeled	on	the	way	we	locate	information	today.
When	we	want	to	find	out	about	some	subject	now,	it's	natural	to	go	to	a
labeled	section	of	a	library	or	bookstore.	Newspapers	have	sports,	real	estate,
and	business	sections	where	people	"go"	for	certain	kinds	of	news.	In	most
newspapers,	weather	reports	appear	in	the	same	general	location	day	after
day.
Spatial	navigation,	which	is	already	being	used	in	some	software	products,
will	let	you	go	where	the	information	is	by	enabling	you	to	interact	with	a
visual	model	of	a	real	or	make-believe	world.	You	can	think	of	such	a	model
as	a	map—an	illustrated,	three-dimensional	table	of	contents.	Spatial
navigation	will	be	particularly	important	for	interacting	with	televisions	and
small,	portable	PCs,	which	are	unlikely	to	have	conventional	keyboards.	To
do	some	banking,	you	might	go	to	a	drawing	of	a	main	street,	then	point,
using	a	mouse	or	a	remote	control	or	even	your	finger,	at	the	drawing	of	a
bank.	You	will	point	to	a	courthouse	to	find	out	which	cases	are	being	heard
by	which	judges	or	what	the	backlog	is.	You	will	point	to	the	ferry	terminal	to
learn	the	schedule	and	whether	the	boats	are	running	on	time.	If	you	are
considering	visiting	a	hotel,	you	will	be	able	to	find	out	when	rooms	are
available	and	look	at	a	floor	plan,	and	if	the	hotel	has	a	video	camera
connected	to	the	highway,	you	might	be	able	to	look	at	its	lobby	and
restaurant	and	see	how	crowded	it	is	at	the	moment.

You'll	be	able	to	jump	into	the	map	so	you	can	navigate	down	a	street	or
through	the	rooms	of	a	building.	You'll	be	able	to	zoom	in	and	out	and	pan
around	to	different	locations	very	easily.	Let's	say	you	want	to	buy	a	lawn
mower.	If	the	screen	shows	the	inside	of	a	house,	you	might	move	out	the
back	door,	where	you	might	see	landmarks,	including	a	garage.	A	click	on	the
garage	will	take	you	inside	it,	where	you	might	see	tools,	including	a	lawn
mower.	A	click	on	the	lawn	mower	will	take	you	to	categories	of	relevant
information,	including	advertisements,	reviews,	user	manuals,	and	sales
showrooms	in	cyberspace.	It	will	be	simple	to	do	some	quick	comparison
shopping,	taking	advantage	of	any	amount	of	information	you	want.	When
you	click	on	the	picture	of	the	garage	and	seem	to	move	inside	it,	behind-the-
scenes	information	relating	to	the	objects	"inside"	the	garage	will	be	fed	to
your	screen	from	servers	spread	over	thousands	of	miles	on	the	highway.
When	you	point	at	an	object	on	the	screen	to	bring	up	information	about	the
object,	you	are	employing	a	form	of	"hyperlinking."	Hyperlinks	let	users	leap
from	informational	place	to	informational	place	instantly,	just	as	spaceships	in
science	fiction	jump	from	geographic	place	to	geographic	place	through
"hyperspace."	Hyperlinks	on	the	information	highway	will	let	you	find
answers	to	your	questions	when	they	occur	to	you	and	you're	interested.	Let's
say	you're	watching	the	news	and	you	see	someone	you	don't	recognize
walking	with	the	British	prime	minister.	You	want	to	know	who	she	is.	Using
your	television's	remote	control,	you	will	point	at	the	person.	That	action	will
bring	up	a	biography	and	a	lis======================================================== t	of	other	news	accounts	in	which	she	figured
recently.	Point	at	something	on	the	list,	and	you	will	be	able	to	read	it	or
watch	it,	jumping	any	number	of	times	from	topic	to	topic	and	gathering
video,	audio,	and	text	information	from	all	over	the	world.
Spatial	navigation	can	also	be	used	for	touring.	If	you	want	to	see
reproductions	of	the	artwork	in	a	museum	or	gallery,	you'll	be	able	to	"walk"
through	a	visual	representation,	navigating	among	the	works	much	as	if	you
were	physically	there.	For	details	about	a	painting	or	sculpture,	you	would	use
a	hyperlink.	No	crowds,	no	rush,	and	you	could	ask	anything	without
worrying	about	seeming	uninformed.	You	would	bump	into	interesting	things,
just	as	you	do	in	a	real	gallery.	Navigating	through	a	virtual	gallery	won't	be
like	walking	through	a	real	art	gallery,	but	it	will	be	a	rewarding
approximation—just	as	watching	a	ballet	or	basketball	game	on	television	can
be	entertaining	even	though	you're	not	in	the	theater	or	stadium.
If	other	people	are	visiting	the	same	"museum,"	you	will	be	able	to	choose	to
see	them	and	interact	with	them	or	not,	as	you	please.	Your	visits	needn't	be
solitary	experiences.	Some	locations	will	be	used	purely	for	cyberspace

socialization;	in	others	no	one	will	be	visible.	Some	will	force	you	to	appear
to	some	degree	as	you	are;	others	won't.	The	way	you	look	to	other	users	will
depend	on	your	choices	and	the	rules	of	the	particular	location.
If	you	are	using	spatial	navigation,	the	place	you're	moving	around	in	won't
have	to	be	real.	You'll	be	able	to	set	up	imaginary	places	and	return	to	them
whenever	you	want.	In	your	own	museum,	you'll	be	able	to	move	walls,	add
imaginary	galleries,	and	rearrange	the	art.	You	might	want	all	still	lifes	to	be
displayed	together,	even	if	one	is	a	fragment	of	a	Pompeian	fresco	that	hangs
in	a	gallery	of	ancient	Roman	art	and	one	is	a	Cubist	Picasso	from	a
twentieth-century	gallery.	You	will	be	able	to	play	curator	and	gather	images
of	your	favorite	artworks	from	around	the	world	to	"hang"	in	a	gallery	of	your
own.	Suppose	you	want	to	include	a	warmly	remembered	painting	of	a	man
asleep	being	nuzzled	by	a	lion,	but	you	can't	recall	either	the	artist	or	where
you	saw	it.	The	information	highway	won't	make	you	go	looking	for	the
information.	You'll	be	able	to	describe	what	you	want	by	posing	a	query.	The
query	will	start	your	computer	or	other	information	appliance	sifting	through
a	reservoir	of	information	to	deliver	those	pieces	that	match	your	request.
You	will	even	be	able	to	give	friends	tours,	whether	they	are	sitting	next	to
you	or	watching	from	the	other	side	of	the	world.	"Here,	between	the	Raphael
and	the	Modigliani,"	you	might	say,	"is	a	favorite	finger	painting	I	did	when	I
was	three	years	old."
The	last	type	of	navigational	aid,	and	in	many	ways	the	most	useful	of	all,	is
an	agent.	This	is	a	filter	that	has	taken	on	a	personality	and	seems	to	show
initiative.	An	agent's	job	is	to	assist	you.	In	the	Information	Age,	that	means
the	agent	is	there	to	help	you	find	information.
To	understand	the	ways	an	agent	can	help	with	a	variety	of	tasks,	consider
how	it	could	improve	today's	PC	interface.	The	present	state	of	the	art	in	user
interface	is	the	graphical	user	interface,	such	as	Apple's	Macintosh	and
Microsoft	Windows,	which	depicts	information	and	relationships	on	the
screen	instead	of	just	describing	them	in	text.	Graphical	interfaces	also	allow
the	user	to	point	to	and	move	objects	including	pictures—around	on	the
screen.
But	the	graphical	user	interface	isn't	easy	enough	for	future	systems.	We've
put	so	many	options	on	the	screen	that	programs	or	features	that	are	not	used
regularly	have	become	daunting.	The	features	are	great	and	fast	for	people
familiar	with	the	software,	but	for	the	average	user	not	enough	guidance
comes	from	the	machine	for	him	or	her	to	feel	comfortable.	Agents	will

remedy	that.
Agents	will	know	how	to	help	you	partly	because	the	computer	will
remember	your	past	activities.	It	will	be	able	to	find	patterns	of	use	that	will
help	it	work	more	effectively	with	you.	Through	the	magic	of	software,
information	appliances	connected	to	the	highway	will	appear	to	learn	from
your	interactions	and	will	make	suggestions	to	you.	I	call	this	"softer
software."
Software	allows	hardware	to	perform	a	number	of	functions,	but	once	the
program	is	written,	it	stays	the	same.	Softer	software	will	appear	to	get
smarter	as	you	use	it.	It	will	learn	about	your	requirements	in	pretty	much	the
same	way	a	human	assistant	does	and,	like	a	human	assistant,	will	become
more	helpful	as	it	learns	about	you	and	your	work.	The	first	day	a	new
assistant	is	on	the	job,	you	can't	simply	ask	him	to	format	a	document	like
another	memo	you	wrote	a	few	weeks	ago.	You	can't	say,	"Send	a	copy	to
everybody	who	should	know	about	this."	But	over	the	course	of	months	and
years,	the	assistant	becomes	more	valuable	as	he	picks	up	on	what	is	typical
routine	and	how	you	like	things	done.
The	computer	today	is	like	a	first-day	assistant.	It	needs	explicit	first-day
instructions	all	the	time.	And	it	remains	a	first-day	assistant	forever.	It	will
never	make	one	iota	of	adjustment	as	a	response	to	its	experience	with	you.
We're	working	to	perfect	softer	software.	No	one	should	be	stuck	with	an
assistant,	in	this	case	software,	that	doesn't	learn	from	experience.
If	an	agent	that	could	learn	were	available	now,	I	would	want	it	to	take	over
certain	functions	for	me.	For	instance,	it	would	be	very	helpful	if	it	could	scan
every	project	schedule,	note	the	changes,	and	distinguish	the	ones	I	had	to	pay
attention	to	from	the	ones	I	didn't.	It	would	learn	the	criteria	for	what	needed
my	attention:	the	size	of	the	project,	what	other	projects	are	dependent	on	it,
the	cause	and	the	length	of	any	delay.	It	would	learn	when	a	two-week	slip
could	be	ignored,	and	when	such	a	slip	indicates	real	trouble	and	I'd	better
look	into	it	right	away	before	it	gets	worse.	It	will	take	time	to	achieve	this
goal,	partly	because	it's	difficult,	as	with	an	assistant,	to	find	the	right	balance
between	initiative	and	routine.	We	don't	want	to	overdo	it.	If	the	built-in	agent
tries	to	be	too	smart	and	anticipates	and	confidently	performs	unrequested	or
undesired	services,	it	will	be	annoying	to	users	who	are	accustomed	to	having
explicit	control	over	their	computers.
When	you	use	an	agent,	you	will	be	in	a	dialogue	with	a	program	that	behaves
to	some	degree	like	a	person.	It	could	be	that	the	software	mimics	the

behavior	of	a	celebrity	or	a	cartoon	character	as	it	assists	you.	An	agent	that
takes	on	a	personality	provides	a	"social	user	interface."	A	number	of
companies,	including	Microsoft,	are	developing	agents	with	social-user-
interface	capabilities.	Agents	won't	replace	the	graphical-user-interface
software,	but,	rather,	will	supplement	it	by	providing	a	character	of	your
choosing	to	assist	you.	The	character	will	disappear	when	you	get	to	the	parts
of	the	product	you	know	very	well.	But	if	you	hesitate	or	ask	for	help,	the
agent	will	reappear	and	offer	assistance.	You	may	even	come	to	think	of	the
agent	as	a	collaborator,	built	right	into	the	software.	It	will	remember	what
you're	good	at	and	what	you've	done	in	the	past,	and	try	to	anticipate
problems	and	suggest	solutions.	It	will	bring	anything	unusual	to	your
attention.	If	you	work	on	something	for	a	few	minutes	and	then	decide	to
discard	the	revision,	the	agent	might	ask	if	you're	sure	you	want	to	throw	the
work	away.	Some	of	today's	software	already	does	that.	But	if	you	were	to
work	for	two	hours	and	then	give	an	instruction	to	delete	what	you'd	just
done,	the	social	interface	would	recognize	that	as	unusual	and	possibly	a
serious	mistake	on	your	part.	The	agent	would	say,	"You've	worked	on	this	for
two	hours.	Are	you	really,	really	sure	you	want	to	delete	it?"
Some	people,	hearing	about	softer	software	and	social	interface,	find	the	idea
of	a	humanized	computer	creepy.	But	I	believe	even	they	will	come	to	like	it,
once	they	have	tried	it.	We	humans	tend	to	anthropomorphize.	Animated
movies	take	advantage	of	this	tendency.	The	Lion	King	is	not	very	realistic,
nor	does	it	try	to	be.	Anybody	could	distinguish	little	Simba	from	a	live	lion
cub	on	film.	When	a	car	breaks	down	or	a	computer	crashes,	we	are	apt	to
yell	at	it,	or	curse	it,	or	even	ask	why	it	let	us	down.	We	know	better,	of
course,	but	still	tend	to	treat	inanimate	objects	as	if	they	were	alive	and	had
free	will.	Researchers	at	universities	and	software	companies	are	exploring
how	to	make	computer	interfaces	more	effective,	using	this	human	tendency.
In	programs	such	as	Microsoft	Bob,	they	have	demonstrated	that	people	will
treat	mechanical	agents	that	have	personalities	with	a	surprising	degree	of
deference.	It	has	also	been	found	that	users'	reactions	differed	depending	on
whether	the	agent's	voice	was	female	or	male.	Recently	we	worked	on	a
project	that	involved	users	rating	their	experience	with	a	computer.	When	we
had	the	computer	the	users	had	worked	with	ask	for	an	evaluation	of	its
performance,	the	responses	tended	to	be	positive.	But	when	we	had	a	second
computer	ask	the	same	people	to	evaluate	their	encounters	with	the	first
machine,	the	people	were	significantly	more	critical.	Their	reluctance	to
criticize	the	first	computer	"to	its	face"	suggested	that	they	didn't	want	to	hurt
its	feelings,	even	though	they	knew	it	was	only	a	machine.	Social	interfaces
may	not	be	suitable	for	all	users	or	all	situations,	but	I	think	that	we'll	see	lots
of	them	in	the	future	because	they	"humanize"	computers.

We	have	a	fairly	clear	idea	of	what	sorts	of	navigation	we'll	have	on	the
highway.	It's	less	clear	what	we'll	be	navigating	through,	but	we	can	make
some	good	guesses.	Many	applications	available	on	the	highway	will	be
purely	for	fun.	Pleasures	will	be	as	simple	as	playing	bridge	or	a	board	game
with	your	best	friends,	even	though	you	are	all	in	several	different	cities.
Televised	sporting	events	will	offer	you	the	opportunity======================================================== at	isn't	so.	However,	the	Internet	is	an	outgrowth	of	a	1960s
government	project:	the	ARPANET,	as	it	was	called,	was	initially	used	solely
for	computer-science	and	engineering	projects.	It	became	a	vital
communications	link	among	far-flung	project	collaborators	but	was	virtually
unknown	to	outsiders.
In	1989,	the	U.S.	government	decided	to	stop	funding	ARPANET,	and	plans
were	laid	for	a	commercial	successor,	to	be	called	the	"Internet."	The	name

was	derived	from	that	of	the	underlying	communications	protocol.	Even	when
it	became	a	commercial	service,	the	Internet's	first	customers	were	mostly
scientists	at	universities	and	companies	in	the	computer	industry,	who	used	it
for	exchanging	e-mail.
The	financial	model	that	allows	the	Internet	to	be	so	suspiciously	cheap	is
actually	one	of	its	most	interesting	aspects.	If	you	use	a	telephone	today,	you
expect	to	be	charged	for	time	and	distance.	Businesses	that	call	one	remote
site	a	great	deal	avoid	these	charges	by	getting	a	leased	line,	a	special-purpose
telephone	line	dedicated	to	calls	between	the	two	sites.	There	are	no	traffic
charges	on	a	leased	line—the	same	amount	is	charged	for	it	each	month	no
matter	how	much	it	is	used.
The	foundation	of	the	Internet	consists	of	a	bunch	of	these	leased	lines
connected	by	switching	systems	that	route	data.	The	long-distance	Internet
connections	are	provided	in	the	United	States	by	five	companies,	each	of
which	leases	lines	from	telecommunications	carriers.	Since	the	breakup	of
AT&T,	the	charges	for	leased	lines	have	become	very	competitive.	Because
the	volume	of	traffic	on	the	Internet	is	so	large,	these	five	companies	qualify
for	the	lowest	possible	rates—which	means	they	carry	enormous	bandwidth
quite	inexpensively.
The	term	"bandwidth"	deserves	further	explanation.	As	I	said,	it	refers	to	the
speed	at	which	a	line	can	carry	information	to	connected	devices.	The
bandwidth	depends,	in	part,	on	the	technology	used	to	transmit	and	receive
the	information.	Telephone	networks	are	designed	for	two-way	private
connections	with	low	bandwidth.	Telephones	are	analog	devices	that
communicate	with	the	telephone	company's	equipment	by	means	of
fluctuating	currents—analogs	of	the	sounds	of	voices.	When	an	analog	signal
is	digitized	by	a	long-distance	telephone	company,	the	resulting	digital	signal
contains	about	64,000	bits	of	information	per	second.
The	coaxial	cables	used	to	carry	cable	television	broadcasts	have	much	higher
bandwidth	potential	than	standard	telephone	wires	because	they	have	to	be
able	to	carry	higher-frequency	video	signals.	Cable	TV	systems	today,
however,	don't	transmit	bits;	they	use	analog	technology	to	transmit	thirty	to
seventy-five	channels	of	video.	Coaxial	cable	can	easily	carry	hundreds	of
millions	or	even	a	billion	bits	per	second,	but	new	switches	will	have	to	be
added	to	allow	them	to	support	digital-information	transmission.	A	long-
distance	fiber-optic	cable	that	carries	1.7	billion	bits	of	information	from	one
repeater	station	(something	like	an	amplifier)	to	another	has	sufficient
bandwidth	for	25,000	simultaneous	telephone	conversations.	The	number	of

possible	conversations	rises	significantly	if	the	conversations	are	compressed
by	removing	redundant	information,	such	as	the	pauses	between	words	and
sentences,	so	that	each	conversation	consumes	fewer	bits.
Most	businesses	use	a	special	kind	of	telephone	line	to	connect	to	the	Internet.
It	is	called	a	T-1	line	and	carries	1.5	million	bits	per	second,	which	is
relatively	high	bandwidth.	Subscribers	pay	the	local	phone	company	a
monthly	charge	for	the	T-1	line	(which	moves	their	data	to	the	nearest	Internet
access	point)	and	then	pay	a	flat	rate	of	about	$20,000	a	year	to	the	company
connecting	them	to	the	Internet.	That	yearly	charge,	based	on	the	capacity	of
the	connection,	or	"on	ramp,"	covers	all	of	their	Internet	usage	whether	they
use	the	Internet	constantly	or	never	use	it	at	all,	and	whether	their	Internet
traffic	goes	a	few	miles	or	across	the	globe.	The	sum	of	these	payments	funds
the	entire	Internet	network.
This	works	because	the	costs	are	based	on	paying	for	capacity,	and	the	pricing
has	simply	followed.	It	would	require	a	lot	of	technology	and	effort	for	the
carriers	to	keep	track	of	time	and	distance.	Why	should	they	bother	if	they	can
make	a	profit	without	having	to?	This	pricing	structure	means	that	once	a
customer	has	an	Internet	connection	there	is	no	extra	cost	for	extensive	use,
which	encourages	usage.	Most	individuals	can't	afford	to	lease	a	T-1	line.	To
connect	to	the	Internet,	they	contact	a	local	on-line	service	provider.	This	is	a
company	that	has	paid	the	$20,000	per	year	to	connect	via	T-1	or	other	high-
speed	means	to	the	Internet.	Individuals	use	their	regular	phone	lines	to	call
the	local	service	provider	and	it	connects	them	to	the	Internet.	A	typical
monthly	charge	is	$20,	for	which	you	get	twenty	hours	of	prime-time	usage.
Providing	access	to	the	Internet	will	become	even	more	competitive	in	the
next	few	years.	Large	phone	companies	around	the	world	will	enter	the
business.	Prices	will	come	down	significantly.	The	on-line	service	companies
such	as	CompuServe	and	America	Online	will	be	including	Internet	access	as
part	of	their	charges.	Over	the	next	few	years	the	Internet	will	improve	and
provide	easy	access,	wide	availability,	a	consistent	user	interface,	easy
navigation,	and	integration	with	other	commercial	on-line	services.
One	technical	challenge	still	facing	the	Internet	is	how	to	handle	"real-time"
content—specifically	audio	(including	voice)	and	video.	The	underlying
technology	of	the	Internet	doesn't	guarantee	that	data	will	move	from	one
point	to	another	at	a	constant	rate.	The	congestion	on	the	network	determines
how	quickly	packets	are	sent.	Various	clever	approaches	do	allow	high-
quality	two-way	audio	and	video	to	be	delivered,	but	full	audio	and	video
support	will	require	significant	changes	in	the	network	and	probably	won't	be

available	for	several	years.
When	these	changes	do	happen,	they	will	set	up	the	Internet	in	direct
competition	with	the	phone	companies'	voice	networks.	Their	different
pricing	approaches	will	make	the	competition	interesting	to	watch.
As	the	Internet	is	changing	the	way	we	pay	for	communication,	it	may	also
change	how	we	pay	for	information.	There	are	those	who	think	the	Internet
has	shown	that	information	will	be	free,	or	largely	so.	Although	a	great	deal
of	information,	from	NASA	photos	to	bulletin	board	entries	donated	by	users,
will	continue	to	be	free,	I	believe	the	most	attractive	information,	whether
Hollywood	movies	or	encyclopedic	databases,	will	continue	to	be	produced
with	profit	in	mind.
Software	programs	are	a	particular	kind	of	information.	There	is	a	lot	of	free
software	on	the	Internet	today,	some	of	it	quite	useful.	Often	this	is	software
written	as	a	graduate-student	project	or	at	a	government-funded	lab.	However,
I	think	that	the	desire	for	quality,	support,	and	comprehensiveness	for	a	tool	as
important	as	software	means	that	demand	for	commercial	software	will
continue	to	grow.	Already,	many	students	and	faculty	members	who	wrote
free	software	at	universities	are	busy	writing	business	plans	for	start-up
companies	to	provide	commercial	versions	of	their	software	with	more
features.	Software	developers,	both	those	who	want	to	charge	for	their
product	and	those	who	want	to	give	it	away,	will	have	an	easier	time	getting	it
distributed	than	they	do	now.
All	of	this	bodes	well	for	the	future	information	highway.	However,	before	it
becomes	a	reality,	a	number	of	transitional	technologies	will	be	used	to	bring
us	new	applications.	While	they	will	fall	short	of	what	will	be	possible	once
the	full-bandwidth	highway	is	available,	they	will	be	a	step	beyond	what	we
can	do	now.	These	evolutionary	advances	are	inexpensive	enough	to	be	cost-
justified	with	applications	that	already	work	and	have	proven	demand.
Some	of	the	transitional	technologies	will	rely	on	telephone	networks.	By
1997,	most	fast	modems	will	support	the	simultaneous	transmission	of	voice
and	data	across	existing	phone	lines.	When	you're	making	travel	plans,	if	you
and	your	travel	agent	both	have	PCs,	she	might	show	you	photos	of	each	of
the	different	hotels	you're	considering,	or	display	a	little	grid	comparing
prices.	When	you	call	a	friend	to	ask	how	he	layered	his	pastry	to	get	it	to	rise
so	high,	if	you	both	have	PCs	connected	to	your	phone	lines,	during	the
conversation,	while	your	dough	is	resting,	he	will	be	able	to	transmit	a
diagram	to	you.

The	technology	that	will	make	this	possible	goes	by	the	acronym	DSVD,
which	stands	for	digital	simultaneous	voice	data.	It	will	demonstrate,	more
clearly	than	anything	has	so	far,	the	possibilities	of	sharing	information	across
a	network.	I	believe	it	will	be	adopted	widely	over	the	next	three	years.	It	is
inexpensive	because	it	requires	no	change	to	the	existing	telephone	system.
The	phone	companies	won't	have	to	modify	their	switches	or	increase	your
phone	bill.	DSVD	works	as	long	as	the	instruments	at	both	ends	of	a
conversation	are	equipped	with	appropriate	modems	and	PC	software.
Another	interim	step	for	using	the	phone	companies'	network	does	require
special	telephone	lines	and	switches.	The	technology	is	called	ISDN	(for
integrated	services	digital	network).	It	transfers	voice	and	data	starting	at
64,000	or	128,000	bits	per	second,	which	means	it	can	do	everything	DSVD
does,	only	five	to	ten	times	faster.	It's	fine	for	midband	applications.	You	get
rapid	transmission	of	text	and	still	pictures.	Motion	video	can	be	transmitted,
but	the	quality	is	mediocre—not	good	enough	to	watch	a	movie,	but
reasonable	for	routine	videoconferencing.	The	full	highway	requires	high-
quality	video.
Hundreds	of	Microsoft	employees	use	ISDN	every	day	to	connect	their	home
computers	to	our	corporate	network.	ISDN	was	invented	more	than	a	decade
ago,	but	without	PC-application	demand	almost	no	one	needed	it.	It's	amazing
that	phone	companies	invested	enormous	sums	in	sw======================================================== tomers,	we
have	a	chance	to	continue	to	lead	the	way.	We	can	certainly	keep	providing
better	and	better	software	to	make	the	PC	a	universally	empowering	tool.	I
often	say	I	have	the	best	job	in	the	world,	and	I	mean	it.
I	think	this	is	a	wonderful	time	to	be	alive.	There	have	never	been	so	many
opportunities	to	do	things	that	were	impossible	before.	It's	also	the	best	time
ever	to	start	new	companies,	advance	sciences	such	as	medicine	that	improve
quality	of	life,	and	stay	in	touch	with	friends	and	relatives.	It's	important	that

both	the	good	and	bad	points	of	the	technological	advances	be	discussed
broadly	so	that	society	as	a	whole,	rather	than	just	technologists,	can	guide	its
direction.
Now	it's	back	to	you.	I	explained	in	the	Foreword	that	I	was	writing	this	book
to	help	get	a	dialogue	started	and	to	call	attention	to	a	number	of	the
opportunities	and	issues	that	individuals,	companies,	and	nations	will	face.
My	hope	is	that	after	reading	this	book	you	will	share	some	of	my	optimism,
and	will	join	the	discussion	about	how	we	should	be	shaping	the	future.======================================================== re	will	continue	to	be	some	modest
price	variations	in	products	from	one	outlet	to	another.	These	will	reflect
differences	in	return	policies,	delivery	times,	and	whatever	limited	customer
assistance	is	available.
Some	merchants	will	offer	"consultants"	as	part	of	the	sales	price,	but	for
important	purchases	you	are	likely	to	welcome	a	truly	independent	guide.	The
cost	of	the	consultation	will	be	offset	to	an	extent	by	the	lower	price	you'll
end	up	paying	at	the	outlet	the	consultant	will	guide	you	to.	The	prices
consultants	charge	will	also	be	very	competitive.	Suppose	you	use	a	service
on	the	highway	to	obtain	information	about	where	to	buy	an	expensive	car	at
the	best	price,	and	then	you	buy	it.	The	price	for	using	the	service—which	has
acted	as	the	middleman	in	the	transaction—might	be	charged	at	a	low	hourly
rate,	or	it	could	be	a	small	percentage	of	the	purchase	price.	It	will	depend	on
the	uniqueness	of	the	service.	Electronic	competition	will	determine	the	fee.
Over	time,	more	advice	will	be	offered	by	software	applications	that	have
been	programmed	to	analyze	your	requirements	and	make	appropriate
suggestions.	A	number	of	large	banks	have	already	developed	"expert"
computer	systems	to	analyze	routine	loan	and	credit	applications,	with	great
success.	As	software	agents	become	common,	and	voice-simulation-and-
recognition	software	improves,	it	will	begin	to	feel	as	though	you're	talking	to
a	real	person	when	you	consult	a	multi-media	document	with	a	personality.
You'll	be	able	to	interrupt,	request	more	detail,	or	ask	to	have	an	explanation
repeated.	The	experience	will	be	like	chatting	with	a	personable	expert.
Eventually	it	won't	matter	much	whether	you	are	talking	to	a	human	being	or
a	very	good	simulation,	as	long	as	you	get	the	answers	you	need	to	make	an
appropriate	purchase.
A	step	toward	the	discount	electronic	commerce	of	the	highway	is	today's
home-shopping	television	networks.	In	1994	they	sold	nearly	$3	billion	worth
of	goods	despite	the	fact	that	they	are	synchronous,	which	means	you	may

have	to	sit	through	pitches	for	countless	other	items	until	they	offer	one	you're
interested	in.	On	the	information	highway	you'll	be	able	to	amble	globally	at
your	own	pace	among	goods	and	services.	If	you're	looking	for	sweaters,
you'll	choose	a	basic	style	and	see	as	many	variations	as	you	like,	in	every
price	range.	Perhaps	you'll	watch	a	fashion	show	or	a	product	demonstration.
Interactivity	will	marry	convenience	with	entertainment.
Today,	branded	products	often	appear	in	feature	films	and	television
programs.	A	character	who	once	would	have	ordered	a	beer	now	asks	for	a
Budweiser.	In	the	1993	movie	Demolition	Man,	Taco	Bell	restaurants	seem	to
be	the	only	fast-food	survivors.	Taco	Bell's	corporate	parent,	PepsiCo,	paid
for	the	privilege.	Microsoft	paid	a	fee	to	have	Arnold	Schwarzenegger
discover	the	Arabic	version	of	Windows	running	on	a	computer	screen	during
True	Lies.	In	the	future,	companies	may	pay	not	only	to	have	their	products
on-screen,	but	also	to	make	them	available	for	you	to	buy.	You	will	have	the
option	of	inquiring	about	any	image	you	see.	This	will	be	another	choice	the
highway	will	make	available	unobtrusively.	If	you	are	watching	the	movie
Top	Gun	and	think	Tom	Cruise's	aviator	sunglasses	look	really	cool,	you'll	be
able	to	pause	the	movie	and	learn	about	the	glasses	or	even	buy	them	on	the
spot—if	the	film	has	been	tagged	with	commercial	information.	Or	you	could
mark	the	scene	and	return	to	it	later.	If	a	movie	has	a	scene	filmed	in	a	resort
hotel,	you'll	be	able	to	find	out	where	it's	located,	check	room	rates,	and	make
reservations.	If	the	movie's	star	carries	a	handsome	leather	briefcase	or
handbag,	the	highway	will	let	you	browse	the	manufacturer's	entire	line	of
leather	goods	and	either	order	one	or	be	directed	to	a	convenient	retailer.
Because	the	information	highway	will	carry	video,	you'll	often	be	able	to	see
exactly	what	you've	ordered.	This	will	help	prevent	the	sort	of	mistake	my
grandmother	once	made.	I	was	at	summer	camp	and	she	ordered	lemon	drops
to	be	sent	to	me.	She	ordered	one	hundred,	thinking	I	would	get	one	hundred
pieces	of	candy.	Instead	I	got	one	hundred	bags.	I	gave	them	out	to	everyone
and	was	especially	popular	until	we	all	began	to	have	canker	sores.	On	the
highway	you	will	be	able	to	take	a	video	tour	of	that	hotel	before	you	make
your	reservation.	You	won't	have	to	wonder	whether	the	flowers	you	ordered
for	your	mother	by	telephone	really	were	as	stunning	as	you'd	hoped.	You'll
be	able	to	watch	the	florist	arrange	the	bouquet,	change	your	mind	if	you
want,	and	replace	wilting	roses	with	fresh	anemones.	When	you're	shopping
for	clothing,	it	will	be	displayed	in	your	size.	In	fact,	you'll	be	able	to	see	it
paired	with	other	items	you	have	purchased	or	are	considering.
Once	you	know	exactly	what	you	want,	you'll	be	able	to	get	it	just	that	way.
Computers	will	enable	goods	that	today	are	mass-produced	to	be	both	mass-

produced	and	custom	made	for	particular	customers.	Customization	will
become	an	important	way	for	a	manufacturer	to	add	value.	Increasing
numbers	of	products—from	shoes	to	chairs,	from	newspapers	and	magazines
to	music	albums—will	be	created	on	the	spot	to	match	the	exact	desires	of	a
particular	person.	And	often	the	item	will	cost	no	more	than	a	mass-produced
one	would.	In	many	product	categories	mass	customization	will	replace	mass
production,	just	as	a	few	generations	ago	mass	production	largely	replaced
made-to-order.
Before	mass	production,	everything	was	made	one	piece	at	a	time,	using
labor-intensive	methods	that	hampered	productivity	and	the	standard	of
living.	Until	the	first	practical	sewing	machine	was	built,	every	shirt	was
handmade	with	needle	and	thread.	The	average	person	didn't	have	many
shirts,	because	they	were	expensive.	In	the	1860s,	when	mass-production
techniques	began	to	be	used	to	make	clothing,	machines	turned	out	large
quantities	of	identical	shirts,	the	prices	dropped,	and	even	laborers	could
afford	to	own	a	number	of	them.
Soon	there	will	be	computerized	shirt-making	machines	that	will	obey	a
different	set	of	instructions	for	every	shirt.	When	you	order	you'll	indicate
your	measurements	as	well	as	your	choices	for	fabric,	fit,	collar,	and	every
other	variable.	The	information	will	be	communicated	across	the	information
highway	to	a	manufacturing	plant	that	will	produce	the	garment	for	prompt
delivery.	Delivering	goods	ordered	over	the	highway	will	become	a	big
business.	There	will	be	amazing	competition,	and	as	volume	becomes
enormous,	delivery	will	get	very	inexpensive	and	fast.
Levi	Strauss	&	Co.	is	already	experimenting	with	custom-made	jeans	for
women.	At	a	growing	number	of	their	outlets,	customers	pay	about	$10	extra
to	have	jeans	made	to	their	exact	specifications—any	of	8,448	different
combinations	of	hip,	waist,	inseam,	and	rise	measurements	and	styles.	The
information	is	relayed	from	a	PC	in	the	store	to	a	Levi's	factory	in	Tennessee,
where	the	denim	is	cut	by	computer-driven	machines,	tagged	with	bar	codes,
and	then	washed	and	sewn.	The	completed	jeans	are	sent	back	to	the	store
where	the	order	was	placed,	or	shipped	overnight	directly	to	the	customer.
It	is	conceivable	that	within	a	few	years	everyone	will	have	measurements
registered	electronically	so	it	will	be	easy	to	find	out	how	well	a	ready-made
item	will	fit,	or	to	place	a	custom	order.	If	you	give	friends	and	relatives
access	to	this	information,	they	will	find	it	a	lot	easier	to	buy	for	you.
Customized	information	is	a	natural	extension	of	the	tailored	consultation

capabilities	of	the	highway.	Individuals	who	have	achieved	eminence	in	some
field	may	publish	their	opinions,	recommendations,	or	even	worldview,	in
much	the	same	way	that	successful	investors	publish	newsletters.	Arnold
Palmer	or	Nancy	Lopez	might	offer	golfers	the	chance	to	read	or	look	at
whatever	golf	material	they	have	found	helpful.	An	editor	who	today	works	at
The	Economist	might	start	his	or	her	own	service,	and	offer	a	digest	of	the
news	with	links	to	text	and	video	news	accounts	from	a	variety	of	sources.
Someone	using	this	review	service,	instead	of	paying	60	cents	for	a
newspaper,	might	pay	the	expert	a	few	cents	a	day	for	performing	the
middleman	function	of	assembling	the	day's	news,	and	pay	the	publisher	of
each	story	selected	a	little	bit	too.	The	customer	would	decide	how	many
articles	he	wanted	to	read	and	how	much	to	spend.	For	your	own	daily	dose	of
news,	you	might	subscribe	to	several	review	services	and	let	a	software	agent
or	a	human	one	pick	and	choose	from	them	to	compile	your	completely
customized
"newspaper."
These	subscription	services,	whether	human	or	electronic,	will	gather
information	that	conforms	to	a	particular	philosophy	and	set	of	interests.	They
will	compete	on	the	basis	of	their	talents	and	reputations.	Magazines	fill	a
similar	role	today.	Many	are	narrowly	focused	and	serve	as	customized
realities	of	a	sort.	A	reader	who	is	politically	engaged	knows	that	what	he	or
she	is	reading	in	National	Review	is	not	"the	news."	It	is	a	bulletin	from	the
world	of	conservative	politics	where	little	of	what	the	reader	believes	is
challenged.	At	the	other	end	of	the	political	scale,	The	Nation	is	a	magazine
that	knows	its	readers'	liberal	views	and	biases	and	sets	out	to	confirm	and
massage	them.
In	the	same	ways	that	movie	studios	try	to	sell	you	their	newest	release	by
showing	previews	in	theaters,	print	advertising,	and	various	kinds	of
promotional	activities,	the	providers	of	information	will	use	all	sorts	of
techniques	to	convince	you	to	sample	their	wares.	A	lot	of	information	will	be
local—from	neighborhood	schools,	hospitals,	merchants,	and	even	pizza
joints.	Connecting	a	business	to	the	highway	won't	be	expensive.	Once	the
infrastructure	is	in	place	and	a	critical	number	of	users	adopt	it,	every
business	will	want	to	reach	out	to	its	customers	over	the	highway.
The	potential	for	electronic	efficiency	is	causing	some	people	to	worry	that	if
the======================================================== logy.	As	she	scrolls	through	the	document,	the
two	of	you	would	discuss	your	needs.	Then,	if	she	was	particularly	adept,	you
might	even	watch	her	do	the	editing.	However,	if	you	wanted	a	hand	in
editing	the	document	instead	of	just	watching	it	run	on	your	lawyer's
computer,	you	could	join	in	and	work	together.	You	would	be	able	not	only	to
talk	to	each	other	but	also	to	see	the	same	image	on	your	computer	screens.

You	won't	need	to	have	the	same	software.	The	application	just	has	to	run	on
one	end	of	the	connection,	the	lawyer's	end	in	this	case.	On	your	end,	you
would	need	only	an	appropriate	modem	and	DSVD	software.
Another	important	use	of	voice/data	connections	will	be	to	improve	product
support.	Microsoft	has	thousands	of	employees	whose	job	is	to	answer
product-support	questions	about	Microsoft	software.	In	fact,	we	have	as	many
product-support	people	answering	questions	about	our	software	as	we	have
engineers	building	it.	This	is	wonderful,	because	we	log	all	that	feedback	and
use	it	to	improve	our	products.	We	get	lots	of	these	questions	by	e-mail,	but
most	of	our	customers	still	telephone	us.	These	phone	conversations	are
inefficient.	A	customer	calls	in	to	say	his	particular	computer	is	configured	in
a	specific	way	and	is	giving	a	certain	error	message.	The	product-support
specialist	listens	to	this	description,	and	then	suggests	something,	which	it
takes	the	caller	a	few	minutes	to	do.	Then	the	conversation	resumes.	The
average	call	takes	fifteen	minutes,	and	some	take	an	hour.	But	once	everyone
is	using	DSVD,	the	product-support	specialist	will	be	able	to	see	what's	on	the
caller's	computer	screen	(with	the	caller's	explicit	permission,	of	course)	and
examine	the	caller's	computer	directly	rather	than	having	to	rely	on	the	caller
to	explain	what	he	is	seeing.	This	will	have	to	be	done	carefully,	to	ensure	that
no	one's	privacy	is	invaded.	The	process	will	reduce	the	length	of	the	average
call	by	30	or	40	percent,	which	will	make	customers	a	lot	happier	and	will	cut
costs	and	product	prices.
The	picture	transmitted	during	a	DSVD	(or	ISDN)	telephone	connection
won't	necessarily	have	to	be	of	a	document.	One	or	both	people	participating
will	also	be	able	to	transmit	still	images	of	themselves.	If	you	are	calling	in	to
buy	a	product,	you	might	expect	the	company's	service	representative	to	be
there,	smiling.	But	you,	as	the	customer,	might	choose	to	transmit	only	your
voice.	You	can	select	images	of	yourself	dressed	appropriately	for	the
occasion,	so	it	won't	matter	what	you	are	actually	wearing.	Or	you	might
decide	to	have	available	several	pictures	of	yourself,	one	smiling,	one
laughing,	one	contemplative,	and	maybe	one	that	is	angry.	During	the	course
of	the	conversation,	you	could	change	the	image	to	suit	your	mood	or	the
point	you	were	making.
Electronic	mail	and	shared	screens	will	eliminate	the	need	for	many	meetings.
Presentation	meetings,	called	primarily	so	participants	can	listen	and	learn,
can	be	replaced	with	e-mail	messages	with	spreadsheets	and	other	exhibits
enclosed	as	attachments.	When	face-to-face	meetings	do	take	place,	they	will
be	more	efficient	because	participants	will	already	have	exchanged
background	information	by	e-mail.

It	will	also	be	easier	to	schedule	meetings	because	software	will	handle	it.	For
example,	if	you	want	to	sit	down	face-to-face	with	your	lawyer,	your
scheduling	program	and	hers	will	be	able	to	communicate	across	the	network
—even	the	phone	network—and	pick	a	date	and	time	that	you	both	have	free.
Then	the	appointment	would	just	show	up	on	your	respective	electronic
calendars.
This	will	also	be	an	efficient	way	to	schedule	restaurant	or	theater
reservations,	but	it	raises	an	interesting	issue.	Let's	say	a	restaurant	isn't
getting	much	business,	or	tickets	to	a	show	aren't	selling	well,	or	your	lawyer
doesn't	want	you	to	know	that	you're	her	only	client.	Such	companies	and
individuals	might	instruct	their	scheduling	programs	just	to	respond	to
meeting	requests.	Your	scheduling	program	wouldn't	be	able	to	ask	your
lawyer's	program	to	list	all	the	times	she	is	free.	However,	if	it	asked	for	a
specific	two-hour	block,	the	response	would	be:	"Yes,	we	can	schedule	you
for	Tuesday	at	eleven	o'clock."
Clients	will	expect	their	lawyers,	dentists,	accountants,	and	other
professionals	to	be	able	to	schedule	appointments	and	exchange	documents
electronically.	You	might	have	a	quick	follow-up	question	for	your	doctor—
for	instance,	whether	a	generic	version	of	a	drug	is	acceptable.	It	is	hard	to
interrupt	a	doctor,	but	you'll	expect	to	be	able	to	trade	e-mail	with	all	of	the
professionals	you	work	with.	We're	going	to	see	competition	based	on	how
effectively	one	professional	group	has	adopted	these	communications	tools
and	how	much	more	accessible	and	efficient	this	makes	them.	I'm	sure	we'll
then	begin	seeing	ads	in	which	a	firm	will	tout	how	much	more	advanced	it
has	become	in	the	use	of	PC	communications.
When	the	information	highway	is	available,	people	won't	be	limited	to	audio
and	still	images,	because	the	highway	will	also	transmit	high-quality	video.
The	meetings	they	schedule	will	more	and	more	often	be	conducted
electronically,	using	shared-screen	videoconferencing.	Each	electronic
participant,	wherever	he	or	she	is,	will	look	at	a	different	physical	screen:	a
video	white	board,	a	television	set,	or	a	PC,	but	each	screen	will	show	much
the	same	image.	Part	of	the	screen	might	show	someone's	face,	while	another
part	might	display	a	document.	If	anyone	modifies	the	document,	the	change
will	appear	almost	immediately	on	all	the	screens.	Geographically	distant
collaborators	will	be	able	to	work	together	in	rich	ways.	This	is	synchronous
or	real-time	sharing,	which	means	that	the	computer	screens	will	keep	up	with
the	people	using	them.
If	a	group	were	to	meet	electronically	to	collaborate	on	a	press	release,	each

member	would	be	able	to	use	his	or	her	PC	or	notebook	computer	to	move
paragraphs	around	and	drop	in	a	photograph	or	a	video.	The	rest	of	the	group
would	be	able	to	look	at	the	result	on	their	individual	screens	and	see	each
contributor's	work	as	it	is	actually	happening.
We're	already	accustomed	to	watching	video	meetings.	Anyone	who	tunes	in
to	television	news	shows,	such	as	Nightline,	which	feature	long-distance
debates,	is	seeing	a	videoconference.	The	host	and	guests	may	be	separated
by	continents,	yet	they	engage	in	give-and-take	as	if	they	were	in	the	same
room,	and	to	viewers	it	almost	appears	that	they	are.
Today,	in	order	to	videoconference,	it	is	necessary	to	go	to	a	specially
equipped	facility	with	special	phone	lines.	Microsoft	has	at	least	one
dedicated	videoconference	room	in	each	of	its	sales	offices	around	the	world.
They're	used	quite	a	bit,	but	the	setting	is	fairly	formal.	These	facilities	have
saved	us	lots	of	traveling.	Employees	in	other	offices	"sit	in"	on	staff
meetings,	and	customers	and	vendors	have	"visited"	us	without	traveling	to
our	headquarters	outside	Seattle.	Such	meetings	will	become	very	popular
because	they	save	time	and	money	and	are	often	more	productive	than	audio-
only	phone	conferences	or	even	face-to-face	meetings,	because	people	seem
to	be	more	attentive	if	they	know	they	are	on-camera.
I've	noticed	that	it	does	take	some	getting	used	to,	though.	If	one	person	is	on
a	videoconference	screen,	he	or	she	tends	to	get	much	more	attention	than
others	in	the	meeting.	I	first	noticed	this	when	a	bunch	of	us	in	Seattle	were
videoconferencing	with	Steve	Ballmer,	who	was	in	Europe.	It	was	as	if	we
were	all	glued	to	The	Steve	Ballmer	Show.	If	Steve	took	off	his	shoes,	we'd
all	look	at	each	other's	reactions.	When	the	meeting	was	over	I	could	have
told	you	all	about	Steve's	new	haircut	but	I	might	not	have	been	able	to	name
the	other	people	who'd	been	in	the
room	with	me.	I	think	this	distortion	will	go	away	as	videoconferences
become	commonplace.
It's	currently	fairly	expensive	to	set	up	a	videoconference	room—it	costs	at
least	$40,000.	However,	desktop	systems	that	attach	to	PCs	are	coming,	and
they	will	reduce	the	cost—and	the	formality—dramatically.	Our	facilities	are
generally	connected	with	ISDN	lines	operating	at	384,000	bits	per	second,
which	provide	reasonable	picture	and	sound	quality	for	about	$20	to	$35	an
hour	for	connections	within	the	United	States	and	about	$250	to	$300	an	hour
for	an	international	connection.
The	cost	of	videoconferencing,	like	that	of	almost	every	other	computer-

driven	service,	is	going	to	drop	as	technology	and	communications	costs	do.
Small	video	devices	using	cameras	attached	to	personal	computers	or
television	sets	will	allow	us	to	meet	readily	across	the	information	highway
with	much	higher	quality	pictures	and	sound	for	lower	prices.	As	ISDN
connected	to	PCs	becomes	popular,	videoconferences	will	be	as	standard	a
business	procedure	as	using	a	copier	to	duplicate	a	document	for	distribution
is	now.
Some	people	worry	that,	by	eliminating	the	subtlety	of	human	dynamics	in	a
meeting,	videoconferences	and	shared	screens	will	give	corporate	gatherings
all	the	spontaneity	of	a	congressional	photo	opportunity.	How	will	people
whisper,	roll	their	eyes	at	a	tedious	speaker,	or	pass	notes?	Actually,
clandestine	communication	will	be	simpler	at	a	video	meeting	because	the
network	will	facilitate	individual	communications	on	the	side.	Meetings	have
always	had	unwritten	rules,	but	when	the	network	is	mediating
videoconferences,	some	rules	will	have	to	become	explicit.	Will	people	be
able	to	signal,	publicly	or	privately,	individually	or	collectively,	that	they	are
bored?	To	what	degree	should	a	participant	be	allowed	to	block	his	or	her
video	or	audio	from	others?	Should	private	side	conversations,	one	PC	to
another,	be	permitted?	Over	time,	as	we	use	these	facilities,	new	rules	of
meeting	etiquette	will	emerge.
Home	videoconferences	will	naturally	be	somewhat	different.	If	the
conference	has	only	two	participants,	it	will	amount	to	a	video	phone	call.
That	will	be	great	for	saying	hello	to	y======================================================== a	dollar	to	print	and	mail	a	letter	and	on	average	about	that
much	for	a	long-distance	phone	call.	And	to	make	such	a	call	you	have	to
know	the	number	and	have	coordinated	a	time	to	talk.	So	it	takes	considerable
time	and	effort	to	contact	even	a	modest-size	group.	On	a	bulletin	board	all
you	have	to	do	is	type	your	message	in	once	and	it's	available	to	everyone.
Bulletin	boards	on	the	Internet	cover	a	wide	range	of	topics.	Some	postings
are	not	serious.	Somebody	will	send	a	message	with	something	humorous	in	it
to	a	mailing	list	or	post	it	somewhere.	If	it	seems	funny	enough,	it	starts	being
forwarded	as	e-mail.	In	late	1994	this	happened	with	a	phony	press	release
about	Microsoft	buying	the	Catholic	Church.	Thousands	of	copies	were
distributed	inside	Microsoft	on	our	e-mail	system.	I	was	sent	more	than
twenty	copies	as	various	friends	and	colleagues	inside	and	outside	the
company	chose	to	forward	them.
There	are	many	more	serious	examples	of	the	networks'	being	used	to
mobilize	those	who	share	a	common	concern	or	interest.	During	the	recent
political	conflict	in	Russia,	both	sides	were	able	to	contact	people	throughout
the	world	through	postings	on	electronic	bulletin	boards.	The	networks	let
you	contact	people	you	have	never	met	or	heard	from	who	happen	to	share	an
interest.
Information	published	by	electronic	posting	is	grouped	by	topic.	Each	bulletin
board	or	newsgroup	has	a	name,	and	anyone	interested	can	"hang	out"	there.
There	are	lists	of	interesting	newsgroups	or	you	can	browse	names	that	sound
interesting.	If	you	wanted	to	communicate	about	paranormal	phenomena,	you
would	go	to	the	newsgroup	alt.paranormal.	If	you	wanted	to	discuss	that	sort
of	thing	with	others	who	don't	believe	in	it,	you	would	go	to	sci.skeptic.	Or
you	could	connect	to	copernicus.bbn.com	and	look	in	National	School

Network	Testbed	for	a	set	of	lesson	plans	used	by	kindergarten	through
twelfth-grade	teachers.	Almost	any	topic	you	can	name	has	a	group
communicating	about	it	on	the	network.
We	have	seen	that	Gutenberg's	invention	started	mass	publishing,	but	the
literacy	it	engendered	ultimately	led	to	a	great	deal	more	person-to-person
correspondence.	Electronic	communication	developed	the	other	way	around.
It	started	out	as	electronic	mail,	a	way	to	communicate	to	small	groups.	Now
millions	of	people	are	taking	advantage	of	the	networks'	low-friction
distribution	to	communicate	on	a	wide	scale	via	various	forms	of	posting.
The	Internet	has	enormous	potential,	but	it's	important	for	its	continuing
credibility	that	expectations	aren't	cranked	too	high.	The	total	number	of	users
of	the	Internet,	and	of	commercial	on-line	services	such	as	Prodigy,
CompuServe,	and	America	Online,	is	still	a	very	small	portion	of	the
population.	Surveys	indicate	that	nearly	50	percent	of	all	PC	users	in	the
United	States	have	a	modem,	but	fewer	than	about	10	percent	of	those	users
subscribe	to	an	on-line	service.	And	the	attrition	rate	is	very	high—many
subscribers	drop	off	after	less	than	a	year.
Significant	investments	will	be	required	to	develop	great	on-line	content	that
will	delight	and	excite	PC	users	and	raise	the	number	on-line	from	10	percent
up	to	50	percent,	or	even	the	90	percent	I	believe	it	will	become.	Part	of	the
reason	this	sort	of	investment	isn't	happening	today	is	that	simple	mechanisms
for	authors	and	publishers	to	charge	their	users	or	to	be	paid	by	advertisers	are
just	being	developed.
Commercial	on-line	services	collect	revenue,	but	they	have	been	paying
information	providers	royalties	of	only	10	percent	to	30	percent	of	what
customers	pay.	Although	the	provider	probably	knows	the	customers	and
market	better,	pricing—the	way	the	customer	is	charged—and	marketing	are
both	controlled	by	the	service.	The	resulting	revenue	stream	is	simply	not
large	enough	to	encourage	the	information	providers	to	create	exciting	new
on-line	information.
Over	the	next	several	years	the	evolution	of	on-line	services	will	solve	these
problems	and	create	an	incentive	for	suppliers	to	furnish	great	material.	There
will	be	new	billing	options	monthly	subscriptions,	hourly	rates,	charges	per
item	accessed,	and	advertising	payments—so	that	more	revenue	flows	to	the
information	providers.	Once	that	happens	a	successful	new	mass	medium	will
come	into	existence.	This	might	take	several	years	and	a	new	generation	of
network	technology,	such	as	ISDN	and	cable	modems,	but	one	way	or	another

it	will	happen.	When	it	does,	it	will	open	tremendous	opportunities	for
authors,	editors,	directors—every	creator	of	intellectual	property.
Whenever	a	new	medium	is	created,	the	first	content	offered	is	brought	over
from	other	media.	But	to	take	best	advantage	of	the	capabilities	of	the
electronic	medium,	content	needs	to	be	specially	authored	with	it	in	mind.	So
far	the	vast	majority	of	content	on-line	has	been	"dumped"	from	another
source.	Magazine	or	newspaper	publishers	are	taking	text	already	created	for
paper	editions	and	simply	shoving	it	on-line,	often	minus	the	pictures,	charts,
and	graphics.	Plain-text	bulletin	boards	and	e-mail	are	interesting	but	cannot
really	compete	with	the	richer	forms	of	information	in	our	lives.	On-line
content	should	include	lots	of	graphics,	photos,	and	links	to	related
information.	As	communications	get	faster	and	the	commercial	opportunity
becomes	clear,	more	audio	and	video	elements	will	be	included.
The	development	of	CD-ROMs—multi-media	versions	of	audio	compact
discs—provides	some	lessons	that	can	be	applied	to	the	creation	of	on-line
content.	CD-ROM-based	multi-media	titles	can	integrate	different	types	of
information—text,	graphics,	photographic	images,	animation,	music,	and
video—into	a	single	document.	Much	of	these	titles'	value	today	is	in	the
"multi,"	not	in	the	"media."	They	are	the	best	approximations	of	what	the	rich
documents	of	the	future	will	be	like.
The	music	and	audio	on	CD-ROMs	are	clear,	but	rarely	as	good	as	on	a	music
CD.	You	could	store	CD-quality	sound	on	a	CD-ROM,	but	the	format	it	uses
is	very	bulky,	so	if	you	stored	too	much	CD-quality	sound,	you	wouldn't	have
room	for	data,	graphics,	and	other	material.
Motion	video	on	CD-ROMs	still	needs	improving.	If	you	compare	the	quality
of	video	a	PC	can	display	today	with	the	postage-stamp-size	displays	of	just	a
few	years	ago,	the	progress	is	amazing.	Longtime	computer	users	got	very
excited	when	they	first	encountered	video	on	their	computers.	On	the	other
hand,	the	grainy,	jerky	image	is	certainly	no	better	than	a	1950s	television
picture.	The	size	and	quality	of	images	will	improve	with	faster	processors
and	better	compression,	and	eventually	will	become	far	better	than	today's
television	picture.
CD-ROM	technology	has	enabled	a	new	category	of	applications.	Shopping
catalogs,	museum	tours,	and	textbooks	are	being	republished	in	this	new,
appealing	form.	Every	subject	is	being	covered.	Competition	and	technology
will	bring	rapid	improvements	in	the	quality	of	the	titles.	CD-ROMs	will	be
replaced	by	a	new	high-capacity	disc	that	will	look	like	today's	CD	but	will

hold	ten	times	as	much	data.	The	additional	capacity	of	these	extended	CDs
will	allow	for	more	than	two	hours	of	digital	video	on	a	single	disc,	which
means	they'll	be	capable	of	holding	a	whole	movie.	The	picture	and	sound
quality	will	be	much	higher	than	those	of	the	best	TV	signal	you	can	receive
on	a	home	set,	and	new	generations	of	graphics	chips	will	allow	multi-media
titles	to	include	Hollywood-quality	special	effects	under	the	interactive
control	of	the	user.
Multi-media	CD-ROMs	are	popular	today	because	they	offer	users
interactivity	rather	than	because	they	have	imitated	TV.	The	commercial
appeal	of	interactivity	has	already	been	demonstrated	by	the	popularity	of
CD-ROM	games	such	as	Brøderbund's	Myst	and	Virgin	Interactive
Entertainment's	Seventh	Guest,	which	are	whodunits,	a	blending	of	narrative
fiction	and	a	series	of	puzzles	that	allow	a	player	to	investigate	a	mystery,
collecting	clues	in	any	order.
The	success	of	these	games	has	encouraged	authors	to	begin	to	create
interactive	novels	and	movies	in	which	they	introduce	the	characters	and	the
general	outline	of	the	plot,	then	the	reader/player	makes	decisions	that	change
the	outcome	of	the	story.	No	one	suggests	that	every	book	or	movie	should
allow	the	reader	or	viewer	to	influence	its	outcome.	A	good	story	that	makes
you	just	want	to	sit	there	for	a	few	hours	and	enjoy	it	is	wonderful
entertainment.	I	don't	want	to	choose	an	ending	for	The	Great	Gatsby	or	La
Dolce	Vita.	F.	Scott	Fitzgerald	and	Federico	Fellini	have	done	that	for	me.
The	suspension	of	disbelief	essential	to	the	enjoyment	of	great	fiction	is
fragile	and	may	not	hold	up	under	the	heavy-handed	use	of	interactivity.	You
can't	simultaneously	control	the	plot	and	surrender	your	imagination	to	it.
Interactive	fiction	is	as	similar	to	and	different	from	the	older	forms	as	poetry
is	similar	to	and	different	from	drama.
There	will	be	interactive	stories	and	games	available	on	the	network	too.	Such
applications	can	share	content	with	CD-ROMs,	but	at	least	for	a	while	the
software	will	have	to	be	carefully	prepared	so	the	CD-ROMs	won't	be	slow
when	used	on	a	network.	This	is	because,	as	discussed	earlier,	bandwidth,	or
the	speed	at	which	bits	are	transferred	from	the	CD-ROM	to	the	computer,	is
far	greater	than	the	bandwidth	of	the	existing	telephone	network.	Over	time,
the	networks	will	meet—then	exceed—the	speed	of	the	CD-ROM.	And	when
that	happens,	the	content	being	created	for	the	two	forms	will	be	the	same.
But	this	will	take	a	number	of	years,	because	improvements	are	also	being
made	in	CD-ROM	technology.	In	the	meantime	the	bit	rate	will	differentiate
the	two	forms	enough	so	that	they	will	remain	separate	technologies.

The	technologies	underlying	the	CD-ROM	and	on-line	services	have
improved	dramatically,	but	very	few	computer	users	are	creating	multi-media
documents	yet.	Too	much	effort	is	still	required.	Millions	of	people	have
camcorders	and	make	videos	of	their	kids	or======================================================== our	kids	when	you're	out	of	town	or
showing	your	veterinarian	the	way	your	dog	or	cat	limps.	But	when	you're	at
home,	chances	are	you'll	keep	cameras	off	during	most	calls,	especially	with
strangers.	You	may	choose	to	transmit	a	canned	photograph	of	yourself,	your
family,	or	something	else	you	believe	expresses	your	individuality	yet
protects	your	visual	privacy.	It	will	be	something	like	choosing	a	message	for
your	answering	machine.	Live	video	could	be	switched	on	for	a	friend	or
when	business	required	it.
All	of	the	synchronous	and	asynchronous	images	I	have	discussed	up	to	this
point—photographs,	videos,	or	documents—have	been	pictures	of	real	things.
As	computers	become	more	powerful,	it	will	be	possible	for	a	standard	PC	to
fabricate	realistic	synthetic	images.	Your	phone	or	computer	will	be	able	to
generate	a	lifelike	digital	image	of	your	face,	showing	you	listening	or	even
talking.	You	really	will	be	talking	it's	just	that	you've	taken	the	call	at	home
and	are	dripping	wet	from	the	shower.	As	you	talk,	your	phone	will	synthesize
an	image	of	you	in	your	most	businesslike	suit.	Your	facial	expressions	will
match	your	words	(remember,	small	computers	are	going	to	get	very

powerful).	Just	as	easily,	your	phone	will	be	able	to	transmit	an	image	of	your
words	issuing	from	the	mouth	of	someone	else,	or	from	an	idealized	version
of	you.	If	you	are	talking	to	someone	you've	never	met,	and	you	don't	want	to
show	a	mole	or	a	flabby	chin,	your	caller	won't	be	able	to	tell	if	you	really
look	so	much	like	Cary	Grant	(or	Meg	Ryan)	or	whether	you're	getting	a	little
help	from	your	computer.
All	of	these	electronic	innovations—e-mail,	shared	screens,
videoconferencing,	and	video	phone	calls—are	ways	of	overcoming	physical
separation.	By	the	time	they	become	commonplace,	they	will	have	changed
not	just	the	way	we	work	together	but	also	distinctions	now	made	between	the
workplace	and	everywhere	else.
In	1994	in	the	United	States	there	were	more	than	7	million	"telecommuters"
who	didn't	travel	daily	to	offices	but	instead	"commuted"	via	fax	machines,
telephones,	and	e-mail.	Some	writers,	engineers,	attorneys,	and	others	whose
jobs	are	relatively	autonomous	already	stay	at	home	for	a	portion	of	their
work	hours.	Salespersons	are	judged	on	results;	so	as	long	as	a	professional
salesperson	is	productive,	it	doesn't	much	matter	whether	he	or	she	is	working
in	the	office,	at	home,	or	on	the	road	somewhere.	Many	people	who
telecommute	find	it	liberating	and	convenient,	but	some	find	it	claustrophobic
to	be	at	home	all	the	time.	Others	discover	they	don't	have	the	self-discipline
to	make	it	effective.	In	the	years	ahead,	millions	of	additional	people	will
telecommute	at	least	part-time,	using	the	information	highway.
Employees	who	do	most	of	their	work	on	the	telephone	are	strong	candidates
for	telecommuting	because	calls	can	be	routed	to	them.	Telemarketers,
customer-service	representatives,	reservation	agents,	and	product-support
specialists	will	have	access	to	as	much	information	on	a	screen	at	home	as
they	would	on	a	screen	at	an	office.	A	decade	from	now,	advertisements	for
many	jobs	will	list	how	many	hours	a	week	of	work	are	expected	and	how
many	of	those	hours,	if	any,	are	"inside"	hours	at	a	designated	location	such	as
an	office.	Some	jobs	will	require	that	the	employee	already	have	a	PC	so	he
can	work	at	home.	Customer-service	organizations	will	be	able	to	use	part-
time	labor	very	easily.
When	employees	and	supervisors	are	physically	apart,	management	will	have
to	adapt,	and	each	individual	will	have	to	learn	to	be	a	productive	employee
on	his	or	her	own.	New	feedback	mechanisms	will	have	to	evolve	too,	so	that
both	employer	and	employee	can	determine	the	quality	of	work	being	done.
An	employee	in	an	office	is	assumed	to	be	working	the	whole	time,	but	the

same	employee	working	at	home	might	be	credited	(perhaps	at	a	different
rate)	only	for	the	time	he	or	she	is	actually	performing	work.	If	the	baby	starts
crying,	Dad	or	Mom	would	click	"Not	Available,"	and	take	care	of	the	child
with	unpaid	minutes	away	from	the	job.	When	the	employee	was	ready	once
again	to	focus	on	the	job,	he	or	she	would	signal	availability,	and	the	network
would	start	delivering	work	that	needed	attention.	Part-time	work	and	job
sharing	will	take	on	new	meanings.
The	number	of	offices	a	company	needs	might	be	reduced.	A	single	office	or
cubicle	could	serve	several	people	whose	inside	hours	were	staggered	or
irregular.	Already,	the	major	accounting	firms	Arthur	Andersen	and	Ernst	&
Young	are	among	the	companies	that	have	replaced	large	numbers	of
expensive	private	offices	with	a	smaller	number	of	generic	offices,	which	can
be	reserved	by	accountants	who	are	in	from	the	field.	Tomorrow,	a	shared
office's	computers,	phones,	and	digital	white	boards	could	be	configured	for
that	day's	occupant.	For	part	of	a	day	an	office's	white-board	walls	would
display	one	employee's	calendar,	family	photos,	and	favorite	cartoons,	and
later	on	the	same	whiteboard	walls	would	feature	the	personal	photos	or
artwork	of	a	different	employee.	Wherever	a	worker	logged	on,	his	or	her
familiar	office	surroundings	could	follow,	courtesy	of	digital	white	boards	and
the	information	highway.
Information	technology	will	affect	much	more	than	the	physical	location	and
supervision	of	employees.	The	very	nature	of	almost	every	business
organization	will	have	to	be	reexamined.	This	should	include	its	structure	and
the	balance	between	inside,	full-time	staff	and	outside	consultants	and	firms.
The	corporate	reengineering	movement	starts	with	the	premise	that	there	are
better	ways	to	design	companies.	To	date,	most	reengineering	has	focused	on
moving	information	inside	the	company	in	new	ways.	The	next	movement
will	be	to	redefine	the	boundary	between	the	company	and	its	customers	and
suppliers.	Key	questions	to	reexamine	include:	How	will	customers	find	out
about	products?	How	will	customers	order?	What	new	competitors	will
emerge	as	geography	becomes	less	of	a	barrier?	How	can	the	company	do	the
best	job	of	keeping	customers	happy	after	the	sale?
Corporate	structures	will	evolve.	E-mail	is	a	powerful	force	for	flattening	the
hierarchies	common	to	large	companies.	If	communications	systems	are	good
enough,	companies	don't	need	as	many	levels	of	management.	Intermediaries
in	middle	management,	who	once	passed	information	up	and	down	the	chain
of	command,	already	aren't	as	important	today	as	they	once	were.	Microsoft
was	born	an	Information	Age	company,	and	its	hierarchy	has	always	been

relatively	flat.	Our	goal	is	to	have	no	more	than	six	levels	of	management
between	me	and	anyone	in	the	company.	In	a	sense,	because	of	e-mail,	there
are	no	levels	between	me	and	anyone	in	the	company.
As	technology	makes	it	easier	for	a	business	to	find	and	collaborate	with
outside	expertise,	a	huge	and	competitive	market	for	consultants	will	arise.	If
you	want	someone	to	help	design	a	piece	of	direct-response	advertising,	you'll
ask	a	software	application	running	on	the	information	highway	to	list
consultants	with	certain	qualifications	who	are	willing	to	work	for	no	more
than	a	certain	rate	and	have	an	appropriate	time	period	free.	Software	will
check	references	for	you	preliminarily	and	help	you	filter	out	people	who
aren't	qualified.	You'll	be	able	to	ask,	"Have	any	of	these	candidates	worked
for	us	before	and	gotten	a	rating	above	eight?"	This	system	will	become	so
inexpensive	to	use	that	you'll	eventually	rely	on	it	to	find	baby-sitters	and
people	to	cut	your	lawn.	If	you're	looking	for	work	as	an	employee	or
contractor,	the	system	will	match	you	with	potential	employers	and	be	able	to
send	your	résumé	electronically	with	the	click	of	a	button.
Companies	will	reevaluate	such	employment	issues	as	how	extensive	a	legal
or	finance	department	they	should	keep,	based	on	the	relative	benefits	of
having	expertise	inside	an	organization	versus	outside	it.	For	particularly	busy
periods	a	company	will	be	able	to	get	more	help	easily	without	adding	more
employees	and	the	associated	office	space.	Businesses	that	successfully	draw
on	the	resources	available	across	the	network	will	be	more	efficient,	which
will	challenge	others	to	do	the	same.
Lots	of	companies	will	eventually	be	far	smaller	because	using	the
information	highway	will	make	it	easy	to	find	and	work	with	outside
resources.	Big	is	not	necessarily	good	when	it	comes	to	business.	Hollywood
studios	are	surprisingly	small	in	terms	of	permanent	employees,	because	they
contract	for	services—including	actors	and	often	facilities—on	a	movie-by-
movie	basis.	Some	software	companies	follow	a	similar	model,	hiring
programmers	as	needed.	Of	course,	companies	will	still	reserve	many
functions	for	full-time	employees.	It	would	be	immensely	inefficient	to	have
to	bid	for	the	time	of	an	outside	professional	whenever	a	company	needed
something	done,	especially	if	the	outside	consultant	had	to	come	up	to	speed.
But	a	number	of	functions	will	be	dispersed,	both	structurally	and
geographically.
Geographic	dispersion	will	affect	much	more	than	corporate	structure.	Many
of	today's	major	social	problems	have	arisen	because	the	population	has	been
crowded	into	urban	areas.	The	drawbacks	of	city	life	are	obvious	and

substantial—traffic,	cost	of	living,	crime,	and	limited	access	to	the	outdoors,
among	others.	The	advantages	of	city	life	include	access	to	work,	services,
education,	entertainment,	and	friends.	Over	the	past	hundred	years	most	of	the
population	of	the	industrialized	world	has	chosen	to	live	in	urban	areas,	after
consciously	or	unconsciously	balancing	the	pluses	and	minuses.
The	information	highway	changes	that	balance.	For	those	who	have	a
connection	to	it,	the	highway	will	substantially	reduce	the	drawbacks	of	living
outside	a	big	city.	As	a	consultant	or	employee	involved	in	a	service-related
field,	you	will	be	able	to	collaborate	easily	from	virtually	anywhere.	As	a
consumer,	you	will	be	able	to	get	advice—financial,	legal,	even	some	medical
—withou======================================================== omputers	at	an	early
age	we	can	ensure	that	they	play	their	rightful	role	in	all	the	work	that	benefits
from	computer	expertise.
My	own	experience	as	a	child,	and	that	of	my	friends	raising	children	today,
is	that	once	a	kid	is	exposed	to	computing,	he	or	she	is	hooked.	But	we	have
to	create	the	opportunity	for	that	exposure.	Schools	should	have	low-cost
access	to	computers	connected	to	the	information	highway,	and	teachers	need
to	become	comfortable	with	the	new	tools.
One	of	the	wonderful	things	about	the	information	highway	is	that	virtual
equity	is	far	easier	to	achieve	than	real-world	equity.	It	would	take	a	massive
amount	of	money	to	give	every	grammar	school	in	every	poor	area	the	same
library	resources	as	the	schools	in	Beverly	Hills.	However,	when	you	put
schools	on-line	they	all	get	the	same	access	to	information,	wherever	it	might
be	stored.	We	are	all	created	equal	in	the	virtual	world,	and	we	can	use	this
equality	to	help	address	some	of	the	sociological	problems	that	society	has	yet
to	solve	in	the	physical	world.	The	network	will	not	eliminate	barriers	of
prejudice	or	inequality,	but	it	will	be	a	powerful	force	in	that	direction.
The	question	of	how	to	price	intellectual	property,	such	as	entertainment	and
educational	materials,	is	fascinating.	Economists	understand	a	lot	about	how
the	pricing	of	classical	manufactured	goods	works.	They	can	show	how
rational	pricing	should	reflect	cost	structure	in	a	very	direct	manner.	In	a
market	with	multiple	competing	qualified	manufacturers,	prices	tend	to	drop
to	the	marginal	cost	of	making	one	more	of	whatever	they	are	selling.	But	this
model	doesn't	work	when	applied	to	intellectual	property.
A	basic	economics	course	describes	the	curves	of	supply	and	demand,	which
intersect	at	the	price	appropriate	for	a	product.	But	supply-and-demand
economics	gets	into	trouble	when	it	comes	to	intellectual	property,	because
ordinary	rules	regarding	manufacturing	costs	don't	apply.	Typically	there	are
huge	up-front	development	costs	for	intellectual	property.	These	fixed	costs
are	the	same	regardless	of	whether	one	copy	or	a	million	copies	of	the	work
are	sold.	George	Lucas's	next	movie	in	the	Star	Wars	series	will	cost	millions
to	make,	regardless	of	how	many	people	pay	to	see	it	in	theaters.

The	pricing	of	intellectual	property	is	more	complicated	than	most	pricing
because	today	it	is	relatively	inexpensive	to	manufacture	copies	of	most
intellectual	property.	Tomorrow,	on	the	information	highway,	the	cost	of
delivering	a	copy	of	a	work—which	will	amount	to	the	same	thing	as
manufacturing	it—will	be	even	lower,	and	dropping	every	year	because	of
Moore's	Law.	When	you	buy	a	new	medicine,	you're	paying	mostly	for	what
the	drug	company	spent	for	research,	development,	and	testing.	Even	if	the
marginal	cost	of	making	each	pill	is	minimal,	the	pharmaceutical	company
still	may	have	to	charge	quite	a	bit	for	each,	especially	if	the	market	is	not
huge.	The	revenue	from	the	average	patient	has	to	cover	a	sufficient	share	of
the	development	expenses	and	generate	enough	profit	to	make	investors	glad
they	took	the	substantial	financial	risks	involved	in	developing	a	new	drug.
When	a	poor	country	wants	the	medicine,	the	manufacturer	faces	a	moral
dilemma.	If	the	pharmaceutical	company	doesn't	waive	or	drastically	reduce
its	patent-licensing	fees,	the	medicine	won't	be	available	to	poor	countries.
However,	if	a	manufacturer	is	to	be	able	to	invest	in	R&D,	some	users	must
pay	more	than	the	marginal	cost.	Prices	for	drugs	vary	greatly	from	country	to
country	and	discriminate	against	poor	people	in	rich	countries	except	where
governments	cover	medical	costs.
One	possible	solution,	a	scheme	whereby	a	rich	person	pays	more	to	buy	a
new	medicine,	to	see	a	movie	or	to	read	a	book,	may	seem	inequitable;
however,	it	is	identical	to	a	system	already	in	place	today—taxation.	Through
the	income	tax	and	other	taxes,	people	with	high	incomes	pay	more	for	roads,
schools,	the	army,	and	every	other	government	facility	than	the	average
person	does.	It	cost	me	more	than	$100	million	last	year	to	get	those	services
because	I	paid	a	significant	capital	gains	tax	after	selling	some	Microsoft
shares.	I	have	no	complaint,	but	it	is	an	example	of	the	same	services	being
provided	at	vastly	different	prices.
The	pricing	for	highway	access	may	be	set	politically	rather	than	on	the	basis
of	costs.	It	is	going	to	be	expensive	to	enfranchise	people	in	remote	locations
because	the	cost	of	bringing	wiring	to	far-flung	homes	and	even	small
communities	is	very	high.	Companies	may	not	be	eager	to	make	the	necessary
investment,	and	the	geographically	disenfranchised	may	not	be	in	a	position
to	make	the	investment	on	their	own	behalf.	We	should	expect	heated	debate
about	whether	the	government	should	subsidize	connections	to	rural	areas,	or
impose	regulations	that	cause	urban	users	to	subsidize	rural	ones.	The
precedent	for	this	is	a	doctrine	known	as	"universal	service"	which	was
created	to	subsidize	rural	mail,	phone,	and	electrical	services	in	the	United
States.	It	dictates	a	single	price	for	the	delivery	of	a	letter,	a	phone	call,	or
electrical	power	regardless	of	where	you	live.	It	applies	even	though	it	is

more	expensive	to	deliver	services	in	rural	areas,	where	homes	and	businesses
are	farther	apart	than	in	areas	of	concentrated	population.
There	was	no	equivalent	policy	for	the	delivery	of	newspapers	or	radio	or
television	reception.	Nonetheless,	these	services	are	widely	available,	so
clearly	under	some	circumstances	government	intervention	isn't	necessary	to
ensure	high	availability.	The	U.S.	Postal	Service	was	founded	as	part	of	the
government	on	the	assumption	that	that	was	the	only	way	to	provide	truly
universal	service.	UPS	and	Federal	Express	might	disagree	on	this	point,
however,	because	they	have	managed	to	provide	broad	coverage	and	make
money.	The	debate	as	to	whether,	or	to	what	degree,	government	needs	to	be
involved	to	guarantee	broad	access	to	the	information	highway	is	certain	to
rage	on	for	many	years.
The	highway	will	let	those	who	live	in	remote	places	consult,	collaborate,	and
be	involved	with	the	rest	of	the	world.	Because	many	people	will	find	the
combination	of	rural	lifestyle	and	urban	information	attractive,	network
companies	will	have	an	incentive	to	run	fiber-optic	lines	to	high-income
remote	areas.	It	is	likely	that	some	states,	or	communities,	or	even	private	real
estate	developers	will	promote	their	areas	by	providing	great	connectivity.
This	will	lead	to	what	one	might	call	the	"Aspen-ization"	of	parts	of	the
country.	Interesting	rural	communities	with	high	marks	for	quality	of	life	will
deliberately	set	out	to	attract	a	new	class	of	sophisticated	urban	citizen.	Taken
as	a	whole,	urban	areas	will	tend	to	get	their	connections	before	rural	ones.
The	highway	will	spread	information	and	opportunity	across	borders	to
developing	nations,	too.	Cheap	global	communications	can	bring	people
anywhere	into	the	mainstream	of	the	world	economy.	An	English-speaking
Ph.D.	in	China	will	be	able	to	bid	against	colleagues	in	London	for	consulting
work.	Knowledge	workers	in	industrialized	countries	will,	in	a	sense,	face
new	competition—just	as	some	manufacturing	workers	in	industrialized
countries	have	experienced	competition	from	developing	nations	over	the	past
decade.	This	will	make	the	information	highway	a	powerful	force	for
international	trade	in	intellectual	goods	and	services,	just	as	the	availability	of
relatively	inexpensive	air	cargo	and	containerized	shipping	helped	propel
international	trade	in	physical	goods.
The	net	effect	will	be	a	wealthier	world,	which	should	be	stabilizing.
Developed	nations,	and	workers	in	those	nations,	are	likely	to	maintain	a
sizable	economic	lead.	However,	the	gap	between	the	have	and	have-not
nations	will	diminish.	Starting	out	behind	is	sometimes	an	advantage.	It	lets
those	who	adopt	late	skip	steps,	and	avoid	the	mistakes	of	the	trailblazers.

Some	countries	will	never	have	industrialization.	They	will	move	directly	into
the	Information	Age.	Europe	didn't	adopt	television	until	several	years	after
the	United	States.	The	result	was	higher	picture
quality,	because	by	the	time	Europe	set	its	standard	a	better	choice	was
available.	As	a	result,	Europeans	have	enjoyed	better-looking	television
pictures	for	decades.
Telephone	systems	are	another	example	of	how	starting	late	can	provide	an
advantage.	In	Africa,	China,	and	other	parts	of	the	developing	world,	many
citizens	who	have	phones	use	cellular	instruments.	Cellular	telephone	service
is	spreading	rapidly	in	Asia,	Latin	America,	and	other	developing	regions,
because	it	does	not	require	that	copper	wires	be	strung.	Many	people	in	the
cellular	industry	predict	that	improvements	in	technology	will	mean	that	these
areas	may	never	get	a	conventional	copper	wire-based	telephone	system.
These	countries	will	never	have	to	cut	down	a	million	trees	for	telephone
poles	or	string	a	hundred	thousand	miles	of	telephone	lines	only	to	rip	them
all	down	and	bury	the	entire	network.	The	wireless	telephone	system	will	be
their	first	telephone	system.	They	will	get	increasingly	better	cellular	systems
wherever	they	can't	afford	a	full	broadband	connection.
The	presence	of	advanced	communications	systems	promises	to	make	nations
more	alike	and	reduce	the	importance	of	national	boundaries.	The	fax
machine,	the	portable	videocamera,	and	Cable	News	Network	are	among	the
forces	that	brought	about	the	end	of	communist	regimes	and	the	Cold	War,
because	they	allowed	news	to	pass	both	ways	through	what	was	called	the
Iron	Curtain.
Now,	commercial	satellite	broadcasts	to	nations	such	as	China	and	Iran	offer
citizens	glimpses	of	the	outside	world	that	are	not	necessarily	sanctioned	by
their	governments.	This	new	access	to	information	can	draw	people	together
by	increasing	their	understanding	of	other	cultures.	Some	believe	it	will	cause
discontent	and	worse,	a	"Revolution	of	Expectations,"	when	disenfranchised
people	get	enough	data	a======================================================== We	saw	three	ways	to	get	MS-DOS	out	in	front.	First	was	to	make
MS-DOS	the	best	product.	Second	was	to	help	other	software	companies
write	MS-DOS-based	software.	Third	was	to	ensure	MS-DOS	was
inexpensive.
1981:	The	IBM	personal	computer
We	gave	IBM	a	fabulous	deal—a	low,	one-time	fee	that	granted	the	company
the	right	to	use	Microsoft's	operating	system	on	as	many	computers	as	it
could	sell.	This	offered	IBM	an	incentive	to	push	MS-DOS,	and	to	sell	it
inexpensively.	Our	strategy	worked.	IBM	sold	the	UCSD	Pascal	P-System	for
about	$450,	CP/M-86	for	about	$175,	and	MS-DOS	for	about	$60.
Our	goal	was	not	to	make	money	directly	from	IBM,	but	to	profit	from
licensing	MS-DOS	to	computer	companies	that	wanted	to	offer	machines
more	or	less	compatible	with	the	IBM	PC.	IBM	could	use	our	software	for
free,	but	it	did	not	have	an	exclusive	license	or	control	of	future
enhancements.	This	put	Microsoft	in	the	business	of	licensing	a	software
platform	to	the	personal-computer	industry.	Eventually	IBM	abandoned	the
UCSD	Pascal	P-system	and	CP/M-86	enhancements.
Consumers	bought	the	IBM	PC	with	confidence,	and	in	1982,	software

developers	began	turning	out	applications	to	run	on	it.	Each	new	customer,
and	each	new	application,	added	to	the	IBM	PC's	strength	as	a	potential	de
facto	standard	for	the	industry.	Soon	most	of	the	new	and	best	software,	such
as	Lotus	1-2-3,	was	being	written	for	it.	Mitch	Kapor,	with	Jonathan	Sachs,
created	1-2-3	and	revolutionized	spreadsheets.	The	original	inventors	of	the
electronic	spreadsheet,	Dan	Bricklin	and	Bob	Frankston,	deserve	immense
credit	for	their	product,	VisiCalc,	but	1-2-3	made	it	obsolete.	Mitch	is	a
fascinating	person	whose	eclectic	background—in	his	case	as	a	disc	jockey
and	transcendental	meditation	instructor—is	typical	of	that	of	the	best
software	designers.
A	positive-feedback	cycle	began	driving	the	PC	market.	Once	it	got	going,
thousands	of	software	applications	appeared,	and	untold	numbers	of
companies	began	making	add-in	or	"accessory"	cards,	which	extended	the
hardware	capabilities	of	the	PC.	The	availability	of	software	and	hardware
add-ons	sold	PCs	at	a	far	greater	rate	than	IBM	had	anticipated—by	a	factor
of	millions.	The	positive-feedback	cycle	spun	out	billions	of	dollars	for	IBM.
For	a	few	years,	more	than	half	of	all	personal	computers	used	in	business
were	IBMs	and	most	of	the	rest	were	compatible	with	its	machines.
The	IBM	standard	became	the	platform	everybody	imitated.	A	lot	of	the
reason	was	timing	and	its	use	of	a	16-bit	processor.	Both	timing	and
marketing	are	key	to	acceptance	with	technology	products.	The	PC	happened
to	be	a	good	machine,	but	another	company	could	have	set	the	standard	by
getting	enough	desirable	applications	and	selling	enough	machines.
IBM's	early	business	decisions,	caused	by	its	rush	to	get	the	PCs	out,	made	it
very	easy	for	other	companies	to	build	compatible	machines.	The	architecture
was	for	sale.	The	microprocessor	chips	from	Intel	and	Microsoft's	operating
system	were	available.	This	openness	was	a	powerful	incentive	for
component	builders,	software	developers,	and	everyone	else	in	the	business	to
try	to	copy.
Within	three	years	almost	all	the	competing	standards	for	personal	computers
disappeared.	The	only	exceptions	were	Apple's	Apple	II	and	Macintosh.
Hewlett	Packard,	DEC,	Texas	Instruments,	and	Xerox,	despite	their
technologies,	reputations,	and	customer	bases,	failed	in	the	personal-computer
market	in	the	early	1980s	because	their	machines	weren't	compatible	and
didn't	offer	significant	enough	improvements	over	the	IBM	architecture.	A
host	of	start-ups,	such	as	Eagle	and	Northstar,	thought	people	would	buy	their
hardware	because	it	offered	something	different	and	slightly	better	than	the
IBM	PC.	All	of	the	start-ups	either	changed	to	building	compatible	hardware

or	failed.	The	IBM	PC	became	the	hardware	standard.	By	the	mid-1980s,
there	were	dozens	of	IBM-compatible	PCs.	Although	buyers	of	a	PC	might
not	have	articulated	it	this	way,	what	they	were	looking	for	was	the	hardware
that	ran	the	most	software,	and	they	wanted	the	same	system	the	people	they
knew	and	worked	with	had.
It	has	become	popular	for	certain	revisionist	historians	to	conclude	that	IBM
made	a	mistake	working	with	Intel	and	Microsoft	to	create	its	PC.	They	argue
that	IBM	should	have	kept	the	PC	architecture	proprietary,	and	that	Intel	and
Microsoft	somehow	got	the	better	of	IBM.	But	the	revisionists	are	missing	the
point.	IBM	became	the	central	force	in	the	PC	industry	precisely	because	it
was	able	to	harness	an	incredible	amount	of	innovative	talent	and
entrepreneurial	energy	and	use	it	to	promote	its	open	architecture.	IBM	set	the
standards.
In	the	mainframe	business	IBM	was	king	of	the	hill,	and	competitors	found	it
hard	to	match	the	IBM	sales	force	and	high	R&D.	If	a	competitor	tried
climbing	the	hill,	IBM	could	focus	its	assets	to	make	the	ascent	nearly
impossible.	But	in	the	volatile	world	of	the	personal	computer,	IBM's	position
was	more	like	that	of	the	leading	runner	in	a	marathon.	As	long	as	the	leader
keeps	running	as	fast	or	faster	than	the	others,	he	stays	in	the	lead	and
competitors	will	have	to	keep	trying	to	catch	up.	If,	however,	he	slacks	off	or
stops	pushing	himself,	the	rest	will	pass	him	by.	There	weren't	many
deterrents	to	the	other	racers,	as	would	soon	become	clear.
By	1983,	I	thought	our	next	step	should	be	to	develop	a	graphical	operating
system.	I	didn't	believe	we	would	be	able	to	retain	our	position	at	the
forefront	of	the	software	industry	if	we	stuck	with	MS-DOS,	because	MS-
DOS	was	character-based.	A	user	had	to	type	in	often-obscure	commands,
which	then	appeared	on	the	screen.	MS-DOS	didn't	provide	pictures	and	other
graphics	to	help	users	with	applications.	The	interface	is	the	way	the
computer	and	the	user	communicate.	I	believed	that	in	the	future	interfaces
would	be	graphical	and	that	it	was	essential	for	Microsoft	to	move	beyond
MS-DOS	and	set	a	new	standard	in	which	pictures	and	fonts	(typefaces)
would	be	part	of	an	easier-to-use	interface.	In	order	to	realize	our	vision,	PCs
had	to	be	made	easier	to	use	not	only	to	help	existing	customers,	but	also	to
attract	new	ones	who	wouldn't	take	the	time	to	learn	to	work	with	a
complicated	interface.
To	illustrate	the	huge	difference	between	a	character-based	computer	program
and	a	graphical	one,	imagine	playing	a	board	game	such	as	chess,	checkers,
Go,	or	Monopoly	on	a	computer	screen.	With	a	character-based	system,	you

type	in	your	moves	using	characters.	You	write	"Move	the	piece	on	square	11
to	square	19"	or	something	slightly	more	cryptic	like	"Pawn	to	QB3."	But	in	a
graphical	computer	system,	you	see	the	board	game	on	your	screen.	You
move	pieces	by	pointing	at	them	and	actually	dragging	them	to	their	new
locations.
Researchers	at	Xerox's	now-famous	Palo	Alto	Research	Center	in	California
explored	new	paradigms	for	human-computer	interaction.	They	showed	that	it
was	easier	to	instruct	a	computer	if	you	could	point	at	things	on	the	screen
and	see	pictures.	They	used	a	device	called	a	"mouse,"	which	could	be	rolled
on	a	tabletop	to	move	a	pointer	around	on	the	screen.	Xerox	did	a	poor	job	of
taking	commercial	advantage	of	this	groundbreaking	idea,	because	its
machines	were	expensive	and	didn't	use	standard	microprocessors.	Getting
great	research	to	translate	into	products	that	sell	is	still	a	big	problem	for
many	companies.
1984:	Character	user	interface	in	an	early	version	of	Microsoft	Word	for	DOS
In	1983,	Microsoft	announced	that	we	planned	to	bring	graphical	computing
to	the	IBM	PC,	with	a	product	called	Windows.	Our	goal	was	to	create
software	that	would	extend	MS-DOS	and	let	people	use	a	mouse,	employ
graphical	images	on	the	computer	screen,	and	make	available	on	the	screen	a
number	of	"windows,"	each	running	a	different	computer	program.	At	that
time	two	of	the	personal	computers	on	the	market	had	graphical	capabilities:
the	Xerox	Star	and	the	Apple	Lisa.	Both	were	expensive,	limited	in	capability,
and	built	on	proprietary	hardware	architectures.	Other	hardware	companies
couldn't	license	the	operating	systems	to	build	compatible	systems,	and
neither	computer	attracted	many	software	companies	to	develop	applications.
Microsoft	wanted	to	create	an	open	standard	and	bring	graphical	capabilities
to	any	computer	that	was	running	MS-DOS.

1995:	Graphical	user	interface	in	Microsoft	Word	for	Windows
The	first	popular	graphical	platform	came	to	market	in	1984,	when	Apple
released	its	Macintosh.	Everything	about	the	Macintosh's	proprietary
operating	system	was	graphical,	and	it	was	an	enormous	success.	The	initial
hardware	and	operating-system	software	Apple	released	were	quite	limited
but	vividly	demonstrated	the	potential	of	the	graphical	interface.	As	the
hardware	and	software	improved,	the	potential	was	realized.
We	worked	closely	with	Apple	throughout	the	development	of	the	Macintosh.
Steve	Jobs	led	the	Macintosh	team.	Working	with	him	was	really	fun.	Steve
has	an	amazing	intuition	for	engineering	and	design	as	well	as	an	ability	to
motivate	people	that	is	world	class.
It	took	a	lot	of	imagination	to	develop	graphical	computer	programs.	What
should	one	look	like?	How	should	it	behave?	Some	ideas	were	inherited	from
the	work	done	at	Xerox	and	some	were	original.	At	first	we	went	to	excess
with	the	possibilities.	We	used	nearly	every	one	of	the	fonts	and	icons	we
could.	Then	we	figured	out	all	that	made	it	hard	to	look	at	and	changed	to
more	sober	menus.	We	created	a	word	processor,	Microsoft	Word,	and	a
spreadsheet,	Microsoft	Excel,	for	the	Macintosh.	These	were	Microsoft's	first
graphical	products.
The	Macintosh	had	great	system	software,	but	Apple	refused	(until	1995)	to
let	anyone	else	make	computer	hardware	that	would	run	it.	This	was
traditional	hardware-company	thinking:	If	you	wanted	the	software,	you	had
to	buy	Apple	computers.	Microsoft	wanted	the	Macintosh	to	sell	well	and	be
widely	accepted,	not	only	because	we	had	invested	a	lot	in	creating
applications======================================================== and	so	can't	carry	many	bits
per	second.	"Modems"	(shorthand	for	modulator-demodulators)	are	the
devices	that	connect	phone	lines	to	PCs.	Modems,	by	converting	to	0s	and	1s
into	different	tones,	allow	computers	to	connect	over	phone	lines.	In	the	early
days	of	the	IBM	PC,	modems	typically	carried	data	at	the	rate	of	300	or	1,200
bits	per	seconds	(also	known	as	300	or	1,200	"baud").	Most	of	the	data
transmitted	through	phone	lines	at	these	speeds	was	text,	because	transmitting
pictures	was	painfully	slow	when	so	little	information	could	be	transferred
each	second.	Faster	modems	have	gotten	much	more	affordable.	Today,	many
modems	that	connect	PCs	to	other	computers	via	the	phone	system	can	send
and	receive	14,400	(14.4K)	or	28,800	(28.8K)	bits	per	second.	From	a
practical	standpoint,	this	is	still	insufficient	bandwidth	for	many	kinds	of
transmissions.	A	page	of	text	is	sent	in	a	second,	but	a	complete,	screen-sized
photograph,	even	if	compressed,	requires	perhaps	ten	seconds	at	these	baud
rates.	It	takes	minutes	to	send	a	color	photograph	with	enough	resolution	for	it
to	be	made	into	a	slide.	Motion	video	would	take	so	much	time	to	transmit	it
just	isn't	practical	at	these	speeds.
Already,	anyone	can	send	anyone	else	a	message	on	the	Internet	for	business,

education,	or	just	the	fun	of	it.	Students	around	the	world	can	send	messages
to	one	another.	Shut-ins	can	carry	on	animated	conversations	with	friends
they	might	never	get	out	to	meet.	Correspondents	who	might	be
uncomfortable	talking	to	each	other	in	person	have	forged	bonds	across	a
network.	The	information	highway	will	add	video,	which	unfortunately	will
do	away	with	the	social,	racial,	gender,	and	species	blindness	that	text-only
exchanges	permit.
The	Internet	and	other	information	services	carried	on	telephone	networks
suggest	some	aspects	of	how	the	information	highway	will	operate.	When	I
send	you	a	message,	it	is	transmitted	by	phone	line	from	my	computer	to	the
server	that	has	my	"mailbox,"	and	from	there	it	passes	directly	or	indirectly	to
whichever	server	stores	your	mailbox.	When	you	connect	to	your	server,	via
the	telephone	network	or	a	corporate	computer	network,	you	are	able	to
retrieve	("download")	the	contents	of	your	mailbox,	including	my	message.
That's	how	electronic	mail	works.	You	can	type	a	message	once	and	send	it	to
one	person	or	twenty-five,	or	post	it	on	what	is	called	a	"bulletin	board."
Like	its	namesake,	an	electronic	bulletin	board	is	where	messages	are	left	for
anyone	to	read.	Public	conversations	result,	as	people	respond	to	messages.
These	exchanges	are	usually	asynchronous.	Bulletin	boards	typically	are
organized	by	topics	to	serve	specific	communities	of	interest.	This	makes
them	effective	ways	to	reach	targeted	groups.	Commercial	services	offer
bulletin	boards	for	pilots,	journalists,	teachers,	and	much	smaller
communities.	On	the	Internet,	where	the	often	unedited	and	unmoderated
bulletin	boards	are	called	"usenet	newsgroups,"	there	are	thousands	of
communities	devoted	to	topics	as	narrow	as	caffeine,	Ronald	Reagan,	and
neckties.	You	can	download	all	the	messages	on	a	topic,	or	just	recent
messages,	or	all	messages	from	a	certain	person,	or	those	that	respond	to	a

particular	other	message,	or	that	contain	a	specific	word	in	their	subject	line,
and	so	forth.
In	addition	to	electronic	mail	and	file	exchange,	the	Internet	supports	"Web
browsing,"	one	of	its	most	popular	applications.	The	"World	Wide	Web"
(abbreviated	as	the	Web	or	WWW)	refers	to	those	servers	connected	to	the
Internet	that	offer	graphical	pages	of	information.	When	you	connect	to	one
of	those	servers,	a	screen	of	information	with	a	number	of	hyperlinks	appears.
When	you	activate	a	hyperlink	by	clicking	on	it	with	your	mouse,	you	are
taken	to	another	page	containing	additional	information	and	other	hyperlinks.
That	page	may	be	stored	on	the	same	server	or	any	other	server	on	the
Internet.
1995:	U.S.	Library	of	Congress	home	page	on	the	World	Wide	Web,	showing
hyperlinks
The	main	page	for	a	company	or	an	individual	is	called	the	"home"	page.	If
you	create	one,	you	register	its	electronic	address,	then	Internet	users	can	find
you	by	typing	in	the	address.	In	advertisements	today	we	are	starting	to	see
home	page	citations	as	part	of	the	address	information.	The	software	to	set	up
a	Web	server	is	very	cheap	and	available	for	almost	all	computers.	The
software	to	browse	the	Web	is	also	available	for	all	machines,	generally	for
free.	You	can	Web	browse	using	the	CD	that	comes	with	this	book.	In	the
future,	operating	systems	will	integrate	Internet	browsing.
The	ease	with	which	companies	and	individuals	can	publish	information	on
the	Internet	is	changing	the	whole	idea	of	what	it	means	to	"publish."	The
Internet	has,	on	its	own,	established	itself	as	a	place	to	publish	content.	It	has
enough	users	so	that	it	is	benefiting	from	positive	feedback:	the	more
subscribers	it	gets,	the	more	content	it	gets,	and	the	more	content	it	gets,	the
more	subscribers	it	gets.
The	Internet's	unique	position	arises	from	a	number	of	elements.	The	TCP/IP

protocols	that	define	its	transport	level	support	distributed	computing	and	also
scale	incredibly	well.	The	protocols	that	define	Web	browsing	are	extremely
simple	and	have	allowed	servers	to	handle	immense	amounts	of	traffic
reasonably	well.	Many	of	the	predictions	about	interactive	books	and
hyperlinks—made	decades	ago	by	pioneers	like	Ted	Nelson—are	coming	true
on	the	Web.
Today's	Internet	is	not	the	information	highway	I	imagine,	although	you	can
think	of	it	as	the	beginning	of	the	highway.	An	analogy	is	the	Oregon	Trail.
Between	1841	and	the	early	1860s,	more	than	300,000	hardy	souls	rode
wagon	trains	out	of	Independence,	Missouri,	for	a	dangerous	2,000-mile
journey	across	the	wilderness	to	the	Oregon	Territories	or	the	gold	fields	of
California.	An	estimated	20,000	succumbed	to	marauders,	cholera,	starvation,
or	exposure.	Their	route	was	named	the	Oregon	Trail.	You	could	easily	say
the	Oregon	Trail	was	the	start	of	today's	highway	system.	It	crossed	many
boundaries	and	provided	two-way	traffic	to	travelers	in	wheeled	vehicles.	The
modern	path	of	Interstate	84	and	several	other	highways	follows	the	Oregon
Trail	for	much	of	its	length.	However,	many	conclusions	drawn	from
descriptions	of	the	Oregon	Trail	would	be	misleading	if	applied	to	the	future
system.	Cholera	and	starvation	aren't	a	problem	on	Interstate	84.	Tailgating
and	drunk	drivers	weren't	much	of	a	hazard	for	the	wagon	trains.
The	trail	blazed	by	the	Internet	will	direct	many	elements	of	the	highway.	The
Internet	is	a	wonderful,	critical	development	and	a	very	clear	element	of	the
final	system,	but	it	will	change	significantly	in	the	years	ahead.	The	current
Internet	lacks	security	and	needs	a	billing	system.	Much	of	the	Internet
culture	will	seem	as	quaint	to	future	users	of	the	information	highway	as
stories	of	wagon	trains	and	pioneers	on	the	Oregon	Trail	do	to	us	today.
In	fact,	the	Internet	of	today	is	not	the	Internet	of	even	a	short	time	ago.	The
pace	of	its	evolution	is	so	rapid	that	a	description	of	the	Internet	as	it	existed	a
year	or	even	six	months	ago	might	be	seriously	out-of-date.	This	adds	to	the
confusion.	It	is	very	hard	to	stay	up-to-date	with	something	so	dynamic.
Many	companies,	including	Microsoft,	are	working	together	to	define
standards	in	order	to	extend	the	Internet	and	overcome	its	limitations.
Because	the	Internet	originated	as	a	computer-science	proiect	rather	than	a
communications	utility,	it	has	always	been	a	magnet	for	hackers—
programmers	who	turn	their	talents	toward	mischief	or	malice	by	breaking
into	the	computer	systems	of	others.
On	November	2,	1988,	thousands	of	computers	connected	to	the	network

began	to	slow	down.	Many	eventually	ground	to	a	temporary	halt.	No	data
were	destroyed,	but	millions	of	dollars	of	computing	time	were	lost	as
computer	system	administrators	fought	to	regain	control	of	their	machines.
Much	of	the	public	may	have	heard	of	the	Internet	for	the	first	time	when	this
story	was	widely	covered.	The	cause	turned	out	to	be	a	mischievous	computer
program,	called	a	"worm,"	that	was	spreading	from	one	computer	to	another
on	the	network,	replicating	as	it	went.	(It	was	designated	a	worm	rather	than	a
virus	because	it	didn't	infect	other	programs.)	It	used	an	unnoticed	"back
door"	in	the	systems'	software	to	access	directly	the	memory	of	the	computers
it	was	attacking.	There	it	hid	itself	and	passed	around	misleading	information
that	made	it	harder	to	detect	and	counteract.	Within	a	few	days	The	New	York
Times	identified	the	hacker	as	Robert	Morris,	Jr.,	a	twenty-three-year-old
graduate	student	at	Cornell	University.	Morris	later	testified	that	he	had
designed	and	then	unleashed	the	worm	to	see	how	many	computers	it	would
reach,	but	a	mistake	in	his	programming	caused	the	worm	to	replicate	far
faster	than	he	had	expected.	Morris	was	convicted	of	violating	the	1986
Computer	Fraud	and	Abuse	Act,	a	federal	offense.	He	was	sentenced	to	three
years	of	probation,	a	fine	of	$10,000,	and	400	hours	of	community	service.
There	have	been	occasional	breakdowns	and	security	problems,	but	not	many,
and	the	Internet	has	become	a	reasonably	reliable	communications	channel
for	millions	of	people.	It	provides	worldwide	connections	between	servers,
facilitating	the	exchange	of	electronic	mail,	bulletin	board	items,	and	other
data.	The	exchanges	range	from	short	messages	of	a	few	dozen	characters	to
multimillion-byte	transfers	of	photographs,	software,	and	other	kinds	of	data.
It	costs	no	more	to	request	data	from	a	server	that	is	a	mile	away	than	from
one	that	is	thousands	of	miles	distant.
Already	the	Internet's	pricing	model	has	changed	the	notion	that
communication	has	to	be	paid	for	by	time	and	distance.	The	same	thing
happened	with	computing.	If	you	couldn't	afford	a	big	computer	you	used	to
pay	for	computer	time	by	the	hour.	PCs	changed	that.
Because	the	Internet	is	inexpensive	to	use,	people	assume	it	is	government
funded.	Th======================================================== rted	by	posts	of	Douglas	fir.	The	house	has	lots	of	exposed
horizontal	beams	and	vertical	supports.	You'll	have	a	great	view	of	the	lake.
My	hope	is	that	the	view	and	the	Douglas	fir,	rather	than	the	electronic	pin,

will	be	what	interest	you	most	as	you	descend	toward	the	ground	floor.	Most
of	the	wood	came	from	an	eighty-year-old	Weyerhaeuser	lumber	mill	that	was
being	torn	down	out	on	the	Columbia	River.	This	wood,	harvested	nearly	a
hundred	years	ago,	came	from	trees	that	were	as	much	as	350	feet	tall,
between	8	and	15	feet	in	diameter.	Douglas	fir	is	one	of	the	strongest	woods
in	the	world	for	its	weight.	Unfortunately,	new-growth	Douglas	fir	tends	to
split	if	you	try	to	mill	it	into	beams,	because	the	grain	is	not	as	tight	in	a
seventy-year-old	tree	as	it	is	in	a	five-hundred-year-old	one.	Almost	all	of	the
old-growth	Douglas	fir	has	been	harvested	now,	and	any	that	remains	should
be	preserved.	I	was	lucky	to	find	old-growth	timbers	that	could	be	reused.
The	fir	beams	support	the	two	floors	of	private	living	spaces	you'll	be
descending	past.	Privacy	is	important.	I	want	a	house	that	will	still	feel	like
home	even	when	guests	are	enjoying	other	parts	of	it.
At	the	bottom	of	the	stairs,	the	theater	will	be	on	the	right,	and	to	the	left,	on
the	south	side,	will	be	the	reception	hall.	As	you	step	into	the	reception	hall,
on	your	right	will	be	a	series	of	sliding	glass	doors	that	open	onto	a	terrace
leading	to	the	lake.	Recessed	into	the	east	wall	will	be	twenty-four	video
monitors,	each	with	a	40-inch	picture	tube,	stacked	four	high	and	six	across.
These	monitors	will	work	cooperatively	to	display	large	images	for	artistic,
entertainment,	or	business	purposes.	I	had	hoped	that	when	the	monitors
weren't	in	use	they	could	literally	disappear	into	the	woodwork.	I	wanted	the
screens	to	display	woodgrain	patterns	that	matched	their	surroundings.
Unfortunately	I	could	never	achieve	anything	convincing	with	current
technology,	because	a	monitor	emits	light	while	real	wood	reflects	it.	So	I
settled	for	having	the	monitors	disappear	behind	wood	panels	when	they're
not	in	use.
The	electronic	pin	you	wear	will	tell	the	house	who	and	where	you	are,	and
the	house	will	use	this	information	to	try	to	meet	and	even	anticipate	your
needs—all	as	unobtrusively	as	possible.	Someday,	instead	of	needing	the	pin,
it	might	be	possible	to	have	a	camera	system	with	visual-recognition
capabilities,	but	that's	beyond	current	technology.	When	it's	dark	outside,	the
pin	will	cause	a	moving	zone	of	light	to	accompany	you	through	the	house.
Unoccupied	rooms	will	be	unlit.	As	you	walk	down	a	hallway,	you	might	not
notice	the	lights	ahead	of	you	gradually	coming	up	to	full	brightness	and	the
lights	behind	you	fading.	Music	will	move	with	you,	too.	It	will	seem	to	be
everywhere,	although,	in	fact,	other	people	in	the	house	will	be	hearing
entirely	different	music	or	nothing	at	all.	A	movie	or	the	news	will	be	able	to
follow	you	around	the	house,	too.	If	you	get	a	phone	call,	only	the	handset

nearest	you	will	ring.
Computer	rendering	of	the	Gateses'	future	home,	showing	the	staircase	and
formal	dining	room
You	won't	be	confronted	by	the	technology,	but	it	will	be	readily	and	easily
available.	Handheld	remote	controls	will	put	you	in	charge	of	your	immediate
environment	and	of	the	house's	entertainment	system.	The	remote	will	extend
the	capabilities	of	the	pin.	It	will	not	only	let	the	house	identify	and	locate
you,	it	will	also	allow	you	to	give	instructions.	You'll	use	the	controls	to	tell
the	monitors	in	a	room	to	become	visible	and	what	to	display.	You'll	be	able
to	choose	from	among	thousands	of	pictures,	recordings,	movies,	and
television	programs,	and	you'll	have	all	sorts	of	options	available	for	selecting
information.
A	console,	which	will	be	the	equivalent	of	a	keyboard	that	lets	you	give	very
specific	instructions,	will	be	discreetly	visible	in	each	room.	I	want	consoles
that	are	noticeable	to	those	who	need	them,	but	that	don't	invite	attention.	A
characteristic,	easy-to-identify	feature	will	alert	the	user	to	the	identity	and
whereabouts	of	the	consoles.	The	telephone	has	already	made	this	transition.
It	doesn't	attract	particular	attention	to	itself;	most	of	us	are	comfortable
putting	a	nondescript	phone	on	an	end	table.
Every	computerized	system	should	be	made	so	simple	and	natural	to	use	that
people	don't	give	it	a	second	thought.	But	simple	is	difficult.	Still,	computers
get	easier	to	use	every	year,	and	trial-and-error	in	my	house	will	help	us	learn
how	to	create	a	really	simple	system.	You	will	be	able	to	be	indirect	about
your	instructions	and	requests.	For	example,	you	won't	have	to	ask	for	a	song
by	name.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	the	house	to	play	the	latest	hits,	or	songs	by
a	particular	artist,	or	songs	that	were	performed	at	Woodstock,	or	music
composed	in	eighteenth-century	Vienna,	or	songs	with	the	word	"yellow"	in
their	titles.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	for	songs	that	you	have	categorized	with	a
certain	adjective,	or	songs	that	haven't	been	played	before	when	a	particular

person	was	visiting	the	house.	I	might	program	classical	music	as	background
for	contemplating	and	something	more	modern	and	energetic	to	play	while
I'm	exercising.	If	you	want	to	watch	the	movie	that	won	the	1957	Academy
Award	for	best	picture,	you	can	ask	for	it	that	way—and	see	The	Bridge	on
the	River	Kwai.	You	could	find	the	same	movie	by	asking	for	films	starring
Alec	Guinness	or	William	Holden	or	ones	about	prison	camps.
Prototype	of	a	home	control	console
If	you're	planning	to	visit	Hong	Kong	soon,	you	might	ask	the	screen	in	your
room	to	show	you	pictures	of	the	city.	It	will	seem	to	you	as	if	the
photographs	are	displayed	everywhere,	although	actually	the	images	will
materialize	on	the	walls	of	rooms	just	before	you	walk	in	and	vanish	after	you
leave.	If	you	and	I	are	enjoying	different	things	and	one	of	us	walks	into	a
room	where	the	other	is	sitting,	the	house	will	follow	predetermined	rules
about	what	to	do.	For	example,	the	house	might	continue	the	audio	and	visual
imagery	for	the	person	who	was	in	the	room	first,	or	it	might	change
programming	to	something	it	knows	both	of	us	like.
A	house	that	tracks	its	occupants	in	order	to	meet	their	particular	needs
combines	two	traditions.	The	first	is	the	tradition	of	unobtrusive	service,	and
the	other	is	that	an	object	we	carry	entitles	us	to	be	treated	in	a	certain	way.
You're	already	used	to	the	idea	that	an	object	can	authenticate	you.	It	can
inform	people	or	machinery	that	you	have	permission	to	do	something	such	as
open	a	locked	door,	get	on	an	airplane,	or	use	a	specific	line	of	credit—yours
—to	make	a	purchase.	Keys,	electronic	entry	cards,	driver's	licenses,
passports,	name	badges,	credit	cards,	and	tickets	are	all	forms	of
authentication.	If	I	give	you	the	key	to	my	car,	the	car	allows	you	to	get	in,
start	the	engine,	and	drive	away.	You	might	say	that	the	car	trusts	you	because
you	carry	its	keys.	If	I	give	a	parking	attendant	a	key	that	fits	my	automobile's
ignition	but	not	its	trunk,	the	car	lets	him	drive	but	not	open	the	trunk.	It's	no
different	with	my	house,	which	will	make	various	amenities	available	to	you
based	on	the	electronic	key	you	carry.

None	of	this	is	really	so	radical.	Some	visionaries	are	predicting	that	within
the	next	ten	years	there	will	be	lots	of	robots	wandering	around	helping	us	out
with	various	household	chores.	I	am	certainly	not	preparing	for	that,	because	I
think	it	will	be	many	decades	before	robots	are	practical.	The	only	ones	I
expect	to	see	in	widespread	use	soon	are	intelligent	toys.	Kids	will	be	able	to
program	them	to	respond	to	different	situations	and	even	to	speak	in	the
voices	of	favorite	characters.	These	toy	robots	will	be	able	to	be	programmed
in	a	limited	number	of	ways.	They	will	have	limited	vision,	know	the	distance
to	the	wall	in	each	direction,	the	time,	the	lighting	conditions,	and	accept
limited	speech	input.	I	think	it	would	have	been	cool	to	have	had	a	toy-size
car	I	could	have	talked	to	and	programmed	to	respond	to	my	instructions.
Other	than	toys,	the	other	major	uses	for	robotic	devices	I	see	are	for	military
applications.	The	reason	I	doubt	intelligent	robots	will	provide	much	help	in
actual	housework	in	the	foreseeable	future	is	that	it	takes	a	great	deal	of	visual
intelligence	and	dexterity	to	prepare	food	or	change	diapers.	Pool	cleaning,
lawn	mowing,	and	perhaps	even	vacuum	cleaning	can	be	done	with	a
relatively	dumb	system,	but	once	we	get	beyond	tasks	where	you	just	push
something	around,	it	is	very	hard	to	design	a	machine	that	would	be	able	to
recognize	and	respond	to	all	of	the	contingencies	that	come	along.
The	systems	I	am	building	into	the	house	are	designed	to	make	it	easier	to	live
in,	but	I	won't	know	for	sure	if	they	are	worthwhile	until	I	move	in.	I'm
experimenting	and	learning	all	the	time.	The	design	team	used	my	guest
cottage,	which	was	built	before	the	house,	as	a	sort	of	test	laboratory	for	home
instrumentation.	Because	some	people	like	the	temperature	warmer	than
others	do,	the	cottage's	software	sets	its	temperature	in	reaction	to	who	is
inside,	and	the	time	of	day.	The	cottage	knows	to	make	the	temperature	toasty
on	a	cold	morning	before	a	guest	is	out	of	bed.	In	the	evening,	when	it's	dark
outside,	the	cottage's	lights	dim	if	a	television	is	on.	If	someone	is	in	the
cottage	during	the	day,	the	cottage	matches	its	inside	brightness	to	that	of	the
outdoors.	Of	course	the	occupant	can	always	give	explicit	directions	to
overrule	the	settings.
This	sort	of	instrumentation	can	provide	significant	energy	savings.	A	number
of	electric	utilities	are	testing	a	network	to	monitor	the	use	of	energy	in
individual	homes.	This	would	end	the	expensive	practice	of	having	meter
readers	come	to	each	home	every	month	or	two,	but	more	important,
computers	in	the	home	and	at	the	utility	company	will	be	able	to	manage	the
minute-by-minute	demand	for	power	at	various	times	of	the	day.	Energy-
demand	management	can	save	a	lot======================================================== eramental	monsters	that	resided	in	climate-controlled
cocoons.	After	we	had	used	up	the	money	the	Mothers'	Club	had	provided,
my	school	friend	Paul	Allen,	with	whom	I	later	started	Microsoft,	and	I	spent
a	lot	of	time	trying	to	get	access	to	computers.	They	performed	modestly	by
today's	standards,	but	seemed	awesome	to	us	because	they	were	big	and
complicated	and	cost	as	much	as	millions	of	dollars	each.	They	were
connected	by	phone	lines	to	clackety	Teletype	terminals	so	they	could	be
shared	by	people	at	different	locations.	We	rarely	got	close	to	the	actual
mainframes.	Computer	time	was	very	expensive.	When	I	was	in	high	school,
it	cost	about	$40	an	hour	to	access	a	time-shared	computer	using	a	Teletype—
for	that	$40	an	hour	you	got	a	slice	of	the	computer's	precious	attention.	This
seems	odd	today,	when	some	people	have	more	than	one	PC	and	think
nothing	of	leaving	them	idle	for	most	of	the	day.	Actually,	it	was	possible
even	then	to	own	your	own	computer.	If	you	could	afford	$18,000,	Digital
Equipment	Corporation	(DEC)	made	the	PDP-8.	Although	it	was	called	a
"mini-computer,"	it	was	large	by	today's	standards.	It	occupied	a	rack	about
two	feet	square	and	six	feet	high	and	weighed	250	pounds.	We	had	one	at	our
high	school	for	a	while,	and	I	fooled	around	with	it	a	lot.	The	PDP-8	was	very
limited	compared	to	the	mainframes	we	could	reach	by	phone;	in	fact,	it	had
less	raw	computing	power	than	some	wristwatches	do	today.	But	it	was
programmable	the	same	way	the	big,	expensive	ones	were:	by	giving	it
software	instructions.	Despite	its	limitations,	the	PDP-8	inspired	us	to	indulge
in	the	dream	that	one	day	millions	of	individuals	could	possess	their	own
computers.	With	each	passing	year,	I	became	more	certain	that	computers	and
computing	were	destined	to	be	cheap	and	ubiquitous.	I'm	sure	that	one	of	the
reasons	I	was	so	determined	to	help	develop	the	personal	computer	is	that	I
wanted	one	for	myself.
At	that	time	software,	like	computer	hardware,	was	expensive.	It	had	to	be
written	specifically	for	each	kind	of	computer.	And	each	time	computer
hardware	changed,	which	it	did	regularly,	the	software	for	it	pretty	much	had
to	be	rewritten.	Computer	manufacturers	provided	some	standard	software
program	building	blocks	(for	example,	libraries	of	mathematical	functions)
with	their	machines,	but	most	software	was	written	specifically	to	solve	some
business's	individual	problems.	Some	software	was	shared,	and	a	few
companies	were	selling	general-purpose	software,	but	there	was	very	little
packaged	software	that	you	could	buy	off	the	shelf.
My	parents	paid	my	tuition	at	Lakeside	and	gave	me	money	for	books,	but	I

had	to	take	care	of	my	own	computer-time	bills.	This	is	what	drove	me	to	the
commercial	side	of	the	software	business.	A	bunch	of	us,	including	Paul
Allen,	got	entry-level	software	programming	jobs.	For	high	school	students
the	pay	was	extraordinary—about	$5,000	each	summer,	part	in	cash	and	the
rest	in	computer	time.	We	also	worked	out	deals	with	a	few	companies
whereby	we	could	use	computers	for	free	if	we'd	locate	problems	in	their
software.	One	of	the	programs	I	wrote	was	the	one	that	scheduled	students	in
classes.	I	surreptitiously	added	a	few	instructions	and	found	myself	nearly	the
only	guy	in	a	class	full	of	girls.	As	I	said	before,	it	was	hard	to	tear	myself
away	from	a	machine	at	which	I	could	so	unambiguously	demonstrate
success.	I	was	hooked.
Paul	knew	a	lot	more	than	I	did	about	computer	hardware,	the	machines
themselves.	One	summer	day	in	1972,	when	I	was	sixteen	and	Paul	was
nineteen,	he	showed	me	a	ten-paragraph	article	buried	on	page	143	of
Electronics	magazine.	It	was	announcing	that	a	young	firm	named	Intel	had
released	a	microprocessor	chip	called	the	8008.
A	microprocessor	is	a	simple	chip	that	contains	the	entire	brain	of	a	whole
computer.	Paul	and	I	realized	this	first	microprocessor	was	very	limited,	but
he	was	sure	that	the	chips	would	get	more	powerful	and	computers	on	a	chip
would	improve	very	rapidly.
At	the	time,	the	computer	industry	had	no	idea	of	building	a	real	computer
around	a	microprocessor.	The	Electronics	article,	for	example,	described	the
8008	as	suitable	for	"any	arithmetic,	control,	or	decision-making	system,	such
as	a	smart	terminal"	The	writers	didn't	see	that	a	microprocessor	could	grow
up	to	be	a	general-purpose	computer.	Microprocessors	were	slow	and	limited
in	the	amount	of	information	they	could	handle.	None	of	the	languages
programmers	were	familiar	with	was	available	for	the	8008,	which	made	it
nearly	impossible	to	write	complex	programs	for	it.	Every	application	had	to
be	programmed	with	the	few	dozen	simple	instructions	the	chip	could
understand.	The	8008	was	condemned	to	life	as	a	beast	of	burden,	carrying
out	uncomplicated	and	unchanging	tasks	over	and	over.	It	was	quite	popular
in	elevators	and	calculators.

1972:	Intel's	8088	microprocessor
To	put	it	another	way,	a	simple	microprocessor	in	an	embedded	application,
such	as	an	elevator's	controls,	is	a	single	instrument,	a	drum	or	a	horn,	in	the
hands	of	an	amateur:	good	for	basic	rhythm	or	uncomplicated	tunes.	A
powerful	microprocessor	with	programming	languages,	however,	is	like	an
accomplished	orchestra.	With	the	right	software,	or	sheet	music,	it	can	play
anything.
Paul	and	I	wondered	what	we	could	program	the	8008	to	do.	He	called	up
Intel	to	request	a	manual.	We	were	a	little	surprised	when	they	actually	sent
him	one.	We	both	dug	into	it.	I	had	worked	out	a	version	of	BASIC,	which
ran	on	the	limited	DEC	PDP-8,	and	was	excited	at	the	thought	of	doing	the
same	for	the	little	Intel	chip.	But	as	I	studied	the	8008's	manual,	I	realized	it
was	futile	to	try.	The	8008	just	wasn't	sophisticated	enough,	didn't	have
enough	transistors.
We	did,	however,	figure	out	a	way	to	use	the	little	chip	to	power	a	machine
that	could	analyze	the	information	counted	by	traffic	monitors	on	city	streets.
Many	municipalities	that	measured	traffic	flow	did	so	by	stringing	a	rubber
hose	over	a	selected	street.	When	a	car	crossed	the	hose,	it	punched	a	paper
tape	inside	a	metal	box	at	the	end	of	the	hose.	We	saw	that	we	could	use	the
8008	to	process	these	tapes,	to	print	out	graphs	and	other	statistics.	We
baptized	our	first	company	"Traf-O-Data."	At	the	time	it	sounded	like	poetry.
I	wrote	much	of	the	software	for	the	Traf-O-Data	machine	on	cross-state	bus
trips	from	Seattle	to	Pullman,	Washington,	where	Paul	was	attending	college.
Our	prototype	worked	well,	and	we	envisioned	selling	lots	of	our	new
machines	across	the	country.	We	used	it	to	process	traffic-volume	tapes	for	a
few	customers,	but	no	one	actually	wanted	to	buy	the	machine,	at	least	not
from	a	couple	of	teenagers.
Despite	our	disappointment,	we	still	believed	our	future,	even	if	it	was	not	to

be	in	hardware,	might	have	something	to	do	with	microprocessors.	After	I
started	at	Harvard	College	in	1973,	Paul	somehow	managed	to	coax	his
clunky	old	Chrysler	New	Yorker	cross-country	from	Washington	State	and
took	a	job	in	Boston,	programming	mini-computers	at	Honeywell.	He	drove
over	to	Cambridge	a	lot	so	we	could	continue	our	long	talks	about	future
schemes.
In	the	spring	of	1974,	Electronics	magazine	announced	Intel's	new	8080	chip
—ten	times	the	power	of	the	8008	inside	the	Traf-O-Data	machine.	The	8080
was	not	much	larger	than	the	8008,	but	it	contained	2,700	more	transistors.
All	at	once	we	were	looking	at	the	heart	of	a	real	computer,	and	the	price	was
under	$200.	We	attacked	the	manual.	"DEC	can't	sell	any	more	PDP-8s	now,"
I	told	Paul.	It	seemed	obvious	to	us	that	if	a	tiny	chip	could	get	so	much	more
powerful,	the	end	of	big	unwieldy	machines	was	coming.
Computer	manufacturers,	however,	didn't	see	the	microprocessor	as	a	threat.
They	just	couldn't	imagine	a	puny	chip	taking	on	a	"real"	computer.	Not	even
the	scientists	at	Intel	saw	its	full	potential.	To	them,	the	8080	represented
nothing	more	than	an	improvement	in	chip	technology.	In	the	short	term,	the
computer	establishment	was	right.	The	8080	was	just	another	slight	advance.
But	Paul	and	I	looked	past	the	limits	of	that	new	chip	and	saw	a	different	kind
of	computer	that	would	be	perfect	for	us,	and	for	everyone—personal,
affordable,	and	adaptable.	It	was	absolutely	clear	to	us	that	because	the	new
chips	were	so	cheap,	they	soon	would	be	everywhere.
Computer	hardware,	which	had	once	been	scarce,	would	soon	be	readily
available,	and	access	to	computers	would	no	longer	be	charged	for	at	a	high
hourly	rate.	It	seemed	to	us	people	would	find	all	kinds	of	new	uses	for
computing	if	it	was	cheap.	Then,	software	would	be	the	key	to	delivering	the
full	potential	of	these	machines.	Paul	and	I	speculated	that	Japanese
companies	and	IBM	would	likely	produce	most	of	the	hardware.	We	believed
we	could	come	up	with	new	and	innovative	software.	And	why	not?	The
microprocessor	would	change	the	structure	of	the	industry.	Maybe	there	was	a
place	for	the	two	of	us.
This	kind	of	talk	is	what	college	is	all	about.	You	have	all	kinds	of	new
experiences,	and	dream	crazy	dreams.	We	were	young	and	assumed	we	had
all	the	time	in	the	world.	I	enrolled	for	another	year	at	Harvard	and	kept
thinking	about	how	we	could	get	a	software	company	going.	One	plan	was
pretty	simple.	We	sent	letters	from	my	dorm	room	to	all	the	big	computer
companies,	offering	to	write	them	a	version	of	BASIC	for	the	new	Intel	chip.
We	got	no	takers.	By	December,	we	were	pretty	discouraged.	I	was	planning

to	fly	home	to	Seattle	for	the	holidays,	and	Paul	was	staying	in	Boston.	On	an
achingly	cold	Massachusetts	morning	a	few	days	before	I	left,	Paul	and	I	were
hanging	out	at	the	Harvard	Square	newsstand,	and	Paul	picked	up	the	January
issue	of	Popular	Electronics.	This	is	the	moment	I	described	at	the	beginning
of	the	Foreword.	This	gave	reality	to	our	dreams	about	the	future.
January	1975	issue	of	Popular	Electronics
On	the	magazine's	cover	was	a	photograph	of	a	very	small	computer,	not
much	larger	than	a	toaster	oven.	It	had	a	name	only	slightly	more	dignified
t======================================================== unications
companies.	Federal	regulations	currently	prevent	cable	and	phone	companies
from	offering	a	general-purpose	network	that	would	put	them	in	competition
with	each	other.	The	first	thing	most	governments	have	to	do	to	help	the
highway	start	is	to	deregulate	communications.
The	old	approach	in	most	countries	was	to	create	monopolies	in	the	various
forms	of	telecommunication.	The	theory	behind	this	approach	was	that
companies	wouldn't	make	the	huge	investments	necessary	to	run	telephone
wires	out	to	everyone	unless	they	had	the	incentive	of	being	the	exclusive
supplier.	A	set	of	rules	drawn	up	by	the	government	binds	the	monopoly
holders	to	act	in	the	public	interest	with	restricted	but	essentially	guaranteed
profit.	The	outcome	has	been	a	very	reliable	network	with	broad	services	but
limited	innovation.	Later	regulations	extended	the	concept	to	cable	television
as	well	as	to	local	telephone	systems.	Both	federal	and	local	governments
granted	monopolies	and	curtailed	competition	in	exchange	for	regulatory
control.
A	highway	that	delivers	both	telephone	and	video	services	is	not	allowed
under	current	U.S.	laws.	Economists	and	historians	can	argue	the	pros	and
cons	of	whether	granting	regulated	monopolies	was	a	good	idea	back	in	1934,
but	today	there	is	a	general	agreement	that	the	rules	should	be	changed.	As	of
mid-1995,	however,	policy	makers	haven't	been	able	to	agree	on	exactly	when
or	in	what	ways.	Billions	of	dollars	are	at	stake	and	lawmakers	have	found	it

easy	to	get	lost	in	the	complicated	details	of	how	competition	should	start.
The	problem	is	to	figure	out	how	to	move	from	the	old	system	to	a	new	one
while	keeping	most	of	the	participants	happy.	This	dilemma	is	the	reason
telecommunications	reform	has	been	in	limbo	for	years.	Congress	was
embroiled	much	of	the	summer	of	1995	in	a	debate,	not	about	whether	the
telecommunications	industry	should	be	deregulated,	but	rather	about	how	it
should	be	deregulated.	I	hope	that	by	the	time	you	read	this,	the	information
highway	will	be	legal	in	the	United	States!
Outside	the	United	States,	matters	are	complicated	by	the	fact	that	in	many
countries	the	regulated	monopolies	have	been	agencies	owned	by	the
government	itself.	They	were	called	PTTs	because	they	managed	postal,
telephone,	and	telegraph	services.	In	some	countries	the	PTT	is	being	allowed
to	go	ahead	and	develop	the	highway,	but	when	government	organizations	are
involved,	things	often	move	slowly.	I	think	the	pace	of	investment	and
deregulation	worldwide	will	increase	in	the	next	ten	years	because	politicians
are	recognizing	that	this	issue	is	critical	if	their	countries	are	to	remain
competitive	in	the	long	term.	In	many	election	campaigns	candidates'
platform	planks	will	include	policies	that	will	allow	their	country	to	lead	in
the	creation	of	the	highway.	The	political	use	of	these	issues	will	make	them
more	visible,	which	will	help	clear	various	international	roadblocks.
Countries	like	the	United	States	and	Canada,	where	a	high	percentage	of
homes	have	cable	television,	are	at	an	advantage	because	the	competition
between	cable	companies	and	phone	companies	will	accelerate	the	pace	of
investment	in	the	highway	infrastructure.	Great	Britain,	however,	is	the
farthest	along	in	actually	using	a	single	network	to	provide	both	television
and	cable	services.	The	cable	companies	there	were	allowed	to	offer	phone
service	in	1990.	Foreign	companies,	primarily	U.S.	phone	and	cable
companies,	made	major	investments	in	fiber	infrastructure	in	the	United
Kingdom.	British	consumers	now	can	choose	to	get	telephone	service	from
their	cable	TV	company.	This	competition	has	forced	British	Telecom	to
improve	its	rates	and	services.
If	we	look	back	in	ten	years,	I	think	we'll	see	a	clear	correlation	between	the
amount	of	telecommunications	reform	in	each	country	and	the	state	of	its
information	economy.	Few	investors	will	want	to	put	money	into	places	that
don't	have	great	communications	infrastructures.	There	are	so	many
politicians	and	lobbyists	involved	in	creating	new	regulations	in	so	many
countries,	I'm	sure	the	entire	spectrum	of	different	regulatory	schemes	will	be
tried.	The	"right"	solution	will	vary	somewhat	in	different	countries.

One	area	it's	clear	government	should	stay	out	of	is	compatibility.	Some	have
suggested	that	governments	set	standards	for	networks,	to	guarantee	that	they
interoperate.	In	1994,	legislation	was	put	before	a	subcommittee	in	the	U.S.
House	of	Representatives	calling	for	all	set-top	boxes	to	be	made	so	they
would	be	compatible.	This	sounded	like	a	great	idea	to	those	who	drafted	the
legislation.	It	would	ensure	that	if	Aunt	Bessie	invested	in	a	set-top	box,	she
could	be	confident	it	would	work	if	she	moved	to	another	part	of	the	country.
Compatibility	is	important.	It	makes	the	consumer-electronics	and	personal-
computer	businesses	thrive.	When	the	PC	industry	was	new,	many	machines
came	and	went.	The	Altair	8800	was	superseded	by	the	Apple	I.	Then	came
the	Apple	II,	the	original	IBM	PC,	the	Apple	Macintosh,	IBM	PC	AT,	386
and	486	PCs,	Power	Macintoshes,	and	Pentium	PCs.	Each	of	these	machines
was	somewhat	compatible	with	the	others.	For	instance,	all	were	able	to	share
plain-text	files.	But	there	was	also	a	lot	of	incompatibility	because	each
successive	computer	generation	showcased	fundamental	breakthroughs	the
older	systems	didn't	support.
Compatibility	with	prior	machines	is	a	great	virtue	in	some	cases.	Both	PC-
compatibles	and	the	Apple	Macintosh	provide	some	backwards	compatibility.
However,	they	are	incompatible	with	each	other.	And	at	the	time	the	PC	was
introduced,	it	was	not	compatible	with	IBM's	prior	machines.	Likewise,	the
Mac	was	incompatible	with	Apple's	earlier	machines.	In	the	world	of
computing,	technology	is	so	dynamic	that	any	company	should	be	able	to
come	out	with	whatever	new	product	it	wants	and	let	the	market	decide	if	it
has	made	the	right	set	of	trade-offs.	Because	the	set-top	box	is	in	every	sense
a	computer,	it	stands	to	reason	it	will	follow	the	same	pattern	of	rapid
innovation	that	has	driven	the	PC	industry.	In	fact,	the	set-top	box	will	be	sold
to	a	far	more	uncertain	market	than	the	PC	was,	so	the	case	for	letting	it	be
market	driven	is	even	stronger.	It	would	be	foolish	to	impose	the	constraint	of
government-dictated	design	on	an	unfinished	invention.
The	original	set-top	box	compatibility	legislation	in	the	United	States
ultimately	died	in	Congress	in	1994,	but	related	issues	arose	in	1995,	and	I
expect	that	similar	efforts	will	be	made	in	other	countries.	It	seems	easy	to
legislate	reasonable-sounding	constraints,	but	if	we	don't	watch	out,	those
constraints	could	strangle	the	market.
The	highway	will	develop	at	a	different	pace	in	different	communities	and	in
different	countries.	When	I	travel	abroad,	the	foreign	press	often	asks	how
many	years	behind	the	developments	in	the	United	States	their	country	is.	It's
a	difficult	question.	The	advantages	that	the	United	States	has	are	the	size	of

the	market,	the	popularity	of	the	personal	computer	in	American	homes,	and
the	way	the	phone	and	cable	companies	will	compete	with	each	other	for
current	and	future	revenues.	Of	the	various	technologies	that	will	be	part	of
building	the	highway,	U.S.-based	companies	are	leaders	in	almost	every	one:
microprocessors,	software,	entertainment,	personal	computers,	set-top	boxes,
and	network-switching	equipment.	The	only	significant	exceptions	are	display
technology	and	memory	chips.
Other	countries	have	advantages	of	their	own.	In	Singapore,	the	population
density	and	political	focus	on	infrastructure	makes	it	certain	that	this	nation
will	be	a	leader.	A	decision	by	the	Singaporean	government	to	make
something	happen	means	quite	a	bit	in	this	unique	country.	The	highway
infrastructure	is	already	under	construction.	Every	developer	will	soon	be
required	to	provide	every	new	house	or	apartment	with	a	broadband	cable	in
the	same	way	he	is	required	by	law	to	provide	lines	for	water,	gas,	electricity,
and	telephone.	When	I	visited	with	Lee	Kuan	Yew,	the	seventy-two-year-old
senior	minister	who	was	the	political	head	of	Singapore	from	1959	to	1990,	I
was	extremely	impressed	with	his	understanding	of	the	opportunity	and	his
belief	that	it	is	a	top	priority	to	move	ahead	at	full	speed.	He	views	it	as
imperative	that	his	small	country	continue	to	be	a	premier	location	in	Asia	for
high-value	jobs.	I	was	quite	blunt	in	asking	Mr.	Lee	if	he	understood	that	the
Singaporean	government	would	be	giving	up	the	tight	control	over
information	it	exercises	today	as	a	way	of	ensuring	shared	values	that	tend	to
keep	societal	problems	in	check.	He	said	Singapore	recognizes	that	in	the
future	it	will	have	to	rely	on	methods	other	than	censorship	to	maintain	a
culture	that	sacrifices	some	Western-style	freedom	in	exchange	for	a	strong
sense	of	community.
In	China,	however,	the	government	seems	to	believe	it	can	have	it	both	ways.
Post	and	Telecommunications	Minster	Wu	Jichuan	told	reporters	at	a	news
briefing,	"By	linking	with	the	Internet	we	don't	mean	absolute	freedom	of
information.	I	think	there	is	general	understanding	about	this.	If	you	go
through	customs,	you	have	to	show	your	passport.	It's	the	same	with
management	of	information."	Wu	said	Beijing	will	adopt	unspecified
"management	measures"	to	control	inflows	of	data	on	all	telecommunications
services	as	they	evolve	in	China.	"There	is	no	contradiction	at	all	between	the
development	of	telecoms	infrastructure	and	the	exercise	of	state	sovereignty.
The	International	Telecommunications	Union	states	that	any	country	has
sovereignty	over	its	own	telecoms."	He	may	not	understand	that	to	implement
full	Internet	access	and	maintain	censorship,	you	would	almost	have	to	have
someone	looking	over	the	shoulder	of	every	user.

In	France,	the	pioneering	on-line	service,	Minitel,	has	fostered	a	community
of	information	publishers	and	stimulated	broad	familiarity	with	on-line
systems	generally.	Even	though	both	terminals	and	bandwidth	a======================================================== t	leaving	your	house.	Flexibility	is	going	to	be	increasingly
important	as	everyone	tries	to	balance	family	life	with	work	life.	You	won't
always	have	to	travel	to	see	friends	and	family	or	to	play	games.	Cultural
attractions	will	be	available	via	the	information	highway,	although	I'm	not
suggesting	that	a	Broadway	or	West	End	musical	will	be	the	same	experience
in	your	living	room	as	it	is	in	a	New	York	or	London	theater.	However,
improvements	in	screen	sizes	and	resolutions	will	enhance	all	video,
including	movies,	in	the	home.	Educational	programming	will	be	extensive.
All	of	this	will	liberate	those	who	would	like	to	abandon	city	living.
The	opening	of	the	interstate	highway	system	had	a	substantial	effect	on
where	in	the	United	States	people	chose	to	settle.	It	made	new	suburbs
accessible	and	contributed	to	the	culture	of	the	automobile.	There	will	be
significant	implications	for	city	planners,	real	estate	developers,	and	school
districts	if	the	opening	of	the	information	highway	also	encourages	people	to
move	away	from	city	centers.	If	large	pools	of	talent	disperse,	companies	will
feel	even	more	pressure	to	be	creative	about	how	to	work	with	consultants
and	employees	not	located	near	their	operations.	This	could	set	off	a	positive-
feedback	cycle,	encouraging	rural	living.
If	the	population	of	a	city	were	reduced	by	even	10	percent,	the	result	would
be	a	major	difference	in	property	values	and	wear	and	tear	on	transportation
and	other	urban	systems.	If	the	average	office	worker	in	any	major	city	stayed
home	one	or	two	days	a	week,	the	decreases	in	gasoline	consumption,	air
pollution,	and	traffic	congestion	would	be	significant.	The	net	effect,
however,	is	hard	to	foresee.	If	those	who	moved	out	of	cities	were	mostly	the
affluent	knowledge	workers,	the	urban	tax	base	would	be	reduced.	This	would
aggravate	the	inner	city's	woes	and	encourage	other	affluent	people	to	leave.
But	at	the	same	time,	the	urban	infrastructure	might	be	less	heavily	loaded.
Rents	would	fall,	creating	opportunities	for	a	better	standard	of	living	for
some	of	those	remaining	in	the	cities.

It	will	take	decades	to	implement	all	the	major	changes,	because	most	people
remain	comfortable	with	whatever	they	learn	early	and	are	reluctant	to	alter
familiar	patterns.	However,	new	generations	will	bring	new	perspectives.	Our
children	will	grow	up	comfortable	with	the	idea	of	working	with	information
tools	across	distances.	These	tools	will	be	as	natural	to	them	as	a	telephone	or
a	ballpoint	pen	is	to	us.	But	technology	isn't	going	to	wait	until	people	are
ready	for	it.	Within	the	next	ten	years	we	will	start	to	see	substantial	shifts	in
how	and	where	we	work,	the	companies	we	work	for,	and	the	places	we
choose	to	live.	My	advice	is	to	try	to	find	out	as	much	as	possible	about	the
technology	that	will	touch	you.	The	more	you	know	about	it,	the	less
disconcerting	it	will	seem.	Technology's	role	is	to	provide	more	flexibility	and
efficiency.	Forward-looking	business	managers	will	have	lots	of	opportunities
to	perform	better	in	the	years	ahead.

8
FRICTION-FREE
CAPITALISM
When	Adam	Smith	described	the	concept	of	markets	in	The	Wealth	of	Nations
in	1776,	he	theorized	that	if	every	buyer	knew	every	seller's	price,	and	every
seller	knew	what	every	buyer	was	willing	to	pay,	everyone	in	the	"market"
would	be	able	to	make	fully	informed	decisions	and	society's	resources	would
be	distributed	efficiently.	To	date	we	haven't	achieved	Smith's	ideal	because
would-be	buyers	and	would-be	sellers	seldom	have	complete	information
about	one	another.
Not	many	consumers	looking	to	buy	a	car	stereo	have	the	time	or	patience	to
canvass	every	dealer	and	thus	are	acting	on	imperfect	and	limited
information.	If	you've	bought	a	product	for	$500	and	see	it	advertised	in	the
paper	for	$300	a	week	or	two	later,	you	feel	foolish	for	overpaying.	But	you
feel	a	lot	worse	if	you	end	up	in	the	wrong	job	because	you	haven't	done
thorough	enough	research.
A	few	markets	are	already	working	fairly	close	to	Smith's	ideal.	Investors
buying	and	selling	currency	and	certain	other	commodities	participate	in
efficient	electronic	markets	that	provide	nearly	complete	instantaneous
information	about	worldwide	supply,	demand,	and	prices.	Everyone	gets
pretty	much	the	same	deal	because	news	about	all	offers,	bids,	and
transactions	speeds	across	wires	to	trading	desks	everywhere.	However,	most
marketplaces	are	very	inefficient.	For	instance,	if	you	are	trying	to	find	a
doctor,	lawyer,	accountant,	or	similar	professional,	or	are	buying	a	house,
information	is	incomplete	and	comparisons	are	difficult	to	make.
The	information	highway	will	extend	the	electronic	marketplace	and	make	it
the	ultimate	go-between,	the	universal	middleman.	Often	the	only	humans
involved	in	a	transaction	will	be	the	actual	buyer	and	seller.	All	the	goods	for
sale	in	the	world	will	be	available	for	you	to	examine,	compare,	and,	often,
customize.	When	you	want	to	buy	something	you'll	be	able	to	tell	your
computer	to	find	it	for	you	at	the	best	price	offered	by	any	acceptable	source
or	ask	your	computer	to	"haggle"	with	the	computers	of	various	sellers.
Information	about	vendors	and	their	products	and	services	will	be	available	to
any	computer	connected	to	the	highway.	Servers	distributed	worldwide	will

accept	bids,	resolve	offers	into	completed	transactions,	control	authentication
and	security,	and	handle	all	other	aspects	of	the	marketplace,	including	the
transfer	of	funds.	This	will	carry	us	into	a	new	world	of	low-friction,	low-
overhead	capitalism,	in	which	market	information	will	be	plentiful	and
transaction	costs	low.	It	will	be	a	shopper's	heaven.
Every	market,	from	a	bazaar	to	the	highway,	facilitates	competitive	pricing
and	allows	goods	to	move	from	seller	to	buyer	efficiently	with	modest
friction.	This	is	thanks	to	the	market	makers—those	whose	job	it	is	to	bring
buyers	and	sellers	together.	As	the	information	highway	assumes	the	role	of
market	maker	in	realm	after	realm,	traditional	middlemen	will	have	to
contribute	real	value	to	a	transaction	to	justify	a	commission.	For	example,
stores	and	services	that	until	now	have	profited	just	because	they	are
"there"—in	a	particular	geographic	location	may	find	they	have	lost	that
advantage.	But	those	who	provide	added	value	will	not	only	survive,	they	will
thrive,	because	the	information	highway	will	let	them	make	their	services
available	to	customers	everywhere.
This	idea	will	scare	a	lot	of	people.	Most	change	feels	a	bit	threatening,	and	I
expect	dramatic	changes	in	the	business	of	retailing	as	commerce	flows	across
the	highway.	But,	as	with	so	many	changes,	I	think	once	we	get	used	to	it
we'll	wonder	how	we	did	without	it.	The	consumer	will	get	not	only
competitive	cost	savings,	but	also	a	much	wider	variety	of	products	and
services	to	choose	from.	Although	there	may	be	fewer	stores,	if	people
continue	to	enjoy	shopping	in	today's	outlets,	as	many	stores	as	their	demand
justifies	will	remain	available.	And	because	the	highway	will	simplify	and
standardize	shopping,	it	will	also	save	time.	If	you	are	buying	a	gift	for	a
loved	one,	you	will	be	able	to	consider	more	choices	and	often	you	will	find
something	more	imaginative.	You	could	use	the	time	saved	from	shopping	to
think	up	a	fun	clue	to	put	on	the	package,	or	create	a	personalized	card.	Or
you	could	spend	the	time	you	save	with	the	recipient.
We	all	recognize	the	value	of	a	knowledgeable	salesperson	when	we	are
shopping	for	insurance,	clothes,	investments,	jewelry,	a	camera,	a	home
appliance,	or	a	home.	We	also	know	the	salesperson's	advice	is	sometimes
biased	because	he	or	she	is	ultimately	hoping	to	make	a	sale	from	a	particular
inventory.
On	the	information	highway	lots	of	product	information	will	be	available
directly	from	manufacturers.	As	they	do	today,	vendors	will	use	a	variety	of
entertaining	and	provocative	techniques	to	attract	us.	Advertising	will	evolve
into	a	hybrid,	combining	today's	television	commercials,	magazine	ads,	and	a

detailed	sales	brochure.	If	an	ad	catches	your	attention,	you'll	be	able	to
request	additional	information	directly	and	very	easily.	Links	will	let	you
navigate	through	whatever	information	the	advertiser	has	made	available,
which	might	be	product	manuals	consisting	of	video,	audio,	and	text.	Vendors
will	make	getting	information	about	their	products	as	simple	as	possible.
At	Microsoft,	we're	looking	forward	to	using	the	highway	to	get	information
out	about	our	products.	Today	we	print	millions	of	pages	of	product	brochures
and	data	sheets,	and	mail	them	out	to	people	who	ask	for	them.	But	we	never
know	how	much	information	to	put	onto	a	data	sheet;	we	don't	want	to
intimidate	casual	inquirers,	and	yet	there	are	people	out	there	who	want	to
know	all	the	detailed	product	specifications.	Also,	since	the	information
changes	fairly	rapidly,	we	are	often	in	the	position	of	having	just	printed	tens
of	thousands	of	copies	of	some	brochure,	and	then	having	to	throw	them	out
because	they	describe	a	version	of	a	product	we're	replacing.	We	expect	a
high	percentage	of	our	information	dissemination	will	shift	to	electronic
inquiry,	particularly	because	we	serve	computer	users.	We	have	already
eliminated	the	printing	of	millions	of	pages	of	paper	by	sending	quarterly	CD-
ROMs	and	using	on-line	services	to	reach	professional	software	developers,
some	of	Microsoft's	most	sophisticated	customers.
But	you	won't	have	to	depend	only	on	what	we	or	any	other	manufacturer
tells	you.	You'll	be	able	to	examine	product	reviews	in	search	of	less	biased
information.	After	you've	seen	the	advertising,	reviews,	and	multi-media
manuals,	you	might	ask	for	relevant	government	regulatory	data.	You'll	check
to	see	if	the	vendor	has	surveyed	owners.	Then	you	might	dig	deeper	into	one
area	of	particular	interest	to	you—for	instance,	durability.	Or	you	could	seek
the	advice	of	sales	consultants,	human	or	electronic,	who	will	create	and
publish	specialized	reviews	for	all	kinds	of	products,	from	drill	bits	t======================================================== pler	it	is	to	search
and	navigate	through	them	quickly,	because	their	content	can	be	restructured
so	easily.
The	organizational	structure	of	a	reservation	book	at	a	restaurant	is	by	date
and	time.	A	9:00	P.M.	reservation	is	written	farther	down	the	page	than	an
8:00	P.M.	reservation.	Saturday-night	dinner	reservations	follow	those	for
Saturday	lunch.	A	mâitre	d'	or	anyone	else	can	rapidly	find	out	who	has	a
reservation	on	any	date	for	any	time	because	the	book's	information	is	ordered
that	way.	But	if,	for	whatever	reason,	someone	wants	to	extract	information	in
another	way,	the	simple	chronology	is	useless.
Imagine	the	plight	of	a	restaurant	captain	if	I	called	to	say,	"My	name	is
Gates.	My	wife	made	us	a	reservation	for	some	time	next	month.	Would	you
mind	checking	to	see	when	it	is?"

"I'm	sorry,	sir,	do	you	know	the	date	of	the	reservation?"	the	captain	would	be
likely	to	ask.
"No,	that's	what	I'm	trying	to	find	out."
"Would	that	have	been	on	a	weekend?"	the	captain	asks.
He	knows	he's	going	to	be	paging	through	the	book	by	hand,	and	he's	hoping
to	reduce	the	task	by	focusing	the	dates	in	any	possible	way.
A	restaurant	can	use	a	paper-based	reservation	book	because	the	total	number
of	reservations	isn't	large.	An	airline	reservation	system	is	not	a	book	but	a
database	containing	an	enormous	quantity	of	information—flights,	air	fares,
bookings,	seat	assignments,	and	billing	information—for	hundreds	of	flights	a
day	worldwide.	American	Airlines'	SABRE	reservation	system	stores	the
information—4.4	trillion	bytes	of	it,	which	is	more	than	4	million	million
characters—on	computer	hard	disks.	If	the	information	in	the	SABRE	system
were	copied	into	a	hypothetical	paper	reservation	book,	it	would	require	more
than	2	billion	pages.
For	as	long	as	we've	had	paper	documents	or	collections	of	documents,	we
have	been	ordering	information	linearly,	with	indexes,	tables	of	contents,	and
cross-references	of	various	kinds	to	provide	alternate	means	of	navigation.	In
most	offices	filing	cabinets	are	organized	by	customer,	vendor,	or	project	in
alphabetical	order,	but	to	speed	access,	often	a	duplicate	set	of
correspondence	is	filed	chronologically.	Professional	indexers	add	value	to	a
book	by	building	an	alternative	way	to	find	information.	And	before	library
catalogs	were	computerized,	new	books	were	entered	into	the	paper	catalogs
on	several	different	cards	so	a	reader	could	find	a	book	by	its	title	or	any	one
of	its	authors	or	topics.	This	redundancy	was	to	make	information	easier	to
find.
When	I	was	young	I	loved	my	family's	1960	World	Book	Encyclopedia.	Its
heavy	bound	volumes	contained	just	text	and	pictures.	They	showed	what
Edison's	phonograph	looked	like,	but	didn't	let	me	listen	to	its	scratchy	sound.
The	encyclopedia	had	photographs	of	a	fuzzy	caterpillar	changing	into	a
butterfly,	but	there	was	no	video	to	bring	the	transformation	to	life.	It	also
would	have	been	nice	if	it	had	quizzed	me	on	what	I	had	read,	or	if	the
information	had	always	been	up-to-date.	Naturally	I	wasn't	aware	of	those
drawbacks	then.	When	I	was	eight,	I	began	to	read	the	first	volume.	I	was
determined	to	read	straight	through	every	volume.	I	could	have	absorbed
more	if	it	had	been	easy	to	read	all	the	articles	about	the	sixteenth	century	in
sequence	or	all	the	articles	pertaining	to	medicine.	Instead	I	read	about

"Garter	Snakes"	then	"Gary,	Indiana,"	then	"Gas."	But	I	had	a	great	time
reading	the	encyclopedia	anyway	and	kept	at	it	for	five	years	until	I	reached
the	Ps.	Then	I	discovered	the	Encyclopaedia	Britannica,	with	its	greater
sophistication	and	detail.	I	knew	I	would	never	have	the	patience	to	read	all	of
it.	Also,	by	then,	satisfying	my	enthusiasm	for	computers	was	taking	up	most
of	my	spare	time.
Current	print	encyclopedias	consist	of	nearly	two	dozen	volumes,	with
millions	of	words	of	text	and	thousands	of	illustrations,	and	cost	hundreds	or
thousands	of	dollars.	That's	quite	an	investment,	especially	considering	how
rapidly	the	information	gets	out	of	date.	Microsoft	Encarta,	which	is
outselling	print	and	other	multi-media	encyclopedias,	comes	on	a	single	1-
ounce	CD-ROM	(which	stands	for	Compact	Disc	Read	Only	Memory).
Encarta	includes	26,000	topics	with	9	million	words	of	text,	8	hours	of
sounds,	7,000	photographs	and	illustrations,	800	maps,	250	interactive	charts
and	tables,	and	100	animations	and	video	clips.	It	costs	less	than	$100.	If	you
want	to	know	how	the	Egyptian	"ud"	(a	musical	instrument)	sounds,	hear	the
1936	abdication	speech	of	Great	Britain's	King	Edward	VIII,	or	see	an
animation	explaining	how	a	machine	works,	the	information's	all	there—and
no	paper-based	encyclopedia	will	ever	have	it.
Articles	in	a	print	encyclopedia	often	are	followed	by	a	list	of	articles	on
related	subjects.	To	read	them,	you	have	to	find	the	referenced	article,	which
may	be	in	another	volume.	With	a	CD-ROM	encyclopedia	all	you	have	to	do
is	click	on	the	reference	and	the	article	will	appear.	On	the	information
highway,	encyclopedia	articles	will	include	links	to	related	subjects—not	just
those	covered	in	the	encyclopedia,	but	those	in	other	sources.	There	will	be	no
limit	to	how	much	detail	you	will	be	able	to	explore	on	a	subject	that	interests
you.	In	fact,	an	encyclopedia	on	the	highway	will	be	more	than	just	a	specific
reference	work—it	will	be,	like	the	library	card	catalog,	a	doorway	to	all
knowledge.
1995:	Screen	from	Microsoft	Encarta	electronic	multimedia	encyclopedia

Today,	printed	information	is	hard	to	locate.	It's	almost	impossible	to	find	all
the	best	information—including	books,	news	articles,	and	film	clips—on	a
specific	topic.	It	is	extremely	time-consuming	to	assemble	the	information
you	can	find.	For	example,	if	you	wanted	to	read	biographies	of	all	the	recent
Nobel	Prize	laureates,	compiling	them	could	take	an	entire	day.	Electronic
documents,	however,	will	be	interactive.	Request	a	kind	of	information,	and
the	document	responds.	Indicate	that	you've	changed	your	mind,	and	the
document	responds	again.	Once	you	get	used	to	this	sort	of	system,	you	find
that	being	able	to	look	at	information	in	different	ways	makes	that
information	more	valuable.	The	flexibility	invites	exploration,	and	the
exploration	is	rewarded	with	discovery.
You'll	be	able	to	get	your	daily	news	in	a	similar	way.	You'll	be	able	to	specify
how	long	you	want	your	newscast	to	last.	This	will	be	possible	because	you'll
be	able	to	have	each	of	the	news	stories	selected	individually.	The	newscast
assembled	for	and	delivered	only	to	you	might	include	world	news	from
NBC,	the	BBC,	CNN,	or	the	Los	Angeles	Times,	with	a	weather	report	from	a
favorite	local	TV	meteorologist—or	from	any	private	meteorologist	who
wanted	to	offer	his	or	her	own	service.	You	will	be	able	to	request	longer
stories	on	the	subjects	that	particularly	interest	you	and	just	highlights	on
others.	If,	while	you	are	watching	the	newscast,	you	want	more	than	has	been
put	together,	you	will	easily	be	able	to	request	more	background	or	detail,
either	from	another	news	broadcast	or	from	file	information.
Among	all	the	types	of	paper	documents,	narrative	fiction	is	one	of	the	few
that	will	not	benefit	from	electronic	organization.	Almost	every	reference
book	has	an	index,	but	novels	don't	because	there	is	no	need	to	be	able	to	look
something	up	in	a	novel.	Novels	are	linear.	Likewise,	we'll	continue	to	watch
most	movies	from	start	to	finish.	This	isn't	a	technological	judgment—it	is	an
artistic	one:	Their	linearity	is	intrinsic	to	the	storytelling	process.	New	forms
of	interactive	fiction	are	being	invented	that	take	advantage	of	the	electronic
world,	but	linear	novels	and	movies	will	still	be	popular.
The	highway	will	make	it	easy	to	distribute	digital	documents	cheaply,
whatever	their	form.	Millions	of	people	and	companies	will	be	creating
documents	and	publishing	them	on	the	network.	Some	documents	will	be
aimed	at	paying	audiences	and	some	will	be	free	to	anyone	who	wants	to	pay
attention.	Digital	storage	is	fantastically	inexpensive.	Hard-disk	drives	in
personal	computers	will	soon	cost	about	$0.15	for	a	megabyte	(million	bytes)
of	information.	To	put	this	in	perspective,	1	megabyte	will	hold	about	700
pages	of	text,	so	the	cost	is	something	like	$0.00021	per	page—about	one

two-hundredth	what	the	local	copy	center	would	charge	at	$0.05	a	page.	And
because	there	is	the	option	of	reusing	the	storage	space	for	something	else,	the
cost	is	actually	the	cost	of	storage	per	unit	time—in	other	words,	of	renting
the	space.	If	we	assume	just	a	three-year	average	lifetime	for	the	hard-disk
drive,	the	amortized	price	per	page	per	year	is	$0.00007.	And	storage	is
getting	cheaper	all	the	time.	Hard-disk	prices	have	been	dropping	by	about	50
percent	per	year	for	the	last	several	years.
Text	is	particularly	easy	to	store	because	it	is	very	compact	in	digital	form.
The	old	saying	that	a	picture	is	worth	a	thousand	words	is	more	than	true	in
the	digital	world.	High-quality	photographic	images	take	more	space	than
text,	and	video	(which	you	can	think	of	as	a	sequence	of	up	to	thirty	new
images	appearing	every	second)	takes	even	more.	Nevertheless,	the	cost	of
distribution	for	these	kinds	of	data	is	still	quite	low.	A	feature	film	takes	up
about	4	gigabytes	(4,000	megabytes)	in	compressed	digital	format,	which	is
about	$1,600	worth	of	hard-disk	space.
Sixteen	hundred	dollars	to	store	a	single	film	doesn't	sound	low-cost.
However,	consider	that	the	typical	local	video-rental	store	usually	buys	at
least	eight	copies	of	a	hot	new	movie	for	about	$80	a	copy.	With	these	eight
copies	the	store	can	supply	only	eight	customers	per	day.
Once	the	disk	and	the	computer	that	manages	it	are	connected	up	to	the
highway,	only	one	copy	of	the	information	will	be	necessary	for	everyone	to
have	access.	The	most	popular	documents	will	have	copies	made	on	different
servers	to	avoid	delays	when	an	unusual	number	of	users	want	access.	With
one	investment,	roughly	what	a	single	shop	today	spends	for	a	popular
videotape	title,======================================================== ical	records
before	determining	whether	it	chooses	to	insure	our	mortality.	These
companies	may	also	want	to	know	if	we	indulge	in	any	dangerous	pastimes,
such	as	hang	gliding,	smoking,	or	stock	car	racing.	Should	an	insurer's
computer	be	allowed	to	examine	the	information	highway	for	records	of	our
purchases	to	see	if	there	are	any	that	might	indicate	risky	behavior	on	our
part?	Should	a	prospective	employer's	computer	be	allowed	to	examine	our
communications	or	entertainment	records	to	develop	a	psychological	profile?
How	much	information	should	a	federal,	state,	or	city	agency	be	allowed	to
see?	What	should	a	potential	landlord	be	able	to	learn	about	you?	What
information	should	a	potential	spouse	have	access	to?	We	will	need	to	define
both	the	legal	and	practical	limits	of	privacy.
These	privacy	fears	revolve	around	the	possibility	that	someone	else	is
keeping	track	of	information	about	you.	But	the	highway	will	also	make	it
possible	for	an	individual	to	keep	track	of	his	or	her	own	whereabouts—to
lead	what	we	might	call	"a	documented	life"
Your	wallet	PC	will	be	able	to	keep	audio,	time,	location,	and	eventually	even
video	records	of	everything	that	happens	to	you.	It	will	be	able	to	record
every	word	you	say	and	every	word	said	to	you,	as	well	as	body	temperature,

blood	pressure,	barometric	pressure,	and	a	variety	of	other	data	about	you	and
your	surroundings.	It	will	be	able	to	track	your	interactions	with	the	highway
—all	of	the	commands	you	issue,	the	messages	you	send,	and	the	people	you
call	or	who	call	you.	The	resulting	record	will	be	the	ultimate	diary	and
autobiography,	if	you	want	one.	If	nothing	else,	you	would	know	exactly
when	and	where	you	took	a	photograph	when	you	organize	your	family's
digital	photo	album.
The	technology	required	is	not	difficult.	It	should	soon	be	possible	to
compress	the	human	voice	down	to	a	few	thousand	bits	of	digital	information
per	second,	which	means	that	an	hour	of	conversation	will	be	converted	into
about	1	megabyte	of	digital	data.	Small	tapes	used	for	backing	up	computer
hard	disks	already	store	10	gigabytes	or	more	of	data—enough	to	record
about	10,000	hours	of	compressed	audio.	Tapes	for	new	generations	of	digital
VCRs	will	hold	more	than	100	gigabytes,	which	means	that	a	single	tape
costing	a	few	dollars	could	hold	recordings	of	all	the	conversations	an
individual	has	over	the	course	of	a	decade	or	possibly	even	a	lifetime—
depending	on	how	talkative	he	is.	These	numbers	are	based	only	on	today's
capacities—in	the	future	storage	will	be	much	cheaper.	Audio	is	easy,	but
within	a	couple	of	years	a	full	video	recording	will	be	possible	as	well.
I	find	the	prospect	of	documented	lives	a	little	chilling,	but	some	people	will
warm	to	the	idea.	One	reason	for	documenting	a	life	will	be	defensive.	We
can	think	of	the	wallet	PC	as	an	alibi	machine,	because	encrypted	digital
signatures	will	guarantee	an	unforgeable	alibi	against	false	accusations.	If
someone	ever	accused	you	of	something,	you	could	retort:	"Hey,	buddy,	I
have	a	documented	life.	These	bits	are	stored	away.	I	can	play	back	anything
I've	ever	said.	So	don't	play	games	with	me"	On	the	other	hand,	if	you	were
guilty	of	something,	there	would	be	a	record	of	it.	There	would	also	be	a
record	of	any	tampering.	Richard	Nixon's	taping	of	conversations	in	the
White	House—and	then	the	suspicions	that	he	had	attempted	to	alter	those
tapes—contributed	to	his	undoing.	He	chose	to	have	a	documented	political
life	and	lived	to	regret	it.
The	Rodney	King	case	showed	the	evidentiary	power	of	videotape	and	its
limits.	Before	long	every	police	car,	or	individual	policeman,	may	be
equipped	with	a	digital	video	camera,	with	nonforgeable	time	and	location
stamps.	The	public	may	insist	that	the	police	record	themselves	in	the	course
of	their	work.	And	the	police	could	be	all	for	it,	to	guard	against	claims	of
brutality	or	abuse	on	one	hand	and	as	an	aid	in	gathering	better	evidence	on
the	other.	Some	police	forces	are	already	videorecording	all	arrests.	This	sort
of	record	won't	affect	just	the	police.	Medical	malpractice	insurance	might	be

cheaper,	or	only	available,	for	doctors	who	record	surgical	procedures	or	even
office	visits.	Bus,	taxi,	and	trucking	companies	have	an	obvious	interest	in	the
performance	of	their	drivers.	Some	transportation	companies	have	already
installed	equipment	to	record	mileage	and	average	speed.	I	can	imagine
proposals	that	every	automobile,	including	yours	and	mine,	be	outfitted	not
only	with	a	recorder	but	also	with	a	transmitter	that	identifies	the	car	and	its
location—a	future	license	plate.	After	all,	airplanes	have	"black	box"
recorders	today,	and	once	the	cost	drops,	there	is	no	reason	they	shouldn't	also
be	in	our	cars.	If	a	car	was	reported	stolen,	its	location	would	be	known
immediately.	After	a	hit-and-run	accident	or	a	drive-by	shooting,	a	judge
could	authorize	a	query:	"What	vehicles	were	in	the	following	two-block	area
during	this	thirty-minute	period?"	The	black	box	could	record	your	speed	and
location,	which	would	allow	for	the	perfect	enforcement	of	speeding	laws.	I
would	vote	against	that.
In	a	world	that	is	increasingly	instrumented,	we	could	reach	the	point	where
cameras	record	most	of	what	goes	on	in	public.	Video	cameras	in	public
places	are	already	relatively	commonplace.	They	perch,	often	concealed,
around	banks,	airports,	automatic-teller	machines,	hospitals,	freeways,	stores,
and	hotel	and	office-building	lobbies	and	elevators.
The	prospect	of	so	many	cameras,	always	watching,	might	have	distressed	us
fifty	years	ago,	as	it	did	George	Orwell.	But	today	they	are	unremarkable.
There	are	neighborhoods	in	the	United	States	and	Europe	where	citizens	are
welcoming	these	cameras	above	streets	and	parking	lots.	In	Monaco,	street
crime	has	been	virtually	eliminated	because	hundreds	of	video	cameras	have
been	placed	around	the	tiny	principality.	Monaco,	however,	is	small	enough	in
area,	370	acres	(150	hectares),	that	a	few	hundred	cameras	can	pretty	much
cover	it	all.	Many	parents	would	welcome	cameras	around	schoolyards	to
discourage	or	help	apprehend	drug	dealers,	child	molesters,	and	even
playground	bullies.	Every	city	streetlight	represents	a	substantial	investment
by	a	community	in	public	safety.	In	a	few	years	it	will	require	only	a
relatively	modest	additional	sum	to	add	and	operate	cameras	with	connections
to	the	information	highway.	Within	a	decade,	computers	will	be	able	to	scan
video	records	very	inexpensively	looking	for	a	particular	person	or	activity.	I
can	easily	imagine	proposals	that	virtually	every	pole	supporting	a	streetlight
should	also	have	one	or	more	cameras.	The	images	from	these	cameras	might
be	accessed	only	in	the	event	of	a	crime,	and	even	then	possibly	only	under
court	order.	Some	people	might	argue	that	every	image	from	every	camera
should	be	available	for	viewing	by	everyone	at	any	time.	This	raises	serious
privacy	questions	in	my	mind,	but	advocates	might	argue	that	it's	appropriate
if	the	cameras	are	only	in	public	places.

Almost	everyone	is	willing	to	accept	some	restrictions	in	exchange	for	a	sense
of	security.	From	a	historical	perspective,	people	living	in	Western
democracies	already	enjoy	a	degree	of	privacy	and	personal	freedom
unprecedented	in	all	of	human	history.	If	ubiquitous	cameras	tied	into	the
information	highway	should	prove	to	reduce	serious	crime	dramatically	in	test
communities,	a	real	debate	would	begin	over	whether	people	fear	surveillance
more	or	less	than	they	fear	crime.	It	is	difficult	to	imagine	a	government-
sanctioned	experiment	along	these	lines	in	the	United	States	because	of	the
privacy	issues	it	raises	and	the	likelihood	of	constitutional	challenges.
However,	opinion	can	change.	It	might	take	only	a	few	more	incidents	like
the	bombing	in	Oklahoma	City	within	the	borders	of	the	United	States	for
attitudes	toward	strong	privacy	protection	to	shift.	What	today	seems	like
digital	Big	Brother	might	one	day	become	the	norm	if	the	alternative	is	being
left	to	the	mercy	of	terrorists	and	criminals.	I	am	not	advocating	either
position—technology	will	enable	society	to	make	a	political	decision.
At	the	same	time	technology	is	making	it	easier	to	create	video	records,	it	is
also	making	it	possible	to	keep	all	your	personal	documents	and	messages
totally	private.	Encryption-technology	software,	which	anyone	can	download
from	the	Internet,	can	transform	a	PC	into	a	virtually	unbreakable	code
machine.	As	the	highway	is	deployed,	security	services	will	be	applied	to	all
forms	of	digital	information—phone	calls,	files,	databases,	you	name	it.	As
long	as	you	protect	the	password,	the	information	stored	on	your	computer
can	be	held	under	the	strongest	lock	and	key	that	has	ever	existed.	This	allows
for	the	greatest	degree	of	information	privacy	any	individual	has	ever	had.
Many	in	government	are	opposed	to	this	encryption	capability,	because	it
reduces	their	ability	to	gather	information.	Unfortunately	for	them,	the
technology	can't	be	stopped.	The	National	Security	Agency	is	a	part	of	the
U.S.	government	defense	and	intelligence	community	that	protects	this
country's	secret	communications	and	decrypts	foreign	communications	to
gather	intelligence	data.	The	NSA	does	not	want	software	containing
advanced	encryption	capabilities	to	be	sent	outside	the	United	States.
However,	this	software	is	already	available	throughout	the	world,	and	any
computer	can	run	it.	No	policy	decision	will	be	able	to	restore	the	tapping
capabilities	governments	had	in	the	past.
Today's	legislation	that	prevents	the	export	of	software	with	good	encryption
capability	could	harm	U.S.	software	and	hardware	companies.	The
restrictions	give	foreign	companies	an	advantage	over	U.S.	competitors.
American	companies	almost	unanimously	agree	that	the	current	encryption
export	restrictions	don't	work.

Each	media	advance	has	had	a	substantial	effect	on	how	people	and
governments	interact.	The	printing	press	and,	later,	mass-circulation
newspapers	changed	the	nature	o======================================================== for	it,	but	also	because	we	wanted	the	public	to	accept	graphical
computing.
Mistakes	such	as	Apple's	decision	to	limit	the	sale	of	its	operating-system
software	for	its	own	hardware	will	be	repeated	often	in	the	years	ahead.	Some

telephone	and	cable	companies	are	already	talking	about	communicating	only
with	the	software	they	control.
1984:	the	Apple	macintosh	computer
It's	increasingly	important	to	be	able	to	compete	and	cooperate	at	the	same
time,	but	that	calls	for	a	lot	of	maturity.
The	separation	of	hardware	and	software	was	a	major	issue	in	the
collaboration	between	IBM	and	Microsoft	to	create	OS/2.	The	separation	of
hardware	and	software	standards	is	still	an	issue	today.	Software	standards
create	a	level	playing	field	for	the	hardware	companies,	but	many
manufacturers	use	the	tie	between	their	hardware	and	their	software	to
distinguish	their	systems.	Some	companies	treat	hardware	and	software	as
separate	businesses	and	some	don't.	These	different	approaches	will	be	played
out	again	on	the	highway.
Throughout	the	1980s,	IBM	was	awesome	by	every	measure	capitalism
knows.	In	1984,	it	set	the	record	for	the	most	money	ever	made	by	any	firm	in
a	single	year—$6.6	billion	of	profit.	In	that	banner	year	IBM	introduced	its
second-generation	personal	computer,	a	high-performance	machine	called	the
PC	AT,	which	incorporated	Intel's	80286	microprocessor	(colloquially	known
as	the	"286").	It	was	three	times	faster	than	the	original	IBM	PC.	The	AT	was
a	great	success,	and	within	a	year	had	more	than	70	percent	of	all	business	PC
sales.
When	IBM	launched	the	original	PC,	it	never	expected	the	machine	to
challenge	sales	of	the	company's	business	systems,	although	a	significant
percentage	of	the	PCs	were	bought	by	IBM's	traditional	customers.	Company
executives	thought	the	smaller	machines	would	find	their	place	only	at	the
low	end	of	the	market.	As	PCs	became	more	powerful,	to	avoid	having	them
cannibalize	its	higher-end	products,	IBM	held	back	on	PC	development.

In	its	mainframe	business,	IBM	had	always	been	able	to	control	the	adoption
of	new	standards.	For	example,	the	company	would	limit	the
price/performance	of	a	new	line	of	hardware	so	it	wouldn't	steal	business
from	existing,	more	expensive	products.	It	would	encourage	the	adoption	of
new	versions	of	its	operating	systems	by	releasing	hardware	that	required	the
new	software	or	vice	versa.	That	kind	of	strategy	might	have	worked	well	for
mainframes,	but	it	was	a	disaster	in	the	fast-moving	personal-computer
market.	IBM	could	still	command	somewhat	higher	prices	for	equivalent
performance,	but	the	world	had	discovered	that	lots	of	companies	made
compatible	hardware,	and	that	if	IBM	couldn't	deliver	the	right	value,
someone	else	would.
Three	engineers	who	appreciated	the	potential	offered	by	IBM's	entry	into	the
personal-computer	business	left	their	jobs	at	Texas	Instruments	and	formed	a
new	company—Compaq	Computer.	They	built	hardware	that	would	accept
the	same	accessory	cards	as	the	IBM	PC	and	licensed	MS-DOS	so	their
computers	were	able	to	run	the	same	applications	as	the	IBM	PC.	The
company	produced	machines	that	did	everything	the	IBM	PCs	did	and	were
more	portable.	Compaq	quickly	became	one	of	the	all-time	success	stories	in
American	business,	selling	more	than	$100	million	worth	of	computers	its
first	year	in	business.	IBM	was	able	to	collect	royalties	by	licensing	its	patent
portfolio,	but	its	share	of	market	declined	as	compatible	systems	came	to
market	and	IBM's	hardware	was	not	competitive.
The	company	delayed	the	release	of	its	PCs	with	the	powerful	Intel	386	chip,
Intel's	successor	to	the	286.	This	was	done	to	protect	the	sales	of	its	low-end
minicomputers,	which	weren't	much	more	powerful	than	a	386-based	PC.
IBM's	delay	allowed	Compaq	to	become	the	first	company	to	introduce	a
386-based	computer	in	1986.	This	gave	Compaq	an	aura	of	prestige	and
leadership	that	previously	had	been	IBM's	alone.
IBM	planned	to	recover	with	a	one-two	punch,	the	first	in	hardware	and	the
second	in	software.	It	wanted	to	build	computers	and	write	operating	systems,
each	of	which	would	depend	exclusively	on	the	other	for	its	new	features	so
competitors	would	either	be	frozen	out	or	forced	to	pay	hefty	licensing	fees.
The	strategy	was	to	make	everyone	else's	"IBM-compatible"	personal
computer	obsolete.
The	IBM	strategy	included	some	good	ideas.	One	was	to	simplify	the	design
of	the	PC	by	taking	many	applications	that	had	formerly	been	selectable
options	and	building	them	into	the	machine.	This	would	both	reduce	costs	and
increase	the	percentage	of	IBM	components	in	the	ultimate	sale.	The	plan	also

called	for	substantial	changes	in	the	hardware	architecture:	new	connectors
and	standards	for	accessory	cards,	keyboards,	mice,	and	even	displays.	To
give	itself	a	further	advantage	IBM	didn't	release	specifications	on	any	of
these	connectors	until	it	had	shipped	the	first	systems.	This	was	supposed	to
redefine	compatibility	standards.	Other	PC	manufacturers	and	the	makers	of
peripherals	would	have	to	start	over—IBM	would	have	the	lead	again.
By	1984,	a	significant	part	of	Microsoft's	business	was	providing	MS-DOS	to
manufacturers	that	built	PCs	compatible	with	IBM's	systems.	We	began
working	with	IBM	on	a	replacement	for	MS-DOS,	eventually	named	OS/2.
Our	agreement	allowed	Microsoft	to	sell	other	manufacturers	the	same
operating	system	that	IBM	was	shipping	with	its	machines.	We	each	were
allowed	to	extend	the	operating	system	beyond	what	we	developed	together.
This	time	it	wasn't	like	when	we	did	MS-DOS.	IBM	wanted	to	control	the
standard	to	help	its	PC	hardware	and	mainframe	businesses.	IBM	became
directly	involved	in	the	design	and	implementation	of	OS/2.
OS/2	was	central	to	IBM's	corporate	software	plans.	It	was	to	be	the	first
implementation	of	IBM's	Systems	Application	Architecture,	which	the
company	ultimately	intended	to	have	as	a	common	development	environment
across	its	full	line	of	computers	from	mainframe	to	midrange	to	PC.	IBM
executives	believed	that	using	the	company's	mainframe	technology	on	the
PC	would	prove	irresistible	to	corporate	customers	who	were	moving	more
and	more	capabilities	from	mainframe	and	mini-computers	to	PCs.	They	also
thought	that	it	would	give	IBM	a	huge	advantage	over	PC	competitors	who
would	not	have	access	to	mainframe	technology.	IBM's	proprietary	extensions
of	OS/2—called	Extended	Edition—included	communications	and	database
services.	And	it	planned	to	build	a	full	set	of	office	applications—to	be	called
OfficeVision—to	work	on	top	of	Extended	Edition.	The	plan	predicted	these
applications,	including	word	processing,	would	allow	IBM	to	become	a	major
player	in	PC-application	software,	and	compete	with	Lotus	and	WordPerfect.
The	development	of	OfficeVision	required	another	team	of	thousands.	OS/2
was	not	just	an	operating	system,	it	was	part	of	a	corporate	crusade.
The	development	work	was	burdened	by	demands	that	the	project	meet	a
variety	of	conflicting	feature	requirements	as	well	as	by	IBM's	schedule
commitments	for	Extended	Edition	and	OfficeVision.	Microsoft	went	ahead
and	developed	OS/2	applications	to	help	get	the	market	going,	but	as	time
went	on,	our	confidence	in	OS/2	eroded.	We	had	entered	into	the	project	with
the	belief	that	IBM	would	allow	OS/2	to	be	enough	like	Windows	that	a
software	developer	would	have	to	make	at	most	only	minor	modifications	to
get	an	application	running	on	both	platforms.	But	after	IBM's	insistence	that

the	applications	be	compatible	with	its	mainframe	and	midrange	systems,
what	we	were	left	with	was	more	like	an	unwieldy	mainframe	operating
system	than	a	PC	one.
Our	business	relationship	with	IBM	was	vital	to	us.	That	year,	1986,	we	had
taken	Microsoft	public	to	provide	liquidity	for	the	employees	who	had	been
given	stock	options.	It	was	about	that	time	Steve	Ballmer	and	I	proposed	to
IBM	that	they	buy	up	to	30	percent	of	Microsoft—at	a	bargain	price—so	it
would	share	in	our	fortune,	good	or	bad.	We	thought	this	might	help	the
companies	work	together	more	amicably	and	productively.	IBM	was	not
interested.
We	worked	extremely	hard	to	make	sure	our	operating-system	work	with
IBM	succeeded.	I	felt	the	project	would	be	a	ticket	to	the	future	for	both
companies.	Instead,	it	eventually	created	an	enormous	rift	between	us.	A	new
operating	system	is	a	big	project.	We	had	our	team	working	outside	Seattle.
IBM	had	teams	in	Boca	Raton,	Florida;	Hursley	Park,	England;	and	later
Austin,	Texas.
But	the	geographical	problems	were	not	as	bad	as	those	that	came	from	IBM's
mainframe	legacy.	IBM's	previous	software	projects	almost	never	caught	on
with	PC	customers	precisely	because	they	were	designed	with	a	mainframe
customer	in	mind.	For	instance,	it	took	three	minutes	for	one	version	of	OS/2
to	"boot"	(to	make	itself	ready	for	use	after	it	was	turned	on).	That	didn't	seem
bad	to	them,	because	in	the	mainframe	world,	booting	could	take	fifteen
minutes.
IBM,	with	more	than	300,000	employees,	was	also	stymied	by	its
commitment	to	company-wide	consensus.	Every	part	of	IBM	was	invited	to
submit	Design	Change	Requests,	which	usually	turned	out	to	be	demands	that
the	personal-computer-system	software	be	changed	to	fit	the	needs	of
mainframe	products	better.	We	got	more	than	10,000	such	requests,	and
talented	people	from	IBM	and	Microsoft	would	sit	and	discuss	them	for	days.
I	remember	change	request	#221:	"Remove	fonts	from	product.	Reason:
Enhancement	to	product's	substance."	Someone	at	IBM	didn't	want	the	PC
operating	system	to	offer	multiple	typefaces	because	a	particular	IBM
mainframe	printer	couldn't	handle	them.
Finally	it	became	clear	that	joint	development	wasn't	going	to	work.	We	asked
IBM	to	let	us	develop	the	new	operating	system	on	our	own	and	license	it	to
them	cheaply.	We'd	make	our	profit	by	selling	the	same	thing	to	other
computer	companies.	But	IBM	had	declared	that	its	own	programmers	had	to

be	involved	in	the	creation	of	any	software	it	considered	strategic.	And
operating-system	software	clearly	wa======================================================== ical	records
before	determining	whether	it	chooses	to	insure	our	mortality.	These
companies	may	also	want	to	know	if	we	indulge	in	any	dangerous	pastimes,
such	as	hang	gliding,	smoking,	or	stock	car	racing.	Should	an	insurer's
computer	be	allowed	to	examine	the	information	highway	for	records	of	our
purchases	to	see	if	there	are	any	that	might	indicate	risky	behavior	on	our
part?	Should	a	prospective	employer's	computer	be	allowed	to	examine	our
communications	or	entertainment	records	to	develop	a	psychological	profile?
How	much	information	should	a	federal,	state,	or	city	agency	be	allowed	to
see?	What	should	a	potential	landlord	be	able	to	learn	about	you?	What
information	should	a	potential	spouse	have	access	to?	We	will	need	to	define
both	the	legal	and	practical	limits	of	privacy.
These	privacy	fears	revolve	around	the	possibility	that	someone	else	is
keeping	track	of	information	about	you.	But	the	highway	will	also	make	it
possible	for	an	individual	to	keep	track	of	his	or	her	own	whereabouts—to
lead	what	we	might	call	"a	documented	life"
Your	wallet	PC	will	be	able	to	keep	audio,	time,	location,	and	eventually	even
video	records	of	everything	that	happens	to	you.	It	will	be	able	to	record
every	word	you	say	and	every	word	said	to	you,	as	well	as	body	temperature,

blood	pressure,	barometric	pressure,	and	a	variety	of	other	data	about	you	and
your	surroundings.	It	will	be	able	to	track	your	interactions	with	the	highway
—all	of	the	commands	you	issue,	the	messages	you	send,	and	the	people	you
call	or	who	call	you.	The	resulting	record	will	be	the	ultimate	diary	and
autobiography,	if	you	want	one.	If	nothing	else,	you	would	know	exactly
when	and	where	you	took	a	photograph	when	you	organize	your	family's
digital	photo	album.
The	technology	required	is	not	difficult.	It	should	soon	be	possible	to
compress	the	human	voice	down	to	a	few	thousand	bits	of	digital	information
per	second,	which	means	that	an	hour	of	conversation	will	be	converted	into
about	1	megabyte	of	digital	data.	Small	tapes	used	for	backing	up	computer
hard	disks	already	store	10	gigabytes	or	more	of	data—enough	to	record
about	10,000	hours	of	compressed	audio.	Tapes	for	new	generations	of	digital
VCRs	will	hold	more	than	100	gigabytes,	which	means	that	a	single	tape
costing	a	few	dollars	could	hold	recordings	of	all	the	conversations	an
individual	has	over	the	course	of	a	decade	or	possibly	even	a	lifetime—
depending	on	how	talkative	he	is.	These	numbers	are	based	only	on	today's
capacities—in	the	future	storage	will	be	much	cheaper.	Audio	is	easy,	but
within	a	couple	of	years	a	full	video	recording	will	be	possible	as	well.
I	find	the	prospect	of	documented	lives	a	little	chilling,	but	some	people	will
warm	to	the	idea.	One	reason	for	documenting	a	life	will	be	defensive.	We
can	think	of	the	wallet	PC	as	an	alibi	machine,	because	encrypted	digital
signatures	will	guarantee	an	unforgeable	alibi	against	false	accusations.	If
someone	ever	accused	you	of	something,	you	could	retort:	"Hey,	buddy,	I
have	a	documented	life.	These	bits	are	stored	away.	I	can	play	back	anything
I've	ever	said.	So	don't	play	games	with	me"	On	the	other	hand,	if	you	were
guilty	of	something,	there	would	be	a	record	of	it.	There	would	also	be	a
record	of	any	tampering.	Richard	Nixon's	taping	of	conversations	in	the
White	House—and	then	the	suspicions	that	he	had	attempted	to	alter	those
tapes—contributed	to	his	undoing.	He	chose	to	have	a	documented	political
life	and	lived	to	regret	it.
The	Rodney	King	case	showed	the	evidentiary	power	of	videotape	and	its
limits.	Before	long	every	police	car,	or	individual	policeman,	may	be
equipped	with	a	digital	video	camera,	with	nonforgeable	time	and	location
stamps.	The	public	may	insist	that	the	police	record	themselves	in	the	course
of	their	work.	And	the	police	could	be	all	for	it,	to	guard	against	claims	of
brutality	or	abuse	on	one	hand	and	as	an	aid	in	gathering	better	evidence	on
the	other.	Some	police	forces	are	already	videorecording	all	arrests.	This	sort
of	record	won't	affect	just	the	police.	Medical	malpractice	insurance	might	be

cheaper,	or	only	available,	for	doctors	who	record	surgical	procedures	or	even
office	visits.	Bus,	taxi,	and	trucking	companies	have	an	obvious	interest	in	the
performance	of	their	drivers.	Some	transportation	companies	have	already
installed	equipment	to	record	mileage	and	average	speed.	I	can	imagine
proposals	that	every	automobile,	including	yours	and	mine,	be	outfitted	not
only	with	a	recorder	but	also	with	a	transmitter	that	identifies	the	car	and	its
location—a	future	license	plate.	After	all,	airplanes	have	"black	box"
recorders	today,	and	once	the	cost	drops,	there	is	no	reason	they	shouldn't	also
be	in	our	cars.	If	a	car	was	reported	stolen,	its	location	would	be	known
immediately.	After	a	hit-and-run	accident	or	a	drive-by	shooting,	a	judge
could	authorize	a	query:	"What	vehicles	were	in	the	following	two-block	area
during	this	thirty-minute	period?"	The	black	box	could	record	your	speed	and
location,	which	would	allow	for	the	perfect	enforcement	of	speeding	laws.	I
would	vote	against	that.
In	a	world	that	is	increasingly	instrumented,	we	could	reach	the	point	where
cameras	record	most	of	what	goes	on	in	public.	Video	cameras	in	public
places	are	already	relatively	commonplace.	They	perch,	often	concealed,
around	banks,	airports,	automatic-teller	machines,	hospitals,	freeways,	stores,
and	hotel	and	office-building	lobbies	and	elevators.
The	prospect	of	so	many	cameras,	always	watching,	might	have	distressed	us
fifty	years	ago,	as	it	did	George	Orwell.	But	today	they	are	unremarkable.
There	are	neighborhoods	in	the	United	States	and	Europe	where	citizens	are
welcoming	these	cameras	above	streets	and	parking	lots.	In	Monaco,	street
crime	has	been	virtually	eliminated	because	hundreds	of	video	cameras	have
been	placed	around	the	tiny	principality.	Monaco,	however,	is	small	enough	in
area,	370	acres	(150	hectares),	that	a	few	hundred	cameras	can	pretty	much
cover	it	all.	Many	parents	would	welcome	cameras	around	schoolyards	to
discourage	or	help	apprehend	drug	dealers,	child	molesters,	and	even
playground	bullies.	Every	city	streetlight	represents	a	substantial	investment
by	a	community	in	public	safety.	In	a	few	years	it	will	require	only	a
relatively	modest	additional	sum	to	add	and	operate	cameras	with	connections
to	the	information	highway.	Within	a	decade,	computers	will	be	able	to	scan
video	records	very	inexpensively	looking	for	a	particular	person	or	activity.	I
can	easily	imagine	proposals	that	virtually	every	pole	supporting	a	streetlight
should	also	have	one	or	more	cameras.	The	images	from	these	cameras	might
be	accessed	only	in	the	event	of	a	crime,	and	even	then	possibly	only	under
court	order.	Some	people	might	argue	that	every	image	from	every	camera
should	be	available	for	viewing	by	everyone	at	any	time.	This	raises	serious
privacy	questions	in	my	mind,	but	advocates	might	argue	that	it's	appropriate
if	the	cameras	are	only	in	public	places.

Almost	everyone	is	willing	to	accept	some	restrictions	in	exchange	for	a	sense
of	security.	From	a	historical	perspective,	people	living	in	Western
democracies	already	enjoy	a	degree	of	privacy	and	personal	freedom
unprecedented	in	all	of	human	history.	If	ubiquitous	cameras	tied	into	the
information	highway	should	prove	to	reduce	serious	crime	dramatically	in	test
communities,	a	real	debate	would	begin	over	whether	people	fear	surveillance
more	or	less	than	they	fear	crime.	It	is	difficult	to	imagine	a	government-
sanctioned	experiment	along	these	lines	in	the	United	States	because	of	the
privacy	issues	it	raises	and	the	likelihood	of	constitutional	challenges.
However,	opinion	can	change.	It	might	take	only	a	few	more	incidents	like
the	bombing	in	Oklahoma	City	within	the	borders	of	the	United	States	for
attitudes	toward	strong	privacy	protection	to	shift.	What	today	seems	like
digital	Big	Brother	might	one	day	become	the	norm	if	the	alternative	is	being
left	to	the	mercy	of	terrorists	and	criminals.	I	am	not	advocating	either
position—technology	will	enable	society	to	make	a	political	decision.
At	the	same	time	technology	is	making	it	easier	to	create	video	records,	it	is
also	making	it	possible	to	keep	all	your	personal	documents	and	messages
totally	private.	Encryption-technology	software,	which	anyone	can	download
from	the	Internet,	can	transform	a	PC	into	a	virtually	unbreakable	code
machine.	As	the	highway	is	deployed,	security	services	will	be	applied	to	all
forms	of	digital	information—phone	calls,	files,	databases,	you	name	it.	As
long	as	you	protect	the	password,	the	information	stored	on	your	computer
can	be	held	under	the	strongest	lock	and	key	that	has	ever	existed.	This	allows
for	the	greatest	degree	of	information	privacy	any	individual	has	ever	had.
Many	in	government	are	opposed	to	this	encryption	capability,	because	it
reduces	their	ability	to	gather	information.	Unfortunately	for	them,	the
technology	can't	be	stopped.	The	National	Security	Agency	is	a	part	of	the
U.S.	government	defense	and	intelligence	community	that	protects	this
country's	secret	communications	and	decrypts	foreign	communications	to
gather	intelligence	data.	The	NSA	does	not	want	software	containing
advanced	encryption	capabilities	to	be	sent	outside	the	United	States.
However,	this	software	is	already	available	throughout	the	world,	and	any
computer	can	run	it.	No	policy	decision	will	be	able	to	restore	the	tapping
capabilities	governments	had	in	the	past.
Today's	legislation	that	prevents	the	export	of	software	with	good	encryption
capability	could	harm	U.S.	software	and	hardware	companies.	The
restrictions	give	foreign	companies	an	advantage	over	U.S.	competitors.
American	companies	almost	unanimously	agree	that	the	current	encryption
export	restrictions	don't	work.

Each	media	advance	has	had	a	substantial	effect	on	how	people	and
governments	interact.	The	printing	press	and,	later,	mass-circulation
newspapers	changed	the	nature	o======================================================== t	of	other	news	accounts	in	which	she	figured
recently.	Point	at	something	on	the	list,	and	you	will	be	able	to	read	it	or
watch	it,	jumping	any	number	of	times	from	topic	to	topic	and	gathering
video,	audio,	and	text	information	from	all	over	the	world.
Spatial	navigation	can	also	be	used	for	touring.	If	you	want	to	see
reproductions	of	the	artwork	in	a	museum	or	gallery,	you'll	be	able	to	"walk"
through	a	visual	representation,	navigating	among	the	works	much	as	if	you
were	physically	there.	For	details	about	a	painting	or	sculpture,	you	would	use
a	hyperlink.	No	crowds,	no	rush,	and	you	could	ask	anything	without
worrying	about	seeming	uninformed.	You	would	bump	into	interesting	things,
just	as	you	do	in	a	real	gallery.	Navigating	through	a	virtual	gallery	won't	be
like	walking	through	a	real	art	gallery,	but	it	will	be	a	rewarding
approximation—just	as	watching	a	ballet	or	basketball	game	on	television	can
be	entertaining	even	though	you're	not	in	the	theater	or	stadium.
If	other	people	are	visiting	the	same	"museum,"	you	will	be	able	to	choose	to
see	them	and	interact	with	them	or	not,	as	you	please.	Your	visits	needn't	be
solitary	experiences.	Some	locations	will	be	used	purely	for	cyberspace

socialization;	in	others	no	one	will	be	visible.	Some	will	force	you	to	appear
to	some	degree	as	you	are;	others	won't.	The	way	you	look	to	other	users	will
depend	on	your	choices	and	the	rules	of	the	particular	location.
If	you	are	using	spatial	navigation,	the	place	you're	moving	around	in	won't
have	to	be	real.	You'll	be	able	to	set	up	imaginary	places	and	return	to	them
whenever	you	want.	In	your	own	museum,	you'll	be	able	to	move	walls,	add
imaginary	galleries,	and	rearrange	the	art.	You	might	want	all	still	lifes	to	be
displayed	together,	even	if	one	is	a	fragment	of	a	Pompeian	fresco	that	hangs
in	a	gallery	of	ancient	Roman	art	and	one	is	a	Cubist	Picasso	from	a
twentieth-century	gallery.	You	will	be	able	to	play	curator	and	gather	images
of	your	favorite	artworks	from	around	the	world	to	"hang"	in	a	gallery	of	your
own.	Suppose	you	want	to	include	a	warmly	remembered	painting	of	a	man
asleep	being	nuzzled	by	a	lion,	but	you	can't	recall	either	the	artist	or	where
you	saw	it.	The	information	highway	won't	make	you	go	looking	for	the
information.	You'll	be	able	to	describe	what	you	want	by	posing	a	query.	The
query	will	start	your	computer	or	other	information	appliance	sifting	through
a	reservoir	of	information	to	deliver	those	pieces	that	match	your	request.
You	will	even	be	able	to	give	friends	tours,	whether	they	are	sitting	next	to
you	or	watching	from	the	other	side	of	the	world.	"Here,	between	the	Raphael
and	the	Modigliani,"	you	might	say,	"is	a	favorite	finger	painting	I	did	when	I
was	three	years	old."
The	last	type	of	navigational	aid,	and	in	many	ways	the	most	useful	of	all,	is
an	agent.	This	is	a	filter	that	has	taken	on	a	personality	and	seems	to	show
initiative.	An	agent's	job	is	to	assist	you.	In	the	Information	Age,	that	means
the	agent	is	there	to	help	you	find	information.
To	understand	the	ways	an	agent	can	help	with	a	variety	of	tasks,	consider
how	it	could	improve	today's	PC	interface.	The	present	state	of	the	art	in	user
interface	is	the	graphical	user	interface,	such	as	Apple's	Macintosh	and
Microsoft	Windows,	which	depicts	information	and	relationships	on	the
screen	instead	of	just	describing	them	in	text.	Graphical	interfaces	also	allow
the	user	to	point	to	and	move	objects	including	pictures—around	on	the
screen.
But	the	graphical	user	interface	isn't	easy	enough	for	future	systems.	We've
put	so	many	options	on	the	screen	that	programs	or	features	that	are	not	used
regularly	have	become	daunting.	The	features	are	great	and	fast	for	people
familiar	with	the	software,	but	for	the	average	user	not	enough	guidance
comes	from	the	machine	for	him	or	her	to	feel	comfortable.	Agents	will

remedy	that.
Agents	will	know	how	to	help	you	partly	because	the	computer	will
remember	your	past	activities.	It	will	be	able	to	find	patterns	of	use	that	will
help	it	work	more	effectively	with	you.	Through	the	magic	of	software,
information	appliances	connected	to	the	highway	will	appear	to	learn	from
your	interactions	and	will	make	suggestions	to	you.	I	call	this	"softer
software."
Software	allows	hardware	to	perform	a	number	of	functions,	but	once	the
program	is	written,	it	stays	the	same.	Softer	software	will	appear	to	get
smarter	as	you	use	it.	It	will	learn	about	your	requirements	in	pretty	much	the
same	way	a	human	assistant	does	and,	like	a	human	assistant,	will	become
more	helpful	as	it	learns	about	you	and	your	work.	The	first	day	a	new
assistant	is	on	the	job,	you	can't	simply	ask	him	to	format	a	document	like
another	memo	you	wrote	a	few	weeks	ago.	You	can't	say,	"Send	a	copy	to
everybody	who	should	know	about	this."	But	over	the	course	of	months	and
years,	the	assistant	becomes	more	valuable	as	he	picks	up	on	what	is	typical
routine	and	how	you	like	things	done.
The	computer	today	is	like	a	first-day	assistant.	It	needs	explicit	first-day
instructions	all	the	time.	And	it	remains	a	first-day	assistant	forever.	It	will
never	make	one	iota	of	adjustment	as	a	response	to	its	experience	with	you.
We're	working	to	perfect	softer	software.	No	one	should	be	stuck	with	an
assistant,	in	this	case	software,	that	doesn't	learn	from	experience.
If	an	agent	that	could	learn	were	available	now,	I	would	want	it	to	take	over
certain	functions	for	me.	For	instance,	it	would	be	very	helpful	if	it	could	scan
every	project	schedule,	note	the	changes,	and	distinguish	the	ones	I	had	to	pay
attention	to	from	the	ones	I	didn't.	It	would	learn	the	criteria	for	what	needed
my	attention:	the	size	of	the	project,	what	other	projects	are	dependent	on	it,
the	cause	and	the	length	of	any	delay.	It	would	learn	when	a	two-week	slip
could	be	ignored,	and	when	such	a	slip	indicates	real	trouble	and	I'd	better
look	into	it	right	away	before	it	gets	worse.	It	will	take	time	to	achieve	this
goal,	partly	because	it's	difficult,	as	with	an	assistant,	to	find	the	right	balance
between	initiative	and	routine.	We	don't	want	to	overdo	it.	If	the	built-in	agent
tries	to	be	too	smart	and	anticipates	and	confidently	performs	unrequested	or
undesired	services,	it	will	be	annoying	to	users	who	are	accustomed	to	having
explicit	control	over	their	computers.
When	you	use	an	agent,	you	will	be	in	a	dialogue	with	a	program	that	behaves
to	some	degree	like	a	person.	It	could	be	that	the	software	mimics	the

behavior	of	a	celebrity	or	a	cartoon	character	as	it	assists	you.	An	agent	that
takes	on	a	personality	provides	a	"social	user	interface."	A	number	of
companies,	including	Microsoft,	are	developing	agents	with	social-user-
interface	capabilities.	Agents	won't	replace	the	graphical-user-interface
software,	but,	rather,	will	supplement	it	by	providing	a	character	of	your
choosing	to	assist	you.	The	character	will	disappear	when	you	get	to	the	parts
of	the	product	you	know	very	well.	But	if	you	hesitate	or	ask	for	help,	the
agent	will	reappear	and	offer	assistance.	You	may	even	come	to	think	of	the
agent	as	a	collaborator,	built	right	into	the	software.	It	will	remember	what
you're	good	at	and	what	you've	done	in	the	past,	and	try	to	anticipate
problems	and	suggest	solutions.	It	will	bring	anything	unusual	to	your
attention.	If	you	work	on	something	for	a	few	minutes	and	then	decide	to
discard	the	revision,	the	agent	might	ask	if	you're	sure	you	want	to	throw	the
work	away.	Some	of	today's	software	already	does	that.	But	if	you	were	to
work	for	two	hours	and	then	give	an	instruction	to	delete	what	you'd	just
done,	the	social	interface	would	recognize	that	as	unusual	and	possibly	a
serious	mistake	on	your	part.	The	agent	would	say,	"You've	worked	on	this	for
two	hours.	Are	you	really,	really	sure	you	want	to	delete	it?"
Some	people,	hearing	about	softer	software	and	social	interface,	find	the	idea
of	a	humanized	computer	creepy.	But	I	believe	even	they	will	come	to	like	it,
once	they	have	tried	it.	We	humans	tend	to	anthropomorphize.	Animated
movies	take	advantage	of	this	tendency.	The	Lion	King	is	not	very	realistic,
nor	does	it	try	to	be.	Anybody	could	distinguish	little	Simba	from	a	live	lion
cub	on	film.	When	a	car	breaks	down	or	a	computer	crashes,	we	are	apt	to
yell	at	it,	or	curse	it,	or	even	ask	why	it	let	us	down.	We	know	better,	of
course,	but	still	tend	to	treat	inanimate	objects	as	if	they	were	alive	and	had
free	will.	Researchers	at	universities	and	software	companies	are	exploring
how	to	make	computer	interfaces	more	effective,	using	this	human	tendency.
In	programs	such	as	Microsoft	Bob,	they	have	demonstrated	that	people	will
treat	mechanical	agents	that	have	personalities	with	a	surprising	degree	of
deference.	It	has	also	been	found	that	users'	reactions	differed	depending	on
whether	the	agent's	voice	was	female	or	male.	Recently	we	worked	on	a
project	that	involved	users	rating	their	experience	with	a	computer.	When	we
had	the	computer	the	users	had	worked	with	ask	for	an	evaluation	of	its
performance,	the	responses	tended	to	be	positive.	But	when	we	had	a	second
computer	ask	the	same	people	to	evaluate	their	encounters	with	the	first
machine,	the	people	were	significantly	more	critical.	Their	reluctance	to
criticize	the	first	computer	"to	its	face"	suggested	that	they	didn't	want	to	hurt
its	feelings,	even	though	they	knew	it	was	only	a	machine.	Social	interfaces
may	not	be	suitable	for	all	users	or	all	situations,	but	I	think	that	we'll	see	lots
of	them	in	the	future	because	they	"humanize"	computers.

We	have	a	fairly	clear	idea	of	what	sorts	of	navigation	we'll	have	on	the
highway.	It's	less	clear	what	we'll	be	navigating	through,	but	we	can	make
some	good	guesses.	Many	applications	available	on	the	highway	will	be
purely	for	fun.	Pleasures	will	be	as	simple	as	playing	bridge	or	a	board	game
with	your	best	friends,	even	though	you	are	all	in	several	different	cities.
Televised	sporting	events	will	offer	you	the	opportunity======================================================== of	the	board	and	CEO	of	Bell	Atlantic,
comments,	"I	believe	a	combination	of	a	school	system	ready	for	fundamental
change	in	teaching	methods,	a	parent	body	that	was	supportive	and	wanted	to
be	involved,	and	the	careful	but	intensive	integration	of	technology	into	both
the	homes	and	classrooms	.	.	.	created	a	true	learning	community	in	which	the
home	and	school	reinforce	and	support	each	other."
At	Lester	B.	Pearson	School,	a	Canadian	high	school	serving	an	ethnically
diverse	neighborhood,	computers	are	an	integral	part	of	every	course	in	the
daily	curriculum.	For	the	1,200	students	there	are	more	than	300	personal
computers,	and	more	than	100	different	software	titles	are	in	use.	The	school
says	its	dropout	rate,	4	percent,	when	compared	with	a	national	average	of	30
percent,	is	Canada's	lowest.	Thirty-five	hundred	people	a	year	visit	to	see	how
a	high	school	can	"incorporate	technology	in	every	aspect	of	school	life."
When	the	information	highway	is	in	operation,	the	texts	of	millions	of	books
will	be	available.	A	reader	will	be	able	to	ask	questions,	print	the	text,	read	it
on-screen,	or	even	have	it	read	in	his	choice	of	voices.	He'll	be	able	to	ask
questions.	It	will	be	his	tutor.
Computers	with	social	interfaces	will	figure	out	how	to	present	information	so
that	it	is	customized	for	the	particular	user.	Many	educational	software
programs	will	have	distinct	personalities,	and	the	student	and	the	computer
will	get	to	know	each	other.	A	student	will	ask,	perhaps	orally,	"What	caused
the	American	Civil	War?"	His	or	her	computer	will	reply,	describing	the
conflicting	contentions:	that	it	was	primarily	a	battle	over	economics	or
human	rights.	The	length	and	approach	of	the	answer	will	vary	depending	on
the	student	and	the	circumstances.	A	student	will	be	able	to	interrupt	at	any
time	to	ask	the	computer	for	more	or	less	detail	or	to	request	a	different

approach	altogether.	The	computer	will	know	what	information	the	student
has	read	or	watched	and	will	point	out	connections	or	correlations	and	offer
appropriate	links.	If	the	computer	knows	the	student	likes	historical	fiction,
war	stories,	folk	music,	or	sports,	it	may	try	to	use	that	knowledge	to	present
the	information.	But	this	will	be	only	an	attention-getting	device.	The
machine,	like	a	good	human	teacher,	won't	give	in	to	a	child	who	has	lopsided
interests.	Instead	it	will	use	the	child's	predilections	to	teach	a	broader
curriculum.
Different	learning	rates	will	be	accommodated,	because	computers	will	be
able	to	pay	individual	attention	to	independent	learners.	Children	with
learning	disabilities	will	be	particularly	well	served.	Regardless	of	his	or	her
ability	or	disability,	every	student	will	be	able	to	work	at	an	individual	pace.
Another	benefit	of	computer-aided	learning	will	be	the	way	many	students
come	to	view	tests.	Today,	tests	are	pretty	depressing	for	many	kids.	They	are
associated	with	falling	short:	"I	got	a	bad	grade,"	or	"I	ran	out	of	time"	or	"I
wasn't	ready."	After	a	while,	many	kids	who	haven't	done	well	on	tests	may
think	to	themselves,	I'd	better	pretend	tests	aren't	important	to	me,	because	I
can	never	succeed	at	them.	Tests	can	cause	a	student	to	develop	a	negative
attitude	toward	all	education.
The	interactive	network	will	allow	students	to	quiz	themselves	anytime,	in	a
risk-free	environment.	A	self-administered	quiz	is	a	form	of	self-exploration,
like	the	tests	Paul	Allen	and	I	used	to	give	each	other.	Testing	will	become	a
positive	part	of	the	learning	process.	A	mistake	won't	call	forth	a	reprimand;	it
will	trigger	the	system	to	help	the	student	overcome	his	misunderstanding.	If
someone	really	gets	stuck,	the	system	will	offer	to	explain	the	circumstances
to	a	teacher.	There	should	be	less	apprehension	about	formal	tests	and	fewer
surprises,	because	on-going	self-quizzing	will	give	each	student	a	better	sense
of	where	he	or	she	stands.
Many	educational	software	and	textbook	companies	are	already	delivering
interactive	computer	products	in	mathematics,	languages,	economics,	and
biology	that	build	basic	skills	this	way.	For	example,	Academic	Systems	of
Palo	Alto,	California,	is	working	on	an	interactive	multi-media	instructional
system	for	colleges,	to	help	teach	basic	math	and	English	courses.	The
concept	is	called	"mediated	learning,"	and	it	blends	traditional	instruction
with	computer-based	learning.	Each	student	begins	by	taking	a	placement	test
to	determine	which	topics	he	or	she	understands	and	where	instruction	is
required.	The	system	then	creates	a	personalized	lesson	plan	for	the	student.
Periodic	tests	monitor	the	student's	progress,	and	the	lesson	plan	can	be

modified	as	the	student	masters	concepts.	The	program	can	also	report
problems	to	the	instructor,	who	can	then	give	the	student	individual	help.	So
far,	the	company	has	found	that	students	in	pilot	programs	like	the	new
learning	materials,	but	the	most	successful	classes	are	those	in	which	an
instructor	is	more	available.	These	results	underscore	the	point	that	new
technology,	by	itself,	is	not	sufficient	to	improve	education.
Some	parents	resist	the	use	of	computers	because	they	believe	they	can't
monitor	what	their	child	is	doing	and	can't	exert	any	control.	Most	parents	are
delighted	when	a	child	curls	up	with	an	engrossing	book,	but	less	enthusiastic
when	he	spends	hours	at	the	computer.	They're	probably	thinking	of	video
games.	A	kid	can	spend	a	great	deal	of	time	using	a	video	game	without
learning	much.	So	far,	a	great	deal	more	has	been	invested	in	computer
software	meant	to	entertain	than	in	software	to	educate.	It's	easier	to	create	an
addictive	game	than	it	is	to	expose	a	child	to	a	world	of	information	in	an
appealing	way.
However,	as	textbook	budgets	and	parental	spending	shift	to	interactive
material,	there	will	be	thousands	of	new	software	companies	working	with
teachers	to	create	entertainment-quality	interactive	learning	materials.	The
Lightspan	Partnership,	for	example,	is	using	Hollywood	talent	to	create	live
action	and	animated	programs.	Lightspan	hopes	its	sophisticated	production
techniques	will	capture	and	retain	the	interest	of	the	young	viewers—ages
five	through	eleven—and	encourage	them	to	spend	more	hours	learning.
Animated	characters	lead	students	through	lessons	that	explain	basic
concepts,	then	into	games	that	put	them	to	use.	The	Lightspan	lessons	are
grouped	by	two-year	age	spans	and	organized	into	series	intended	to
complement	elementary	school	curricula	in	mathematics,	reading,	and
language	arts.	These	programs	will	be	available	on	televisions	in	homes	and
community	centers	as	well	as	in	classrooms.	Until	interactive	television	is
widely	available,	this	kind	of	programming	will	be	offered	on	CD-ROMs	or
across	the	Internet	to	PC	users.
All	this	information,	however,	is	not	going	to	solve	the	serious	problems
facing	many	public	schools	today:	budget	cuts,	violence,	drugs,	high	dropout
rates,	dangerous	neighborhoods,	teachers	more	concerned	about	survival	than
education.	Offering	new	technology	won't	suffice.	Society	will	also	have	to
fix	the	fundamental	problems.
But	while	some	public	schools	face	major	challenges,	they	are	also	our
greatest	hope.	Imagine	a	situation	in	which	most	of	the	kids	in	inner-city
public	schools	are	on	the	dole,	are	barely	able	to	speak	the	national	language,

have	few	skills	and	an	uncertain	future.	This	was	America	in	the	early	1900s,
when	tens	of	millions	of	immigrants	had	overwhelmed	the	schools	and	social
services	of	our	big	cities.
Yet	that	generation	and	the	next	achieved	a	standard	of	living	unequaled	in
the	world.	The	problems	of	America's	schools	are	not	insurmountable,	just
extremely	complicated.	Even	today,	for	every	disastrous	public	school	there
are	dozens	of	successful	ones	you	don't	read	about.	I've	mentioned	several
examples	here.	It	is	outside	the	scope	of	this	book	to	go	deeply	into	this
subject,	but	communities	can,	and	have,	won	back	their	streets	and	schools.
It's	always	taken	an	intense	local	effort.	One	street	at	a	time,	one	school	at	a
time.	Then	parents	must	insist	that	their	kids	come	to	school	ready	to	learn.	If
the	attitude	is	"Let	the	school	(or	government)	do	it"	kids	will	fail.
Once	even	the	most	modest	positive	atmosphere	for	education	is	established,
the	information	highway	will	help	raise	the	educational	standards	for
everyone	in	future	generations.	The	highway	will	allow	new	methods	of
teaching	and	much	more	choice.	Quality	curriculums	can	be	created	with
government	funding	and	made	available	for	free.	Private	vendors	will
compete	to	enhance	the	free	material.	The	new	vendors	might	be	other	public
schools;	public-school	teachers	or	retired	teachers	going	into	business	for
themselves;	or	some	privately	run,	highway-based	school	service	program
wanting	to	prove	its	capabilities.	The	highway	would	be	a	way	for	schools	to
try	out	new	teachers	or	use	their	services	at	a	distance.
The	highway	will	also	make	home	schooling	easier.	It	will	allow	parents	to
select	some	classes	from	a	range	of	quality	possibilities	and	still	maintain
control	over	content.
Learning	with	a	computer	will	be	a	springboard	for	learning	away	from	the
computer.	Young	children	will	still	need	to	touch	toys	and	tools	with	their
hands.	Seeing	chemical	reactions	on	a	computer	screen	can	be	a	good
supplement	to	hands-on	work	in	a	chemistry	lab,	but	it	can't	replace	the	real
experience.	Children	need	personal	interaction	with	each	other,	and	with
adults,	to	learn	social	and	interpersonal	skills,	such	as	how	to	work
cooperatively.
The	good	teachers	of	the	future	will	be	doing	much	more	than	showing	kids
where	to	find	information	on	the	highway.	They	will	still	have	to	understand
when	to	probe,	observe,	stimulate,	or	agitate.	They'll	still	have	to	build	kids'
skills	in	written	and	oral	communications,	and	will	use	technology	as	a
starting	point	or	an	aid.	Successful	teachers	will	act	as	coaches,	partners,

creative	outlets,	and	communications	bridges	to	the	world.
Computers	on	the	information	highway	will	be======================================================== pler	it	is	to	search
and	navigate	through	them	quickly,	because	their	content	can	be	restructured
so	easily.
The	organizational	structure	of	a	reservation	book	at	a	restaurant	is	by	date
and	time.	A	9:00	P.M.	reservation	is	written	farther	down	the	page	than	an
8:00	P.M.	reservation.	Saturday-night	dinner	reservations	follow	those	for
Saturday	lunch.	A	mâitre	d'	or	anyone	else	can	rapidly	find	out	who	has	a
reservation	on	any	date	for	any	time	because	the	book's	information	is	ordered
that	way.	But	if,	for	whatever	reason,	someone	wants	to	extract	information	in
another	way,	the	simple	chronology	is	useless.
Imagine	the	plight	of	a	restaurant	captain	if	I	called	to	say,	"My	name	is
Gates.	My	wife	made	us	a	reservation	for	some	time	next	month.	Would	you
mind	checking	to	see	when	it	is?"

"I'm	sorry,	sir,	do	you	know	the	date	of	the	reservation?"	the	captain	would	be
likely	to	ask.
"No,	that's	what	I'm	trying	to	find	out."
"Would	that	have	been	on	a	weekend?"	the	captain	asks.
He	knows	he's	going	to	be	paging	through	the	book	by	hand,	and	he's	hoping
to	reduce	the	task	by	focusing	the	dates	in	any	possible	way.
A	restaurant	can	use	a	paper-based	reservation	book	because	the	total	number
of	reservations	isn't	large.	An	airline	reservation	system	is	not	a	book	but	a
database	containing	an	enormous	quantity	of	information—flights,	air	fares,
bookings,	seat	assignments,	and	billing	information—for	hundreds	of	flights	a
day	worldwide.	American	Airlines'	SABRE	reservation	system	stores	the
information—4.4	trillion	bytes	of	it,	which	is	more	than	4	million	million
characters—on	computer	hard	disks.	If	the	information	in	the	SABRE	system
were	copied	into	a	hypothetical	paper	reservation	book,	it	would	require	more
than	2	billion	pages.
For	as	long	as	we've	had	paper	documents	or	collections	of	documents,	we
have	been	ordering	information	linearly,	with	indexes,	tables	of	contents,	and
cross-references	of	various	kinds	to	provide	alternate	means	of	navigation.	In
most	offices	filing	cabinets	are	organized	by	customer,	vendor,	or	project	in
alphabetical	order,	but	to	speed	access,	often	a	duplicate	set	of
correspondence	is	filed	chronologically.	Professional	indexers	add	value	to	a
book	by	building	an	alternative	way	to	find	information.	And	before	library
catalogs	were	computerized,	new	books	were	entered	into	the	paper	catalogs
on	several	different	cards	so	a	reader	could	find	a	book	by	its	title	or	any	one
of	its	authors	or	topics.	This	redundancy	was	to	make	information	easier	to
find.
When	I	was	young	I	loved	my	family's	1960	World	Book	Encyclopedia.	Its
heavy	bound	volumes	contained	just	text	and	pictures.	They	showed	what
Edison's	phonograph	looked	like,	but	didn't	let	me	listen	to	its	scratchy	sound.
The	encyclopedia	had	photographs	of	a	fuzzy	caterpillar	changing	into	a
butterfly,	but	there	was	no	video	to	bring	the	transformation	to	life.	It	also
would	have	been	nice	if	it	had	quizzed	me	on	what	I	had	read,	or	if	the
information	had	always	been	up-to-date.	Naturally	I	wasn't	aware	of	those
drawbacks	then.	When	I	was	eight,	I	began	to	read	the	first	volume.	I	was
determined	to	read	straight	through	every	volume.	I	could	have	absorbed
more	if	it	had	been	easy	to	read	all	the	articles	about	the	sixteenth	century	in
sequence	or	all	the	articles	pertaining	to	medicine.	Instead	I	read	about

"Garter	Snakes"	then	"Gary,	Indiana,"	then	"Gas."	But	I	had	a	great	time
reading	the	encyclopedia	anyway	and	kept	at	it	for	five	years	until	I	reached
the	Ps.	Then	I	discovered	the	Encyclopaedia	Britannica,	with	its	greater
sophistication	and	detail.	I	knew	I	would	never	have	the	patience	to	read	all	of
it.	Also,	by	then,	satisfying	my	enthusiasm	for	computers	was	taking	up	most
of	my	spare	time.
Current	print	encyclopedias	consist	of	nearly	two	dozen	volumes,	with
millions	of	words	of	text	and	thousands	of	illustrations,	and	cost	hundreds	or
thousands	of	dollars.	That's	quite	an	investment,	especially	considering	how
rapidly	the	information	gets	out	of	date.	Microsoft	Encarta,	which	is
outselling	print	and	other	multi-media	encyclopedias,	comes	on	a	single	1-
ounce	CD-ROM	(which	stands	for	Compact	Disc	Read	Only	Memory).
Encarta	includes	26,000	topics	with	9	million	words	of	text,	8	hours	of
sounds,	7,000	photographs	and	illustrations,	800	maps,	250	interactive	charts
and	tables,	and	100	animations	and	video	clips.	It	costs	less	than	$100.	If	you
want	to	know	how	the	Egyptian	"ud"	(a	musical	instrument)	sounds,	hear	the
1936	abdication	speech	of	Great	Britain's	King	Edward	VIII,	or	see	an
animation	explaining	how	a	machine	works,	the	information's	all	there—and
no	paper-based	encyclopedia	will	ever	have	it.
Articles	in	a	print	encyclopedia	often	are	followed	by	a	list	of	articles	on
related	subjects.	To	read	them,	you	have	to	find	the	referenced	article,	which
may	be	in	another	volume.	With	a	CD-ROM	encyclopedia	all	you	have	to	do
is	click	on	the	reference	and	the	article	will	appear.	On	the	information
highway,	encyclopedia	articles	will	include	links	to	related	subjects—not	just
those	covered	in	the	encyclopedia,	but	those	in	other	sources.	There	will	be	no
limit	to	how	much	detail	you	will	be	able	to	explore	on	a	subject	that	interests
you.	In	fact,	an	encyclopedia	on	the	highway	will	be	more	than	just	a	specific
reference	work—it	will	be,	like	the	library	card	catalog,	a	doorway	to	all
knowledge.
1995:	Screen	from	Microsoft	Encarta	electronic	multimedia	encyclopedia

Today,	printed	information	is	hard	to	locate.	It's	almost	impossible	to	find	all
the	best	information—including	books,	news	articles,	and	film	clips—on	a
specific	topic.	It	is	extremely	time-consuming	to	assemble	the	information
you	can	find.	For	example,	if	you	wanted	to	read	biographies	of	all	the	recent
Nobel	Prize	laureates,	compiling	them	could	take	an	entire	day.	Electronic
documents,	however,	will	be	interactive.	Request	a	kind	of	information,	and
the	document	responds.	Indicate	that	you've	changed	your	mind,	and	the
document	responds	again.	Once	you	get	used	to	this	sort	of	system,	you	find
that	being	able	to	look	at	information	in	different	ways	makes	that
information	more	valuable.	The	flexibility	invites	exploration,	and	the
exploration	is	rewarded	with	discovery.
You'll	be	able	to	get	your	daily	news	in	a	similar	way.	You'll	be	able	to	specify
how	long	you	want	your	newscast	to	last.	This	will	be	possible	because	you'll
be	able	to	have	each	of	the	news	stories	selected	individually.	The	newscast
assembled	for	and	delivered	only	to	you	might	include	world	news	from
NBC,	the	BBC,	CNN,	or	the	Los	Angeles	Times,	with	a	weather	report	from	a
favorite	local	TV	meteorologist—or	from	any	private	meteorologist	who
wanted	to	offer	his	or	her	own	service.	You	will	be	able	to	request	longer
stories	on	the	subjects	that	particularly	interest	you	and	just	highlights	on
others.	If,	while	you	are	watching	the	newscast,	you	want	more	than	has	been
put	together,	you	will	easily	be	able	to	request	more	background	or	detail,
either	from	another	news	broadcast	or	from	file	information.
Among	all	the	types	of	paper	documents,	narrative	fiction	is	one	of	the	few
that	will	not	benefit	from	electronic	organization.	Almost	every	reference
book	has	an	index,	but	novels	don't	because	there	is	no	need	to	be	able	to	look
something	up	in	a	novel.	Novels	are	linear.	Likewise,	we'll	continue	to	watch
most	movies	from	start	to	finish.	This	isn't	a	technological	judgment—it	is	an
artistic	one:	Their	linearity	is	intrinsic	to	the	storytelling	process.	New	forms
of	interactive	fiction	are	being	invented	that	take	advantage	of	the	electronic
world,	but	linear	novels	and	movies	will	still	be	popular.
The	highway	will	make	it	easy	to	distribute	digital	documents	cheaply,
whatever	their	form.	Millions	of	people	and	companies	will	be	creating
documents	and	publishing	them	on	the	network.	Some	documents	will	be
aimed	at	paying	audiences	and	some	will	be	free	to	anyone	who	wants	to	pay
attention.	Digital	storage	is	fantastically	inexpensive.	Hard-disk	drives	in
personal	computers	will	soon	cost	about	$0.15	for	a	megabyte	(million	bytes)
of	information.	To	put	this	in	perspective,	1	megabyte	will	hold	about	700
pages	of	text,	so	the	cost	is	something	like	$0.00021	per	page—about	one

two-hundredth	what	the	local	copy	center	would	charge	at	$0.05	a	page.	And
because	there	is	the	option	of	reusing	the	storage	space	for	something	else,	the
cost	is	actually	the	cost	of	storage	per	unit	time—in	other	words,	of	renting
the	space.	If	we	assume	just	a	three-year	average	lifetime	for	the	hard-disk
drive,	the	amortized	price	per	page	per	year	is	$0.00007.	And	storage	is
getting	cheaper	all	the	time.	Hard-disk	prices	have	been	dropping	by	about	50
percent	per	year	for	the	last	several	years.
Text	is	particularly	easy	to	store	because	it	is	very	compact	in	digital	form.
The	old	saying	that	a	picture	is	worth	a	thousand	words	is	more	than	true	in
the	digital	world.	High-quality	photographic	images	take	more	space	than
text,	and	video	(which	you	can	think	of	as	a	sequence	of	up	to	thirty	new
images	appearing	every	second)	takes	even	more.	Nevertheless,	the	cost	of
distribution	for	these	kinds	of	data	is	still	quite	low.	A	feature	film	takes	up
about	4	gigabytes	(4,000	megabytes)	in	compressed	digital	format,	which	is
about	$1,600	worth	of	hard-disk	space.
Sixteen	hundred	dollars	to	store	a	single	film	doesn't	sound	low-cost.
However,	consider	that	the	typical	local	video-rental	store	usually	buys	at
least	eight	copies	of	a	hot	new	movie	for	about	$80	a	copy.	With	these	eight
copies	the	store	can	supply	only	eight	customers	per	day.
Once	the	disk	and	the	computer	that	manages	it	are	connected	up	to	the
highway,	only	one	copy	of	the	information	will	be	necessary	for	everyone	to
have	access.	The	most	popular	documents	will	have	copies	made	on	different
servers	to	avoid	delays	when	an	unusual	number	of	users	want	access.	With
one	investment,	roughly	what	a	single	shop	today	spends	for	a	popular
videotape	title,======================================================== t	of	other	news	accounts	in	which	she	figured
recently.	Point	at	something	on	the	list,	and	you	will	be	able	to	read	it	or
watch	it,	jumping	any	number	of	times	from	topic	to	topic	and	gathering
video,	audio,	and	text	information	from	all	over	the	world.
Spatial	navigation	can	also	be	used	for	touring.	If	you	want	to	see
reproductions	of	the	artwork	in	a	museum	or	gallery,	you'll	be	able	to	"walk"
through	a	visual	representation,	navigating	among	the	works	much	as	if	you
were	physically	there.	For	details	about	a	painting	or	sculpture,	you	would	use
a	hyperlink.	No	crowds,	no	rush,	and	you	could	ask	anything	without
worrying	about	seeming	uninformed.	You	would	bump	into	interesting	things,
just	as	you	do	in	a	real	gallery.	Navigating	through	a	virtual	gallery	won't	be
like	walking	through	a	real	art	gallery,	but	it	will	be	a	rewarding
approximation—just	as	watching	a	ballet	or	basketball	game	on	television	can
be	entertaining	even	though	you're	not	in	the	theater	or	stadium.
If	other	people	are	visiting	the	same	"museum,"	you	will	be	able	to	choose	to
see	them	and	interact	with	them	or	not,	as	you	please.	Your	visits	needn't	be
solitary	experiences.	Some	locations	will	be	used	purely	for	cyberspace

socialization;	in	others	no	one	will	be	visible.	Some	will	force	you	to	appear
to	some	degree	as	you	are;	others	won't.	The	way	you	look	to	other	users	will
depend	on	your	choices	and	the	rules	of	the	particular	location.
If	you	are	using	spatial	navigation,	the	place	you're	moving	around	in	won't
have	to	be	real.	You'll	be	able	to	set	up	imaginary	places	and	return	to	them
whenever	you	want.	In	your	own	museum,	you'll	be	able	to	move	walls,	add
imaginary	galleries,	and	rearrange	the	art.	You	might	want	all	still	lifes	to	be
displayed	together,	even	if	one	is	a	fragment	of	a	Pompeian	fresco	that	hangs
in	a	gallery	of	ancient	Roman	art	and	one	is	a	Cubist	Picasso	from	a
twentieth-century	gallery.	You	will	be	able	to	play	curator	and	gather	images
of	your	favorite	artworks	from	around	the	world	to	"hang"	in	a	gallery	of	your
own.	Suppose	you	want	to	include	a	warmly	remembered	painting	of	a	man
asleep	being	nuzzled	by	a	lion,	but	you	can't	recall	either	the	artist	or	where
you	saw	it.	The	information	highway	won't	make	you	go	looking	for	the
information.	You'll	be	able	to	describe	what	you	want	by	posing	a	query.	The
query	will	start	your	computer	or	other	information	appliance	sifting	through
a	reservoir	of	information	to	deliver	those	pieces	that	match	your	request.
You	will	even	be	able	to	give	friends	tours,	whether	they	are	sitting	next	to
you	or	watching	from	the	other	side	of	the	world.	"Here,	between	the	Raphael
and	the	Modigliani,"	you	might	say,	"is	a	favorite	finger	painting	I	did	when	I
was	three	years	old."
The	last	type	of	navigational	aid,	and	in	many	ways	the	most	useful	of	all,	is
an	agent.	This	is	a	filter	that	has	taken	on	a	personality	and	seems	to	show
initiative.	An	agent's	job	is	to	assist	you.	In	the	Information	Age,	that	means
the	agent	is	there	to	help	you	find	information.
To	understand	the	ways	an	agent	can	help	with	a	variety	of	tasks,	consider
how	it	could	improve	today's	PC	interface.	The	present	state	of	the	art	in	user
interface	is	the	graphical	user	interface,	such	as	Apple's	Macintosh	and
Microsoft	Windows,	which	depicts	information	and	relationships	on	the
screen	instead	of	just	describing	them	in	text.	Graphical	interfaces	also	allow
the	user	to	point	to	and	move	objects	including	pictures—around	on	the
screen.
But	the	graphical	user	interface	isn't	easy	enough	for	future	systems.	We've
put	so	many	options	on	the	screen	that	programs	or	features	that	are	not	used
regularly	have	become	daunting.	The	features	are	great	and	fast	for	people
familiar	with	the	software,	but	for	the	average	user	not	enough	guidance
comes	from	the	machine	for	him	or	her	to	feel	comfortable.	Agents	will

remedy	that.
Agents	will	know	how	to	help	you	partly	because	the	computer	will
remember	your	past	activities.	It	will	be	able	to	find	patterns	of	use	that	will
help	it	work	more	effectively	with	you.	Through	the	magic	of	software,
information	appliances	connected	to	the	highway	will	appear	to	learn	from
your	interactions	and	will	make	suggestions	to	you.	I	call	this	"softer
software."
Software	allows	hardware	to	perform	a	number	of	functions,	but	once	the
program	is	written,	it	stays	the	same.	Softer	software	will	appear	to	get
smarter	as	you	use	it.	It	will	learn	about	your	requirements	in	pretty	much	the
same	way	a	human	assistant	does	and,	like	a	human	assistant,	will	become
more	helpful	as	it	learns	about	you	and	your	work.	The	first	day	a	new
assistant	is	on	the	job,	you	can't	simply	ask	him	to	format	a	document	like
another	memo	you	wrote	a	few	weeks	ago.	You	can't	say,	"Send	a	copy	to
everybody	who	should	know	about	this."	But	over	the	course	of	months	and
years,	the	assistant	becomes	more	valuable	as	he	picks	up	on	what	is	typical
routine	and	how	you	like	things	done.
The	computer	today	is	like	a	first-day	assistant.	It	needs	explicit	first-day
instructions	all	the	time.	And	it	remains	a	first-day	assistant	forever.	It	will
never	make	one	iota	of	adjustment	as	a	response	to	its	experience	with	you.
We're	working	to	perfect	softer	software.	No	one	should	be	stuck	with	an
assistant,	in	this	case	software,	that	doesn't	learn	from	experience.
If	an	agent	that	could	learn	were	available	now,	I	would	want	it	to	take	over
certain	functions	for	me.	For	instance,	it	would	be	very	helpful	if	it	could	scan
every	project	schedule,	note	the	changes,	and	distinguish	the	ones	I	had	to	pay
attention	to	from	the	ones	I	didn't.	It	would	learn	the	criteria	for	what	needed
my	attention:	the	size	of	the	project,	what	other	projects	are	dependent	on	it,
the	cause	and	the	length	of	any	delay.	It	would	learn	when	a	two-week	slip
could	be	ignored,	and	when	such	a	slip	indicates	real	trouble	and	I'd	better
look	into	it	right	away	before	it	gets	worse.	It	will	take	time	to	achieve	this
goal,	partly	because	it's	difficult,	as	with	an	assistant,	to	find	the	right	balance
between	initiative	and	routine.	We	don't	want	to	overdo	it.	If	the	built-in	agent
tries	to	be	too	smart	and	anticipates	and	confidently	performs	unrequested	or
undesired	services,	it	will	be	annoying	to	users	who	are	accustomed	to	having
explicit	control	over	their	computers.
When	you	use	an	agent,	you	will	be	in	a	dialogue	with	a	program	that	behaves
to	some	degree	like	a	person.	It	could	be	that	the	software	mimics	the

behavior	of	a	celebrity	or	a	cartoon	character	as	it	assists	you.	An	agent	that
takes	on	a	personality	provides	a	"social	user	interface."	A	number	of
companies,	including	Microsoft,	are	developing	agents	with	social-user-
interface	capabilities.	Agents	won't	replace	the	graphical-user-interface
software,	but,	rather,	will	supplement	it	by	providing	a	character	of	your
choosing	to	assist	you.	The	character	will	disappear	when	you	get	to	the	parts
of	the	product	you	know	very	well.	But	if	you	hesitate	or	ask	for	help,	the
agent	will	reappear	and	offer	assistance.	You	may	even	come	to	think	of	the
agent	as	a	collaborator,	built	right	into	the	software.	It	will	remember	what
you're	good	at	and	what	you've	done	in	the	past,	and	try	to	anticipate
problems	and	suggest	solutions.	It	will	bring	anything	unusual	to	your
attention.	If	you	work	on	something	for	a	few	minutes	and	then	decide	to
discard	the	revision,	the	agent	might	ask	if	you're	sure	you	want	to	throw	the
work	away.	Some	of	today's	software	already	does	that.	But	if	you	were	to
work	for	two	hours	and	then	give	an	instruction	to	delete	what	you'd	just
done,	the	social	interface	would	recognize	that	as	unusual	and	possibly	a
serious	mistake	on	your	part.	The	agent	would	say,	"You've	worked	on	this	for
two	hours.	Are	you	really,	really	sure	you	want	to	delete	it?"
Some	people,	hearing	about	softer	software	and	social	interface,	find	the	idea
of	a	humanized	computer	creepy.	But	I	believe	even	they	will	come	to	like	it,
once	they	have	tried	it.	We	humans	tend	to	anthropomorphize.	Animated
movies	take	advantage	of	this	tendency.	The	Lion	King	is	not	very	realistic,
nor	does	it	try	to	be.	Anybody	could	distinguish	little	Simba	from	a	live	lion
cub	on	film.	When	a	car	breaks	down	or	a	computer	crashes,	we	are	apt	to
yell	at	it,	or	curse	it,	or	even	ask	why	it	let	us	down.	We	know	better,	of
course,	but	still	tend	to	treat	inanimate	objects	as	if	they	were	alive	and	had
free	will.	Researchers	at	universities	and	software	companies	are	exploring
how	to	make	computer	interfaces	more	effective,	using	this	human	tendency.
In	programs	such	as	Microsoft	Bob,	they	have	demonstrated	that	people	will
treat	mechanical	agents	that	have	personalities	with	a	surprising	degree	of
deference.	It	has	also	been	found	that	users'	reactions	differed	depending	on
whether	the	agent's	voice	was	female	or	male.	Recently	we	worked	on	a
project	that	involved	users	rating	their	experience	with	a	computer.	When	we
had	the	computer	the	users	had	worked	with	ask	for	an	evaluation	of	its
performance,	the	responses	tended	to	be	positive.	But	when	we	had	a	second
computer	ask	the	same	people	to	evaluate	their	encounters	with	the	first
machine,	the	people	were	significantly	more	critical.	Their	reluctance	to
criticize	the	first	computer	"to	its	face"	suggested	that	they	didn't	want	to	hurt
its	feelings,	even	though	they	knew	it	was	only	a	machine.	Social	interfaces
may	not	be	suitable	for	all	users	or	all	situations,	but	I	think	that	we'll	see	lots
of	them	in	the	future	because	they	"humanize"	computers.

We	have	a	fairly	clear	idea	of	what	sorts	of	navigation	we'll	have	on	the
highway.	It's	less	clear	what	we'll	be	navigating	through,	but	we	can	make
some	good	guesses.	Many	applications	available	on	the	highway	will	be
purely	for	fun.	Pleasures	will	be	as	simple	as	playing	bridge	or	a	board	game
with	your	best	friends,	even	though	you	are	all	in	several	different	cities.
Televised	sporting	events	will	offer	you	the	opportunity======================================================== l	it	into	quadrillions	of	atomistic	packets	of	data.	Once
digital	information	is	stored,	anyone	with	access	and	a	personal	computer	can
instantaneously	recall,	compare,	and	refashion	it.	What	characterizes	this
period	in	history	is	the	completely	new	ways	in	which	information	can	be
changed	and	manipulated,	and	the	increasing	speeds	at	which	we	can	handle
it.	The	computer's	abilities	to	provide	low-cost,	high-speed	processing	and
transmission	of	digital	data	will	transform	the	conventional	communication
devices	in	homes	and	offices.
The	idea	of	using	an	instrument	to	manipulate	numbers	isn't	new.	The	abacus
had	been	in	use	in	Asia	for	nearly	5,000	years	by	1642,	when	the	nineteen-
year-old	French	scientist	Blaise	Pascal	invented	a	mechanical	calculator.	It
was	a	counting	device.	Three	decades	later,	the	German	mathematician
Gottfried	von	Leibniz	improved	on	Pascal's	design.	His	"Stepped	Reckoner"
could	multiply,	divide,	and	calculate	square	roots.	Reliable	mechanical
calculators,	powered	by	rotating	dials	and	gears,	descendants	of	the	Stepped
Reckoner,	were	the	mainstay	of	business	until	their	electronic	counterparts
replaced	them.	When	I	was	a	boy,	a	cash	register	was	essentially	a	mechanical
calculator	linked	to	a	cash	drawer.
More	than	a	century	and	a	half	ago,	a	visionary	British	mathematician
glimpsed	the	possibility	of	the	computer	and	that	glimpse	made	him	famous
even	in	his	day.	Charles	Babbage	was	a	professor	of	mathematics	at
Cambridge	University	who	conceived	the	possibility	of	a	mechanical	device
that	would	be	able	to	perform	a	string	of	related	calculations.	As	early	as	the
1830s,	he	was	drawn	to	the	idea	that	information	could	be	manipulated	by	a
machine	if	the	information	could	be	converted	into	numbers	first.	The	steam-
powered	machine	Babbage	envisioned	would	use	pegs,	toothed	wheels,
cylinders,	and	other	mechanical	parts,	the	apparatus	of	the	then-new	Industrial
Age.	Babbage	believed	his	"Analytical	Engine"	would	be	used	to	take	the
drudgery	and	inaccuracy	out	of	calculating.

He	lacked	the	terms	we	now	use	to	refer	to	the	parts	of	his	machine.	He	called
the	central	processor,	or	working	guts	of	his	machine,	the	"mill."	He	referred
to	his	machine's	memory	as	the	"store."	Babbage	imagined	information	being
transformed	the	way	cotton	was—drawn	from	a	store	(warehouse)	and	milled
into	something	new.
His	Analytical	Engine	would	be	mechanical,	but	he	foresaw	how	it	would	be
able	to	follow	changing	sets	of	instructions	and	thus	serve	different	functions.
This	is	the	essence	of	software.	It	is	a	comprehensive	set	of	rules	a	machine
can	be	given	to	"instruct"	it	how	to	perform	particular	tasks.	Babbage	realized
that	to	create	these	instructions	he	would	need	an	entirely	new	kind	of
language,	and	he	devised	one	using	numbers,	letters,	arrows,	and	other
symbols.	The	language	was	designed	to	let	Babbage	"program"	the	Analytical
Engine	with	a	long	series	of	conditional	instructions,	which	would	allow	the
machine	to	modify	its	actions	in	response	to	changing	situations.	He	was	the
first	to	see	that	a	single	machine	could	serve	a	number	of	different	purposes.
For	the	next	century	mathematicians	worked	with	the	ideas	Babbage	had
outlined	and	finally,	by	the	mid-1940s,	an	electronic	computer	was	built	based
on	the	principles	of	his	Analytical	Engine.	It	is	hard	to	sort	out	the	paternity
of	the	modern	computer,	because	much	of	the	thinking	and	work	was	done	in
the	United	States	and	Britain	during	World	War	II	under	the	cloak	of	wartime
secrecy.	Three	major	contributors	were	Alan	Turing,	Claude	Shannon,	and
John	von	Neumann.
In	the	mid-1930s,	Alan	Turing,	like	Babbage	a	superlative	Cambridge-trained
British	mathematician,	proposed	what	is	known	today	as	a	Turing	machine.	It
was	his	version	of	a	completely	general-purpose	calculating	machine	that
could	be	instructed	to	work	with	almost	any	kind	of	information.
In	the	late	1930s,	when	Claude	Shannon	was	still	a	student,	he	demonstrated
that	a	machine	executing	logical	instructions	could	manipulate	information.
His	insight,	the	subject	of	his	master's	thesis,	was	about	how	computer
circuits—closed	for	true	and	open	for	false—could	perform	logical
operations,	using	the	number	1	to	represent	"true"	and	0	to	represent	"false."
This	is	a	binary	system.	It's	a	code.	Binary	is	the	alphabet	of	electronic
computers,	the	basis	of	the	language	into	which	all	information	is	translated,
stored,	and	used	within	a	computer.	It's	simple,	but	so	vital	to	the
understanding	of	the	way	computers	work	that	it's	worth	pausing	here	to
explain	it	more	fully.
Imagine	you	have	a	room	that	you	want	illuminated	with	as	much	as	250

watts	of	electric	lighting	and	you	want	the	lighting	to	be	adjustable,	from	0
watt	of	illumination	(total	darkness)	to	the	full	wattage.	One	way	to
accomplish	this	is	with	a	rotating	dimmer	switch	hooked	to	a	250-watt	bulb.
To	achieve	complete	darkness,	turn	the	knob	fully	counterclockwise	to	Off	for
0	watt	of	light.	For	maximum	brightness,	turn	the	knob	fully	clockwise	for	the
entire	250	watts.	For	some	illumination	level	in	between,	turn	the	knob	to	an
intermediate	position.
This	system	is	easy	to	use	but	has	limitations.	If	the	knob	is	at	an	intermediate
setting—if	lighting	is	lowered	for	an	intimate	dinner,	for	example—you	can
only	guess	what	the	lighting	level	is.	You	don't	really	know	how	many	watts
are	in	use,	or	how	to	describe	the	setting	precisely.	Your	information	is
approximate,	which	makes	it	hard	to	store	or	reproduce.
What	if	you	want	to	reproduce	exactly	the	same	level	of	lighting	next	week?
You	could	make	a	mark	on	the	switch	plate	so	that	you	know	how	far	to	turn
it,	but	this	is	hardly	exact,	and	what	happens	when	you	want	to	reproduce	a
different	setting?	What	if	a	friend	wants	to	reproduce	the	same	level	of
lighting?	You	can	say,	"Turn	the	knob	about	a	fifth	of	the	way	clockwise,"	or
"Turn	the	knob	until	the	arrow	is	at	about	two	o'clock"	but	your	friend's
reproduction	will	only	approximate	your	setting.	What	if	your	friend	then
passes	the	information	on	to	another	friend,	who	in	turn	passes	it	on	again?
Each	time	the	information	is	handed	on,	the	chances	of	its	remaining	accurate
decrease.
That	is	an	example	of	information	stored	in	"analog"	form.	The	dimmer's
knob	provides	an	analogy	to	the	bulb's	lighting	level.	If	it's	turned	halfway,
presumably	you	have	about	half	the	total	wattage.	When	you	measure	or
describe	how	far	the	knob	is	turned,	you're	actually	storing	information	about
the	analogy	(the	knob)	rather	than	about	the	lighting	level.	Analog
information	can	be	gathered,	stored,	and	reproduced,	but	it	tends	to	be
imprecise—and	runs	the	risk	of	becoming	less	precise	each	time	it	is
transferred.
Now	let's	look	at	an	entirely	different	way	of	describing	how	to	light	the
room,	a	digital	rather	than	analog	method	of	storing	and	transmitting
information.	Any	kind	of	information	can	be	converted	into	numbers	using
only	0s	and	1s.	These	are	called	binary	numbers—numbers	composed	entirely
of	0s	and	1s.	Each	0	or	1	is	called	a	bit.	Once	the	information	has	been
converted,	it	can	be	fed	to	and	stored	in	computers	as	long	strings	of	bits.
Those	numbers	are	all	that's	meant	by	"digital	information."

Instead	of	a	single	250-watt	bulb,	let's	say	you	have	eight	bulbs,	each	with	a
wattage	double	the	one	preceding	it,	from	1	to	128.	Each	of	these	bulbs	is
hooked	to	its	own	switch,	with	the	lowest-watt	bulb	on	the	right.	Such	an
arrangement	can	be	diagrammed	like	this:
By	turning	these	switches	on	and	off,	you	can	adjust	the	lighting	level	in	1-
watt	increments	from	0	watt	(all	switches	off)	to	255	watts	(all	switches	on).
This	gives	you	256	possibilities.	If	you	want	1	watt	of	light,	you	turn	on	only
the	rightmost	switch,	which	turns	on	the	1-watt	bulb.	If	you	want	2	watts	of
light,	you	turn	on	only	the	2-watt	bulb.	If	you	want	3	watts	of	light,	you	turn
on	both	the	1-watt	and	2-watt	bulbs,	because	1	plus	2	equals	the	desired	3
watts.	If	you	want	4	watts	of	light,	you	turn	on	the	4-watt	bulb.	If	you	want	5
watts,	you	turn	on	just	the	4-watt	and	1-watt	bulbs.	If	you	want	250	watts	of
light,	you	turn	on	all	but	the	4-watt	and	1-watt	bulbs.
If	you	have	decided	the	ideal	illumination	level	for	dining	is	137	watts	of
light,	you	turn	on	the	128-,	8-,	and	1-watt	bulbs,	like	this:
This	system	makes	it	easy	to	record	an	exact	lighting	level	for	later	use	or	to
communicate	it	to	others	who	have	the	same	light-switch	setup.	Because	the
way	we	record	binary	information	is	universal—low	number	to	the	right,	high
number	to	the	left,	always	doubling—you	don't	have	to	write	down	the	values
of	the	bulbs.	You	simply	record	the	pattern	of	switches:	on,	off,	off,	off,	on,
off,	off,	on.	With	that	information	a	friend	can	faithfully	reproduce	the	137
watts	of	light	in	your	room.	In	fact,	as	long	as	everyone	involved	double-
checks	the	accuracy	of	what	he	does,	the	message	can	be	passed	through	a

million	hands	and	at	the	end	every	person	will	have	the	same	information	and
be	able	to	achieve	exactly	137	watts	of	light.
To	shorten	the	notation	further,	you	can	record	each	"off"	as	0	and	each	"on"
as	1.	This	means	that	instead	of	writing	down	"on,	off,	off,	off,	on,	off,	off,
on,"	meaning	turn	on	the	first,	the	fourth,	and	the	eighth	of	the	eight	bulbs,
and	leave	the	others	off,	you	write	the	same	information	as	1,	0,	0,	0,	1,	0,	0,
1,	or	10001001,	a	binary	number.	In	this	case	it's	137.	You	call	your	friend
and	say:	"I've	got	the	perfect	lighting	level!	It's	10001001.	Try	it."	Your	friend
gets	it	exactly	right,	by	flipping	a	switch	on	for	each	1	and	off	for	each	0.
This	may	seem	like	a	complicated	way	to	describe	the	brightness	of	a	light
source,	but	it	is	an	example	of	the	theory	behind	binary	expression,	the	basis
of	all	modern	computers.
Binary	expression	made	it	possible	to	take	advantage	of	electric	circuits	to
build	calculators.	This	happened	during	World	War	II	when	a	group	of
mathematicians	led	by	J.	Presper	Eckert	and	John	Mauchly	at	the	University
of	Pennsylvania======================================================== logy.	As	she	scrolls	through	the	document,	the
two	of	you	would	discuss	your	needs.	Then,	if	she	was	particularly	adept,	you
might	even	watch	her	do	the	editing.	However,	if	you	wanted	a	hand	in
editing	the	document	instead	of	just	watching	it	run	on	your	lawyer's
computer,	you	could	join	in	and	work	together.	You	would	be	able	not	only	to
talk	to	each	other	but	also	to	see	the	same	image	on	your	computer	screens.

You	won't	need	to	have	the	same	software.	The	application	just	has	to	run	on
one	end	of	the	connection,	the	lawyer's	end	in	this	case.	On	your	end,	you
would	need	only	an	appropriate	modem	and	DSVD	software.
Another	important	use	of	voice/data	connections	will	be	to	improve	product
support.	Microsoft	has	thousands	of	employees	whose	job	is	to	answer
product-support	questions	about	Microsoft	software.	In	fact,	we	have	as	many
product-support	people	answering	questions	about	our	software	as	we	have
engineers	building	it.	This	is	wonderful,	because	we	log	all	that	feedback	and
use	it	to	improve	our	products.	We	get	lots	of	these	questions	by	e-mail,	but
most	of	our	customers	still	telephone	us.	These	phone	conversations	are
inefficient.	A	customer	calls	in	to	say	his	particular	computer	is	configured	in
a	specific	way	and	is	giving	a	certain	error	message.	The	product-support
specialist	listens	to	this	description,	and	then	suggests	something,	which	it
takes	the	caller	a	few	minutes	to	do.	Then	the	conversation	resumes.	The
average	call	takes	fifteen	minutes,	and	some	take	an	hour.	But	once	everyone
is	using	DSVD,	the	product-support	specialist	will	be	able	to	see	what's	on	the
caller's	computer	screen	(with	the	caller's	explicit	permission,	of	course)	and
examine	the	caller's	computer	directly	rather	than	having	to	rely	on	the	caller
to	explain	what	he	is	seeing.	This	will	have	to	be	done	carefully,	to	ensure	that
no	one's	privacy	is	invaded.	The	process	will	reduce	the	length	of	the	average
call	by	30	or	40	percent,	which	will	make	customers	a	lot	happier	and	will	cut
costs	and	product	prices.
The	picture	transmitted	during	a	DSVD	(or	ISDN)	telephone	connection
won't	necessarily	have	to	be	of	a	document.	One	or	both	people	participating
will	also	be	able	to	transmit	still	images	of	themselves.	If	you	are	calling	in	to
buy	a	product,	you	might	expect	the	company's	service	representative	to	be
there,	smiling.	But	you,	as	the	customer,	might	choose	to	transmit	only	your
voice.	You	can	select	images	of	yourself	dressed	appropriately	for	the
occasion,	so	it	won't	matter	what	you	are	actually	wearing.	Or	you	might
decide	to	have	available	several	pictures	of	yourself,	one	smiling,	one
laughing,	one	contemplative,	and	maybe	one	that	is	angry.	During	the	course
of	the	conversation,	you	could	change	the	image	to	suit	your	mood	or	the
point	you	were	making.
Electronic	mail	and	shared	screens	will	eliminate	the	need	for	many	meetings.
Presentation	meetings,	called	primarily	so	participants	can	listen	and	learn,
can	be	replaced	with	e-mail	messages	with	spreadsheets	and	other	exhibits
enclosed	as	attachments.	When	face-to-face	meetings	do	take	place,	they	will
be	more	efficient	because	participants	will	already	have	exchanged
background	information	by	e-mail.

It	will	also	be	easier	to	schedule	meetings	because	software	will	handle	it.	For
example,	if	you	want	to	sit	down	face-to-face	with	your	lawyer,	your
scheduling	program	and	hers	will	be	able	to	communicate	across	the	network
—even	the	phone	network—and	pick	a	date	and	time	that	you	both	have	free.
Then	the	appointment	would	just	show	up	on	your	respective	electronic
calendars.
This	will	also	be	an	efficient	way	to	schedule	restaurant	or	theater
reservations,	but	it	raises	an	interesting	issue.	Let's	say	a	restaurant	isn't
getting	much	business,	or	tickets	to	a	show	aren't	selling	well,	or	your	lawyer
doesn't	want	you	to	know	that	you're	her	only	client.	Such	companies	and
individuals	might	instruct	their	scheduling	programs	just	to	respond	to
meeting	requests.	Your	scheduling	program	wouldn't	be	able	to	ask	your
lawyer's	program	to	list	all	the	times	she	is	free.	However,	if	it	asked	for	a
specific	two-hour	block,	the	response	would	be:	"Yes,	we	can	schedule	you
for	Tuesday	at	eleven	o'clock."
Clients	will	expect	their	lawyers,	dentists,	accountants,	and	other
professionals	to	be	able	to	schedule	appointments	and	exchange	documents
electronically.	You	might	have	a	quick	follow-up	question	for	your	doctor—
for	instance,	whether	a	generic	version	of	a	drug	is	acceptable.	It	is	hard	to
interrupt	a	doctor,	but	you'll	expect	to	be	able	to	trade	e-mail	with	all	of	the
professionals	you	work	with.	We're	going	to	see	competition	based	on	how
effectively	one	professional	group	has	adopted	these	communications	tools
and	how	much	more	accessible	and	efficient	this	makes	them.	I'm	sure	we'll
then	begin	seeing	ads	in	which	a	firm	will	tout	how	much	more	advanced	it
has	become	in	the	use	of	PC	communications.
When	the	information	highway	is	available,	people	won't	be	limited	to	audio
and	still	images,	because	the	highway	will	also	transmit	high-quality	video.
The	meetings	they	schedule	will	more	and	more	often	be	conducted
electronically,	using	shared-screen	videoconferencing.	Each	electronic
participant,	wherever	he	or	she	is,	will	look	at	a	different	physical	screen:	a
video	white	board,	a	television	set,	or	a	PC,	but	each	screen	will	show	much
the	same	image.	Part	of	the	screen	might	show	someone's	face,	while	another
part	might	display	a	document.	If	anyone	modifies	the	document,	the	change
will	appear	almost	immediately	on	all	the	screens.	Geographically	distant
collaborators	will	be	able	to	work	together	in	rich	ways.	This	is	synchronous
or	real-time	sharing,	which	means	that	the	computer	screens	will	keep	up	with
the	people	using	them.
If	a	group	were	to	meet	electronically	to	collaborate	on	a	press	release,	each

member	would	be	able	to	use	his	or	her	PC	or	notebook	computer	to	move
paragraphs	around	and	drop	in	a	photograph	or	a	video.	The	rest	of	the	group
would	be	able	to	look	at	the	result	on	their	individual	screens	and	see	each
contributor's	work	as	it	is	actually	happening.
We're	already	accustomed	to	watching	video	meetings.	Anyone	who	tunes	in
to	television	news	shows,	such	as	Nightline,	which	feature	long-distance
debates,	is	seeing	a	videoconference.	The	host	and	guests	may	be	separated
by	continents,	yet	they	engage	in	give-and-take	as	if	they	were	in	the	same
room,	and	to	viewers	it	almost	appears	that	they	are.
Today,	in	order	to	videoconference,	it	is	necessary	to	go	to	a	specially
equipped	facility	with	special	phone	lines.	Microsoft	has	at	least	one
dedicated	videoconference	room	in	each	of	its	sales	offices	around	the	world.
They're	used	quite	a	bit,	but	the	setting	is	fairly	formal.	These	facilities	have
saved	us	lots	of	traveling.	Employees	in	other	offices	"sit	in"	on	staff
meetings,	and	customers	and	vendors	have	"visited"	us	without	traveling	to
our	headquarters	outside	Seattle.	Such	meetings	will	become	very	popular
because	they	save	time	and	money	and	are	often	more	productive	than	audio-
only	phone	conferences	or	even	face-to-face	meetings,	because	people	seem
to	be	more	attentive	if	they	know	they	are	on-camera.
I've	noticed	that	it	does	take	some	getting	used	to,	though.	If	one	person	is	on
a	videoconference	screen,	he	or	she	tends	to	get	much	more	attention	than
others	in	the	meeting.	I	first	noticed	this	when	a	bunch	of	us	in	Seattle	were
videoconferencing	with	Steve	Ballmer,	who	was	in	Europe.	It	was	as	if	we
were	all	glued	to	The	Steve	Ballmer	Show.	If	Steve	took	off	his	shoes,	we'd
all	look	at	each	other's	reactions.	When	the	meeting	was	over	I	could	have
told	you	all	about	Steve's	new	haircut	but	I	might	not	have	been	able	to	name
the	other	people	who'd	been	in	the
room	with	me.	I	think	this	distortion	will	go	away	as	videoconferences
become	commonplace.
It's	currently	fairly	expensive	to	set	up	a	videoconference	room—it	costs	at
least	$40,000.	However,	desktop	systems	that	attach	to	PCs	are	coming,	and
they	will	reduce	the	cost—and	the	formality—dramatically.	Our	facilities	are
generally	connected	with	ISDN	lines	operating	at	384,000	bits	per	second,
which	provide	reasonable	picture	and	sound	quality	for	about	$20	to	$35	an
hour	for	connections	within	the	United	States	and	about	$250	to	$300	an	hour
for	an	international	connection.
The	cost	of	videoconferencing,	like	that	of	almost	every	other	computer-

driven	service,	is	going	to	drop	as	technology	and	communications	costs	do.
Small	video	devices	using	cameras	attached	to	personal	computers	or
television	sets	will	allow	us	to	meet	readily	across	the	information	highway
with	much	higher	quality	pictures	and	sound	for	lower	prices.	As	ISDN
connected	to	PCs	becomes	popular,	videoconferences	will	be	as	standard	a
business	procedure	as	using	a	copier	to	duplicate	a	document	for	distribution
is	now.
Some	people	worry	that,	by	eliminating	the	subtlety	of	human	dynamics	in	a
meeting,	videoconferences	and	shared	screens	will	give	corporate	gatherings
all	the	spontaneity	of	a	congressional	photo	opportunity.	How	will	people
whisper,	roll	their	eyes	at	a	tedious	speaker,	or	pass	notes?	Actually,
clandestine	communication	will	be	simpler	at	a	video	meeting	because	the
network	will	facilitate	individual	communications	on	the	side.	Meetings	have
always	had	unwritten	rules,	but	when	the	network	is	mediating
videoconferences,	some	rules	will	have	to	become	explicit.	Will	people	be
able	to	signal,	publicly	or	privately,	individually	or	collectively,	that	they	are
bored?	To	what	degree	should	a	participant	be	allowed	to	block	his	or	her
video	or	audio	from	others?	Should	private	side	conversations,	one	PC	to
another,	be	permitted?	Over	time,	as	we	use	these	facilities,	new	rules	of
meeting	etiquette	will	emerge.
Home	videoconferences	will	naturally	be	somewhat	different.	If	the
conference	has	only	two	participants,	it	will	amount	to	a	video	phone	call.
That	will	be	great	for	saying	hello	to	y======================================================== of	the	board	and	CEO	of	Bell	Atlantic,
comments,	"I	believe	a	combination	of	a	school	system	ready	for	fundamental
change	in	teaching	methods,	a	parent	body	that	was	supportive	and	wanted	to
be	involved,	and	the	careful	but	intensive	integration	of	technology	into	both
the	homes	and	classrooms	.	.	.	created	a	true	learning	community	in	which	the
home	and	school	reinforce	and	support	each	other."
At	Lester	B.	Pearson	School,	a	Canadian	high	school	serving	an	ethnically
diverse	neighborhood,	computers	are	an	integral	part	of	every	course	in	the
daily	curriculum.	For	the	1,200	students	there	are	more	than	300	personal
computers,	and	more	than	100	different	software	titles	are	in	use.	The	school
says	its	dropout	rate,	4	percent,	when	compared	with	a	national	average	of	30
percent,	is	Canada's	lowest.	Thirty-five	hundred	people	a	year	visit	to	see	how
a	high	school	can	"incorporate	technology	in	every	aspect	of	school	life."
When	the	information	highway	is	in	operation,	the	texts	of	millions	of	books
will	be	available.	A	reader	will	be	able	to	ask	questions,	print	the	text,	read	it
on-screen,	or	even	have	it	read	in	his	choice	of	voices.	He'll	be	able	to	ask
questions.	It	will	be	his	tutor.
Computers	with	social	interfaces	will	figure	out	how	to	present	information	so
that	it	is	customized	for	the	particular	user.	Many	educational	software
programs	will	have	distinct	personalities,	and	the	student	and	the	computer
will	get	to	know	each	other.	A	student	will	ask,	perhaps	orally,	"What	caused
the	American	Civil	War?"	His	or	her	computer	will	reply,	describing	the
conflicting	contentions:	that	it	was	primarily	a	battle	over	economics	or
human	rights.	The	length	and	approach	of	the	answer	will	vary	depending	on
the	student	and	the	circumstances.	A	student	will	be	able	to	interrupt	at	any
time	to	ask	the	computer	for	more	or	less	detail	or	to	request	a	different

approach	altogether.	The	computer	will	know	what	information	the	student
has	read	or	watched	and	will	point	out	connections	or	correlations	and	offer
appropriate	links.	If	the	computer	knows	the	student	likes	historical	fiction,
war	stories,	folk	music,	or	sports,	it	may	try	to	use	that	knowledge	to	present
the	information.	But	this	will	be	only	an	attention-getting	device.	The
machine,	like	a	good	human	teacher,	won't	give	in	to	a	child	who	has	lopsided
interests.	Instead	it	will	use	the	child's	predilections	to	teach	a	broader
curriculum.
Different	learning	rates	will	be	accommodated,	because	computers	will	be
able	to	pay	individual	attention	to	independent	learners.	Children	with
learning	disabilities	will	be	particularly	well	served.	Regardless	of	his	or	her
ability	or	disability,	every	student	will	be	able	to	work	at	an	individual	pace.
Another	benefit	of	computer-aided	learning	will	be	the	way	many	students
come	to	view	tests.	Today,	tests	are	pretty	depressing	for	many	kids.	They	are
associated	with	falling	short:	"I	got	a	bad	grade,"	or	"I	ran	out	of	time"	or	"I
wasn't	ready."	After	a	while,	many	kids	who	haven't	done	well	on	tests	may
think	to	themselves,	I'd	better	pretend	tests	aren't	important	to	me,	because	I
can	never	succeed	at	them.	Tests	can	cause	a	student	to	develop	a	negative
attitude	toward	all	education.
The	interactive	network	will	allow	students	to	quiz	themselves	anytime,	in	a
risk-free	environment.	A	self-administered	quiz	is	a	form	of	self-exploration,
like	the	tests	Paul	Allen	and	I	used	to	give	each	other.	Testing	will	become	a
positive	part	of	the	learning	process.	A	mistake	won't	call	forth	a	reprimand;	it
will	trigger	the	system	to	help	the	student	overcome	his	misunderstanding.	If
someone	really	gets	stuck,	the	system	will	offer	to	explain	the	circumstances
to	a	teacher.	There	should	be	less	apprehension	about	formal	tests	and	fewer
surprises,	because	on-going	self-quizzing	will	give	each	student	a	better	sense
of	where	he	or	she	stands.
Many	educational	software	and	textbook	companies	are	already	delivering
interactive	computer	products	in	mathematics,	languages,	economics,	and
biology	that	build	basic	skills	this	way.	For	example,	Academic	Systems	of
Palo	Alto,	California,	is	working	on	an	interactive	multi-media	instructional
system	for	colleges,	to	help	teach	basic	math	and	English	courses.	The
concept	is	called	"mediated	learning,"	and	it	blends	traditional	instruction
with	computer-based	learning.	Each	student	begins	by	taking	a	placement	test
to	determine	which	topics	he	or	she	understands	and	where	instruction	is
required.	The	system	then	creates	a	personalized	lesson	plan	for	the	student.
Periodic	tests	monitor	the	student's	progress,	and	the	lesson	plan	can	be

modified	as	the	student	masters	concepts.	The	program	can	also	report
problems	to	the	instructor,	who	can	then	give	the	student	individual	help.	So
far,	the	company	has	found	that	students	in	pilot	programs	like	the	new
learning	materials,	but	the	most	successful	classes	are	those	in	which	an
instructor	is	more	available.	These	results	underscore	the	point	that	new
technology,	by	itself,	is	not	sufficient	to	improve	education.
Some	parents	resist	the	use	of	computers	because	they	believe	they	can't
monitor	what	their	child	is	doing	and	can't	exert	any	control.	Most	parents	are
delighted	when	a	child	curls	up	with	an	engrossing	book,	but	less	enthusiastic
when	he	spends	hours	at	the	computer.	They're	probably	thinking	of	video
games.	A	kid	can	spend	a	great	deal	of	time	using	a	video	game	without
learning	much.	So	far,	a	great	deal	more	has	been	invested	in	computer
software	meant	to	entertain	than	in	software	to	educate.	It's	easier	to	create	an
addictive	game	than	it	is	to	expose	a	child	to	a	world	of	information	in	an
appealing	way.
However,	as	textbook	budgets	and	parental	spending	shift	to	interactive
material,	there	will	be	thousands	of	new	software	companies	working	with
teachers	to	create	entertainment-quality	interactive	learning	materials.	The
Lightspan	Partnership,	for	example,	is	using	Hollywood	talent	to	create	live
action	and	animated	programs.	Lightspan	hopes	its	sophisticated	production
techniques	will	capture	and	retain	the	interest	of	the	young	viewers—ages
five	through	eleven—and	encourage	them	to	spend	more	hours	learning.
Animated	characters	lead	students	through	lessons	that	explain	basic
concepts,	then	into	games	that	put	them	to	use.	The	Lightspan	lessons	are
grouped	by	two-year	age	spans	and	organized	into	series	intended	to
complement	elementary	school	curricula	in	mathematics,	reading,	and
language	arts.	These	programs	will	be	available	on	televisions	in	homes	and
community	centers	as	well	as	in	classrooms.	Until	interactive	television	is
widely	available,	this	kind	of	programming	will	be	offered	on	CD-ROMs	or
across	the	Internet	to	PC	users.
All	this	information,	however,	is	not	going	to	solve	the	serious	problems
facing	many	public	schools	today:	budget	cuts,	violence,	drugs,	high	dropout
rates,	dangerous	neighborhoods,	teachers	more	concerned	about	survival	than
education.	Offering	new	technology	won't	suffice.	Society	will	also	have	to
fix	the	fundamental	problems.
But	while	some	public	schools	face	major	challenges,	they	are	also	our
greatest	hope.	Imagine	a	situation	in	which	most	of	the	kids	in	inner-city
public	schools	are	on	the	dole,	are	barely	able	to	speak	the	national	language,

have	few	skills	and	an	uncertain	future.	This	was	America	in	the	early	1900s,
when	tens	of	millions	of	immigrants	had	overwhelmed	the	schools	and	social
services	of	our	big	cities.
Yet	that	generation	and	the	next	achieved	a	standard	of	living	unequaled	in
the	world.	The	problems	of	America's	schools	are	not	insurmountable,	just
extremely	complicated.	Even	today,	for	every	disastrous	public	school	there
are	dozens	of	successful	ones	you	don't	read	about.	I've	mentioned	several
examples	here.	It	is	outside	the	scope	of	this	book	to	go	deeply	into	this
subject,	but	communities	can,	and	have,	won	back	their	streets	and	schools.
It's	always	taken	an	intense	local	effort.	One	street	at	a	time,	one	school	at	a
time.	Then	parents	must	insist	that	their	kids	come	to	school	ready	to	learn.	If
the	attitude	is	"Let	the	school	(or	government)	do	it"	kids	will	fail.
Once	even	the	most	modest	positive	atmosphere	for	education	is	established,
the	information	highway	will	help	raise	the	educational	standards	for
everyone	in	future	generations.	The	highway	will	allow	new	methods	of
teaching	and	much	more	choice.	Quality	curriculums	can	be	created	with
government	funding	and	made	available	for	free.	Private	vendors	will
compete	to	enhance	the	free	material.	The	new	vendors	might	be	other	public
schools;	public-school	teachers	or	retired	teachers	going	into	business	for
themselves;	or	some	privately	run,	highway-based	school	service	program
wanting	to	prove	its	capabilities.	The	highway	would	be	a	way	for	schools	to
try	out	new	teachers	or	use	their	services	at	a	distance.
The	highway	will	also	make	home	schooling	easier.	It	will	allow	parents	to
select	some	classes	from	a	range	of	quality	possibilities	and	still	maintain
control	over	content.
Learning	with	a	computer	will	be	a	springboard	for	learning	away	from	the
computer.	Young	children	will	still	need	to	touch	toys	and	tools	with	their
hands.	Seeing	chemical	reactions	on	a	computer	screen	can	be	a	good
supplement	to	hands-on	work	in	a	chemistry	lab,	but	it	can't	replace	the	real
experience.	Children	need	personal	interaction	with	each	other,	and	with
adults,	to	learn	social	and	interpersonal	skills,	such	as	how	to	work
cooperatively.
The	good	teachers	of	the	future	will	be	doing	much	more	than	showing	kids
where	to	find	information	on	the	highway.	They	will	still	have	to	understand
when	to	probe,	observe,	stimulate,	or	agitate.	They'll	still	have	to	build	kids'
skills	in	written	and	oral	communications,	and	will	use	technology	as	a
starting	point	or	an	aid.	Successful	teachers	will	act	as	coaches,	partners,

creative	outlets,	and	communications	bridges	to	the	world.
Computers	on	the	information	highway	will	be======================================================== a	disk-based	server	will	be	able	to	serve	thousands	of
customers	simultaneously.	The	extra	cost	for	each	user	is	simply	the	cost	of
using	the	disk	storage	for	a	short	period	of	time	and	the	communications
charge.	And	that	is	becoming	extremely	cheap.	So	the	extra	per-user	cost	will
be	nearly	zero.
This	doesn't	mean	that	information	will	be	free,	but	the	cost	of	distributing	it
will	be	very	small.	When	you	buy	a	paper	book,	a	good	portion	of	your
money	pays	for	the	cost	of	producing	and	distributing	it,	rather	than	for	the
author's	work.	Trees	have	to	be	cut	down,	ground	into	pulp,	and	turned	into
paper.	The	book	must	be	printed	and	bound.	Most	publishers	invest	capital	in
a	first	printing	that	reflects	the	largest	number	of	copies	they	think	will	sell
right	away,	because	the	printing	technology	is	efficient	only	if	lots	of	books
are	made	at	once.	The	capital	tied	up	in	this	inventory	is	a	financial	risk	for
the	publishers:	They	may	never	sell	all	the	copies,	and	even	if	they	do,	it	will

take	a	while	to	sell	them	all.	Meanwhile,	the	publisher	has	to	store	the	books
and	ship	them	to	wholesalers	and	ultimately	to	retail	bookstores.	Those	folks
also	invest	capital	in	their	inventory	and	expect	a	financial	return	from	it.
By	the	time	the	consumer	selects	the	book	and	the	cash	register	rings,	the
profit	for	the	author	can	be	a	pretty	small	piece	of	the	pie	compared	to	the
money	that	goes	to	the	physical	aspect	of	delivering	information	on	processed
wood	pulp.	I	like	to	call	this	the	"friction"	of	distribution,	because	it	holds
back	variety	and	dissipates	money	away	from	the	author	and	to	other	people.
The	information	highway	will	be	largely	friction	free,	a	theme	I	will	explore
further	in	chapter	8.	This	lack	of	friction	in	information	distribution	is
incredibly	important.	It	will	empower	more	authors,	because	very	little	of	the
customer's	dollar	will	be	used	to	pay	for	distribution.
Gutenberg's	invention	of	the	printing	press	brought	about	the	first	real	shift	in
distribution	friction—it	allowed	information	on	any	subject	to	be	distributed
quickly	and	relatively	cheaply.	The	printing	press	created	a	mass	medium
because	it	offered	low-friction	duplication.	The	proliferation	of	books
motivated	the	general	public	to	read	and	write,	but	once	people	had	the	skills
there	were	many	other	things	that	could	be	done	with	the	written	word.
Businesses	could	keep	track	of	inventory	and	write	contracts.	Lovers	could
exchange	letters.	Individuals	could	keep	notes	and	diaries.	By	themselves
these	applications	were	not	sufficiently	compelling	to	get	large	numbers	of
people	to	make	the	effort	to	learn	to	read	and	write.	Until	there	was	a	real
reason	to	create	an	"installed	base"	of	literate	people,	the	written	word	wasn't
really	useful	as	a	means	for	storing	information.	Books	gave	literacy	critical
mass,	so	you	can	almost	say	that	the	printing	press	taught	us	to	read.
The	printing	press	made	it	easy	to	make	lots	of	copies	of	a	document,	but
what	about	something	written	for	a	few	people?	New	technology	was	required
for	small-scale	publishing.	Carbon	paper	was	fine	if	you	wanted	just	one	or
two	more	copies.	Mimeographs	and	other	messy	machines	could	make
dozens,	but	to	use	any	of	these	processes	you	had	to	have	planned	for	them
when	you	prepared	your	original	document.
In	the	1930s,	Chester	Carlson,	frustrated	by	how	difficult	it	was	to	prepare
patent	applications	(which	involved	copying	drawings	and	text	by	hand),	set
out	to	invent	a	better	way	to	duplicate	information	in	small	quantities.	What
he	came	up	with	was	a	process	he	called	"xerography"	when	he	patented	it	in
1940.	In	1959,	the	company	he	had	hooked	up	with—later	known	as	Xerox—
released	its	first	successful	production-line	copier.	The	914	copier,	by	making

it	possible	to	reproduce	modest	numbers	of	documents	easily	and
inexpensively,	set	off	an	explosion	in	the	kinds	and	amount	of	information
distributed	to	small	groups.	Market	research	had	projected	that	Xerox	would
sell	at	most	3,000	of	their	first	copier	model.	They	actually	placed	about
200,000.	A	year	after	the	copier	was	introduced,	50	million	copies	a	month
were	being	made.	By	1986,	more	than	200	billion	copies	were	being	made
each	month,	and	the	number	has	been	rising	ever	since.	Most	of	these	copies
would	never	be	made	if	the	technology	wasn't	so	cheap	and	easy.
The	photocopier	and	its	later	cousin,	the	desktop	laser	printer—along	with	PC
desktop	publishing	software—facilitated	newsletters,	memos,	maps	to	parties,
flyers,	and	other	documents	intended	for	modest-sized	audiences.	Carlson	was
another	who	reduced	the	distribution	friction	of	information.	The	wild	success
of	his	copier	demonstrates	that	amazing	things	happen	once	you	reduce
distribution	friction.
Of	course,	it's	easier	to	make	copies	of	a	document	than	it	is	to	make	it	worth
reading.	There	is	no	intrinsic	limit	to	the	number	of	books	that	can	be
published	in	a	given	year.	A	typical	bookstore	has	10,000	different	titles,	and
some	of	the	new	superstores	might	carry	100,000.	Only	a	small	fraction,
under	10	percent,	of	all	trade	books	published	make	money	for	their
publishers,	but	some	succeed	beyond	anybody's	wildest	expectations.
My	favorite	recent	example	is	A	Brief	History	of	Time,	by	Stephen	W.
Hawking,	a	brilliant	scientist	who	has	amyotrophic	lateral	sclerosis	(Lou
Gehrig's	disease),	which	confines	him	to	a	wheelchair	and	allows	him	to
communicate	only	with	great	difficulty.	What	are	the	odds	that	his	treatise	on
the	origins	of	the	universe	would	have	been	published	if	there	were	only	a
handful	of	publishers	and	each	of	them	could	produce	only	a	few	books	a
year?	Suppose	an	editor	had	one	spot	left	on	his	list	and	had	to	choose
between	publishing	Hawking's	book	and	Madonna's	Sex?	The	obvious	bet
would	be	Madonna's	book,	because	it	would	likely	sell	a	million	copies.	It
did.	But	Hawking's	book	sold	5.5	million	copies	and	is	still	selling.
Every	now	and	then	this	sort	of	sleeper	best-seller	surprises	everyone	(but	the
author).	A	book	I	enjoyed	greatly,	The	Bridges	of	Madison	County,	was	the
first	published	novel	by	a	business-school	teacher	of	communications.	It
wasn't	positioned	by	the	publisher	to	be	a	bestseller,	but	nobody	really	knows
what	will	appeal	to	the	public's	taste.	Like	most	examples	of	central	planning
trying	to	outguess	a	market	decision,	this	is	fundamentally	a	losing
proposition.	There	are	almost	always	a	couple	of	books	on	The	New	York
Times	best-seller	list	that	have	bubbled	up	from	nowhere,	because	books	cost

so	relatively	little	to	publish—compared	to	other	media—that	publishers	can
afford	to	give	them	a	chance.
Costs	are	much	higher	in	broadcast	television	or	movies,	so	it's	tougher	to	try
something	risky.	In	the	early	days	of	TV	there	were	only	a	few	stations	in
each	geographic	area	and	most	programming	was	targeted	for	the	broadest
possible	audience.
Cable	television	increased	the	number	of	programming	choices,	although	it
wasn't	started	with	that	intention.	It	began	in	the	late	1940s	as	a	way	of
providing	better	television	reception	to	outlying	areas.	Community	antennas
to	feed	a	local	cable	system	were	erected	by	viewers	whose	broadcast
reception	was	blocked	by	hills.	No	one	then	imagined	that	communities	with
perfectly	good	broadcast	television	reception	would	pay	to	have	cable	so	they
could	watch	a	steady	stream	of	music	videos	or	channels	that	offered	nothing
but	news	or	weather	twenty-four	hours	a	day.
When	the	number	of	stations	carried	went	from	three	or	five	to	twenty-four	or
thirty-six,	the	programming	dynamic	changed.	If	you	were	in	charge	of
programming	for	the	thirtieth	channel,	you	wouldn't	attract	much	of	an
audience	if	you	just	tried	to	imitate	channels	1	through	29.	Instead,	cable
channel	programmers	were	forced	to	specialize.	Like	special-interest
magazines	and	newsletters,	these	new	channels	attract	viewers	by	appealing
to	strong	interests	held	by	a	relatively	smaller	number	of	enthusiasts.	This	is
in	contrast	to	general	programming,	which	tries	to	provide	something	for
everyone.	But	the	costs	of	production	and	the	small	number	of	channels	still
limit	the	number	of	television	programs	produced.
Although	it	costs	far	less	to	publish	a	book	than	to	broadcast	a	TV	show,	it's
still	a	lot	compared	to	the	cost	involved	in	electronic	publishing.	To	get	a
book	into	print	a	publisher	has	to	agree	to	pay	the	up-front	expense	of
manufacturing,	distribution,	and	marketing.	The	information	highway	will
create	a	medium	with	entry	barriers	lower	than	any	we	have	ever	seen.	The
Internet	is	the	greatest	self-publishing	vehicle	ever.	Its	bulletin	boards	have
demonstrated	some	of	the	changes	that	will	occur	when	everyone	has	access
to	low-friction	distribution	and	individuals	can	post	messages,	images,	or
software	of	their	own	creation.
Bulletin	boards	have	contributed	a	lot	to	the	popularity	of	the	Internet.	To	be
published	there	all	you	have	to	do	is	type	your	thoughts	and	post	them
someplace.	This	means	that	there	is	a	lot	of	garbage	on	the	Internet,	but	also	a
few	gems.	A	typical	message	is	only	a	page	or	two	long.	A	single	message

posted	on	a	popular	bulletin	board	or	sent	to	a	mailing	list	might	reach	and
engage	millions	of	people.	Or	it	might	sit	there	and	languish	with	no	impact
whatsoever.	The	reason	anyone	is	willing	to	risk	the	latter	eventuality	is	the
low	distribution	friction.	The	network	bandwidth	is	so	great	and	the	other
factors	that	contribute	to	the	cost	are	so	low	that	nobody	thinks	about	the	cost
of	sending	messages.	At	worst	you	might	be	a	bit	embarrassed	if	your
message	just	sits	there	and	nobody	responds	to	it.	On	the	other	hand,	if	your
message	is	popular,	a	lot	of	people	will	see	it,	forward	it	as	e-mail	to	their
friends,	and	post	their	own	comments	on	it.
It	is	amazingly	fast	and	inexpensive	to	communicate	with	bulletin	boards.
Mail	or	telephone	communications	are	fine	for	a	one-on-one	discussion,	but
they	are	also	pretty	expensive	if	you	are	trying	to	communicate	with	a	group.
It	costs	nearly======================================================== l	it	into	quadrillions	of	atomistic	packets	of	data.	Once
digital	information	is	stored,	anyone	with	access	and	a	personal	computer	can
instantaneously	recall,	compare,	and	refashion	it.	What	characterizes	this
period	in	history	is	the	completely	new	ways	in	which	information	can	be
changed	and	manipulated,	and	the	increasing	speeds	at	which	we	can	handle
it.	The	computer's	abilities	to	provide	low-cost,	high-speed	processing	and
transmission	of	digital	data	will	transform	the	conventional	communication
devices	in	homes	and	offices.
The	idea	of	using	an	instrument	to	manipulate	numbers	isn't	new.	The	abacus
had	been	in	use	in	Asia	for	nearly	5,000	years	by	1642,	when	the	nineteen-
year-old	French	scientist	Blaise	Pascal	invented	a	mechanical	calculator.	It
was	a	counting	device.	Three	decades	later,	the	German	mathematician
Gottfried	von	Leibniz	improved	on	Pascal's	design.	His	"Stepped	Reckoner"
could	multiply,	divide,	and	calculate	square	roots.	Reliable	mechanical
calculators,	powered	by	rotating	dials	and	gears,	descendants	of	the	Stepped
Reckoner,	were	the	mainstay	of	business	until	their	electronic	counterparts
replaced	them.	When	I	was	a	boy,	a	cash	register	was	essentially	a	mechanical
calculator	linked	to	a	cash	drawer.
More	than	a	century	and	a	half	ago,	a	visionary	British	mathematician
glimpsed	the	possibility	of	the	computer	and	that	glimpse	made	him	famous
even	in	his	day.	Charles	Babbage	was	a	professor	of	mathematics	at
Cambridge	University	who	conceived	the	possibility	of	a	mechanical	device
that	would	be	able	to	perform	a	string	of	related	calculations.	As	early	as	the
1830s,	he	was	drawn	to	the	idea	that	information	could	be	manipulated	by	a
machine	if	the	information	could	be	converted	into	numbers	first.	The	steam-
powered	machine	Babbage	envisioned	would	use	pegs,	toothed	wheels,
cylinders,	and	other	mechanical	parts,	the	apparatus	of	the	then-new	Industrial
Age.	Babbage	believed	his	"Analytical	Engine"	would	be	used	to	take	the
drudgery	and	inaccuracy	out	of	calculating.

He	lacked	the	terms	we	now	use	to	refer	to	the	parts	of	his	machine.	He	called
the	central	processor,	or	working	guts	of	his	machine,	the	"mill."	He	referred
to	his	machine's	memory	as	the	"store."	Babbage	imagined	information	being
transformed	the	way	cotton	was—drawn	from	a	store	(warehouse)	and	milled
into	something	new.
His	Analytical	Engine	would	be	mechanical,	but	he	foresaw	how	it	would	be
able	to	follow	changing	sets	of	instructions	and	thus	serve	different	functions.
This	is	the	essence	of	software.	It	is	a	comprehensive	set	of	rules	a	machine
can	be	given	to	"instruct"	it	how	to	perform	particular	tasks.	Babbage	realized
that	to	create	these	instructions	he	would	need	an	entirely	new	kind	of
language,	and	he	devised	one	using	numbers,	letters,	arrows,	and	other
symbols.	The	language	was	designed	to	let	Babbage	"program"	the	Analytical
Engine	with	a	long	series	of	conditional	instructions,	which	would	allow	the
machine	to	modify	its	actions	in	response	to	changing	situations.	He	was	the
first	to	see	that	a	single	machine	could	serve	a	number	of	different	purposes.
For	the	next	century	mathematicians	worked	with	the	ideas	Babbage	had
outlined	and	finally,	by	the	mid-1940s,	an	electronic	computer	was	built	based
on	the	principles	of	his	Analytical	Engine.	It	is	hard	to	sort	out	the	paternity
of	the	modern	computer,	because	much	of	the	thinking	and	work	was	done	in
the	United	States	and	Britain	during	World	War	II	under	the	cloak	of	wartime
secrecy.	Three	major	contributors	were	Alan	Turing,	Claude	Shannon,	and
John	von	Neumann.
In	the	mid-1930s,	Alan	Turing,	like	Babbage	a	superlative	Cambridge-trained
British	mathematician,	proposed	what	is	known	today	as	a	Turing	machine.	It
was	his	version	of	a	completely	general-purpose	calculating	machine	that
could	be	instructed	to	work	with	almost	any	kind	of	information.
In	the	late	1930s,	when	Claude	Shannon	was	still	a	student,	he	demonstrated
that	a	machine	executing	logical	instructions	could	manipulate	information.
His	insight,	the	subject	of	his	master's	thesis,	was	about	how	computer
circuits—closed	for	true	and	open	for	false—could	perform	logical
operations,	using	the	number	1	to	represent	"true"	and	0	to	represent	"false."
This	is	a	binary	system.	It's	a	code.	Binary	is	the	alphabet	of	electronic
computers,	the	basis	of	the	language	into	which	all	information	is	translated,
stored,	and	used	within	a	computer.	It's	simple,	but	so	vital	to	the
understanding	of	the	way	computers	work	that	it's	worth	pausing	here	to
explain	it	more	fully.
Imagine	you	have	a	room	that	you	want	illuminated	with	as	much	as	250

watts	of	electric	lighting	and	you	want	the	lighting	to	be	adjustable,	from	0
watt	of	illumination	(total	darkness)	to	the	full	wattage.	One	way	to
accomplish	this	is	with	a	rotating	dimmer	switch	hooked	to	a	250-watt	bulb.
To	achieve	complete	darkness,	turn	the	knob	fully	counterclockwise	to	Off	for
0	watt	of	light.	For	maximum	brightness,	turn	the	knob	fully	clockwise	for	the
entire	250	watts.	For	some	illumination	level	in	between,	turn	the	knob	to	an
intermediate	position.
This	system	is	easy	to	use	but	has	limitations.	If	the	knob	is	at	an	intermediate
setting—if	lighting	is	lowered	for	an	intimate	dinner,	for	example—you	can
only	guess	what	the	lighting	level	is.	You	don't	really	know	how	many	watts
are	in	use,	or	how	to	describe	the	setting	precisely.	Your	information	is
approximate,	which	makes	it	hard	to	store	or	reproduce.
What	if	you	want	to	reproduce	exactly	the	same	level	of	lighting	next	week?
You	could	make	a	mark	on	the	switch	plate	so	that	you	know	how	far	to	turn
it,	but	this	is	hardly	exact,	and	what	happens	when	you	want	to	reproduce	a
different	setting?	What	if	a	friend	wants	to	reproduce	the	same	level	of
lighting?	You	can	say,	"Turn	the	knob	about	a	fifth	of	the	way	clockwise,"	or
"Turn	the	knob	until	the	arrow	is	at	about	two	o'clock"	but	your	friend's
reproduction	will	only	approximate	your	setting.	What	if	your	friend	then
passes	the	information	on	to	another	friend,	who	in	turn	passes	it	on	again?
Each	time	the	information	is	handed	on,	the	chances	of	its	remaining	accurate
decrease.
That	is	an	example	of	information	stored	in	"analog"	form.	The	dimmer's
knob	provides	an	analogy	to	the	bulb's	lighting	level.	If	it's	turned	halfway,
presumably	you	have	about	half	the	total	wattage.	When	you	measure	or
describe	how	far	the	knob	is	turned,	you're	actually	storing	information	about
the	analogy	(the	knob)	rather	than	about	the	lighting	level.	Analog
information	can	be	gathered,	stored,	and	reproduced,	but	it	tends	to	be
imprecise—and	runs	the	risk	of	becoming	less	precise	each	time	it	is
transferred.
Now	let's	look	at	an	entirely	different	way	of	describing	how	to	light	the
room,	a	digital	rather	than	analog	method	of	storing	and	transmitting
information.	Any	kind	of	information	can	be	converted	into	numbers	using
only	0s	and	1s.	These	are	called	binary	numbers—numbers	composed	entirely
of	0s	and	1s.	Each	0	or	1	is	called	a	bit.	Once	the	information	has	been
converted,	it	can	be	fed	to	and	stored	in	computers	as	long	strings	of	bits.
Those	numbers	are	all	that's	meant	by	"digital	information."

Instead	of	a	single	250-watt	bulb,	let's	say	you	have	eight	bulbs,	each	with	a
wattage	double	the	one	preceding	it,	from	1	to	128.	Each	of	these	bulbs	is
hooked	to	its	own	switch,	with	the	lowest-watt	bulb	on	the	right.	Such	an
arrangement	can	be	diagrammed	like	this:
By	turning	these	switches	on	and	off,	you	can	adjust	the	lighting	level	in	1-
watt	increments	from	0	watt	(all	switches	off)	to	255	watts	(all	switches	on).
This	gives	you	256	possibilities.	If	you	want	1	watt	of	light,	you	turn	on	only
the	rightmost	switch,	which	turns	on	the	1-watt	bulb.	If	you	want	2	watts	of
light,	you	turn	on	only	the	2-watt	bulb.	If	you	want	3	watts	of	light,	you	turn
on	both	the	1-watt	and	2-watt	bulbs,	because	1	plus	2	equals	the	desired	3
watts.	If	you	want	4	watts	of	light,	you	turn	on	the	4-watt	bulb.	If	you	want	5
watts,	you	turn	on	just	the	4-watt	and	1-watt	bulbs.	If	you	want	250	watts	of
light,	you	turn	on	all	but	the	4-watt	and	1-watt	bulbs.
If	you	have	decided	the	ideal	illumination	level	for	dining	is	137	watts	of
light,	you	turn	on	the	128-,	8-,	and	1-watt	bulbs,	like	this:
This	system	makes	it	easy	to	record	an	exact	lighting	level	for	later	use	or	to
communicate	it	to	others	who	have	the	same	light-switch	setup.	Because	the
way	we	record	binary	information	is	universal—low	number	to	the	right,	high
number	to	the	left,	always	doubling—you	don't	have	to	write	down	the	values
of	the	bulbs.	You	simply	record	the	pattern	of	switches:	on,	off,	off,	off,	on,
off,	off,	on.	With	that	information	a	friend	can	faithfully	reproduce	the	137
watts	of	light	in	your	room.	In	fact,	as	long	as	everyone	involved	double-
checks	the	accuracy	of	what	he	does,	the	message	can	be	passed	through	a

million	hands	and	at	the	end	every	person	will	have	the	same	information	and
be	able	to	achieve	exactly	137	watts	of	light.
To	shorten	the	notation	further,	you	can	record	each	"off"	as	0	and	each	"on"
as	1.	This	means	that	instead	of	writing	down	"on,	off,	off,	off,	on,	off,	off,
on,"	meaning	turn	on	the	first,	the	fourth,	and	the	eighth	of	the	eight	bulbs,
and	leave	the	others	off,	you	write	the	same	information	as	1,	0,	0,	0,	1,	0,	0,
1,	or	10001001,	a	binary	number.	In	this	case	it's	137.	You	call	your	friend
and	say:	"I've	got	the	perfect	lighting	level!	It's	10001001.	Try	it."	Your	friend
gets	it	exactly	right,	by	flipping	a	switch	on	for	each	1	and	off	for	each	0.
This	may	seem	like	a	complicated	way	to	describe	the	brightness	of	a	light
source,	but	it	is	an	example	of	the	theory	behind	binary	expression,	the	basis
of	all	modern	computers.
Binary	expression	made	it	possible	to	take	advantage	of	electric	circuits	to
build	calculators.	This	happened	during	World	War	II	when	a	group	of
mathematicians	led	by	J.	Presper	Eckert	and	John	Mauchly	at	the	University
of	Pennsylvania======================================================== t	leaving	your	house.	Flexibility	is	going	to	be	increasingly
important	as	everyone	tries	to	balance	family	life	with	work	life.	You	won't
always	have	to	travel	to	see	friends	and	family	or	to	play	games.	Cultural
attractions	will	be	available	via	the	information	highway,	although	I'm	not
suggesting	that	a	Broadway	or	West	End	musical	will	be	the	same	experience
in	your	living	room	as	it	is	in	a	New	York	or	London	theater.	However,
improvements	in	screen	sizes	and	resolutions	will	enhance	all	video,
including	movies,	in	the	home.	Educational	programming	will	be	extensive.
All	of	this	will	liberate	those	who	would	like	to	abandon	city	living.
The	opening	of	the	interstate	highway	system	had	a	substantial	effect	on
where	in	the	United	States	people	chose	to	settle.	It	made	new	suburbs
accessible	and	contributed	to	the	culture	of	the	automobile.	There	will	be
significant	implications	for	city	planners,	real	estate	developers,	and	school
districts	if	the	opening	of	the	information	highway	also	encourages	people	to
move	away	from	city	centers.	If	large	pools	of	talent	disperse,	companies	will
feel	even	more	pressure	to	be	creative	about	how	to	work	with	consultants
and	employees	not	located	near	their	operations.	This	could	set	off	a	positive-
feedback	cycle,	encouraging	rural	living.
If	the	population	of	a	city	were	reduced	by	even	10	percent,	the	result	would
be	a	major	difference	in	property	values	and	wear	and	tear	on	transportation
and	other	urban	systems.	If	the	average	office	worker	in	any	major	city	stayed
home	one	or	two	days	a	week,	the	decreases	in	gasoline	consumption,	air
pollution,	and	traffic	congestion	would	be	significant.	The	net	effect,
however,	is	hard	to	foresee.	If	those	who	moved	out	of	cities	were	mostly	the
affluent	knowledge	workers,	the	urban	tax	base	would	be	reduced.	This	would
aggravate	the	inner	city's	woes	and	encourage	other	affluent	people	to	leave.
But	at	the	same	time,	the	urban	infrastructure	might	be	less	heavily	loaded.
Rents	would	fall,	creating	opportunities	for	a	better	standard	of	living	for
some	of	those	remaining	in	the	cities.

It	will	take	decades	to	implement	all	the	major	changes,	because	most	people
remain	comfortable	with	whatever	they	learn	early	and	are	reluctant	to	alter
familiar	patterns.	However,	new	generations	will	bring	new	perspectives.	Our
children	will	grow	up	comfortable	with	the	idea	of	working	with	information
tools	across	distances.	These	tools	will	be	as	natural	to	them	as	a	telephone	or
a	ballpoint	pen	is	to	us.	But	technology	isn't	going	to	wait	until	people	are
ready	for	it.	Within	the	next	ten	years	we	will	start	to	see	substantial	shifts	in
how	and	where	we	work,	the	companies	we	work	for,	and	the	places	we
choose	to	live.	My	advice	is	to	try	to	find	out	as	much	as	possible	about	the
technology	that	will	touch	you.	The	more	you	know	about	it,	the	less
disconcerting	it	will	seem.	Technology's	role	is	to	provide	more	flexibility	and
efficiency.	Forward-looking	business	managers	will	have	lots	of	opportunities
to	perform	better	in	the	years	ahead.

8
FRICTION-FREE
CAPITALISM
When	Adam	Smith	described	the	concept	of	markets	in	The	Wealth	of	Nations
in	1776,	he	theorized	that	if	every	buyer	knew	every	seller's	price,	and	every
seller	knew	what	every	buyer	was	willing	to	pay,	everyone	in	the	"market"
would	be	able	to	make	fully	informed	decisions	and	society's	resources	would
be	distributed	efficiently.	To	date	we	haven't	achieved	Smith's	ideal	because
would-be	buyers	and	would-be	sellers	seldom	have	complete	information
about	one	another.
Not	many	consumers	looking	to	buy	a	car	stereo	have	the	time	or	patience	to
canvass	every	dealer	and	thus	are	acting	on	imperfect	and	limited
information.	If	you've	bought	a	product	for	$500	and	see	it	advertised	in	the
paper	for	$300	a	week	or	two	later,	you	feel	foolish	for	overpaying.	But	you
feel	a	lot	worse	if	you	end	up	in	the	wrong	job	because	you	haven't	done
thorough	enough	research.
A	few	markets	are	already	working	fairly	close	to	Smith's	ideal.	Investors
buying	and	selling	currency	and	certain	other	commodities	participate	in
efficient	electronic	markets	that	provide	nearly	complete	instantaneous
information	about	worldwide	supply,	demand,	and	prices.	Everyone	gets
pretty	much	the	same	deal	because	news	about	all	offers,	bids,	and
transactions	speeds	across	wires	to	trading	desks	everywhere.	However,	most
marketplaces	are	very	inefficient.	For	instance,	if	you	are	trying	to	find	a
doctor,	lawyer,	accountant,	or	similar	professional,	or	are	buying	a	house,
information	is	incomplete	and	comparisons	are	difficult	to	make.
The	information	highway	will	extend	the	electronic	marketplace	and	make	it
the	ultimate	go-between,	the	universal	middleman.	Often	the	only	humans
involved	in	a	transaction	will	be	the	actual	buyer	and	seller.	All	the	goods	for
sale	in	the	world	will	be	available	for	you	to	examine,	compare,	and,	often,
customize.	When	you	want	to	buy	something	you'll	be	able	to	tell	your
computer	to	find	it	for	you	at	the	best	price	offered	by	any	acceptable	source
or	ask	your	computer	to	"haggle"	with	the	computers	of	various	sellers.
Information	about	vendors	and	their	products	and	services	will	be	available	to
any	computer	connected	to	the	highway.	Servers	distributed	worldwide	will

accept	bids,	resolve	offers	into	completed	transactions,	control	authentication
and	security,	and	handle	all	other	aspects	of	the	marketplace,	including	the
transfer	of	funds.	This	will	carry	us	into	a	new	world	of	low-friction,	low-
overhead	capitalism,	in	which	market	information	will	be	plentiful	and
transaction	costs	low.	It	will	be	a	shopper's	heaven.
Every	market,	from	a	bazaar	to	the	highway,	facilitates	competitive	pricing
and	allows	goods	to	move	from	seller	to	buyer	efficiently	with	modest
friction.	This	is	thanks	to	the	market	makers—those	whose	job	it	is	to	bring
buyers	and	sellers	together.	As	the	information	highway	assumes	the	role	of
market	maker	in	realm	after	realm,	traditional	middlemen	will	have	to
contribute	real	value	to	a	transaction	to	justify	a	commission.	For	example,
stores	and	services	that	until	now	have	profited	just	because	they	are
"there"—in	a	particular	geographic	location	may	find	they	have	lost	that
advantage.	But	those	who	provide	added	value	will	not	only	survive,	they	will
thrive,	because	the	information	highway	will	let	them	make	their	services
available	to	customers	everywhere.
This	idea	will	scare	a	lot	of	people.	Most	change	feels	a	bit	threatening,	and	I
expect	dramatic	changes	in	the	business	of	retailing	as	commerce	flows	across
the	highway.	But,	as	with	so	many	changes,	I	think	once	we	get	used	to	it
we'll	wonder	how	we	did	without	it.	The	consumer	will	get	not	only
competitive	cost	savings,	but	also	a	much	wider	variety	of	products	and
services	to	choose	from.	Although	there	may	be	fewer	stores,	if	people
continue	to	enjoy	shopping	in	today's	outlets,	as	many	stores	as	their	demand
justifies	will	remain	available.	And	because	the	highway	will	simplify	and
standardize	shopping,	it	will	also	save	time.	If	you	are	buying	a	gift	for	a
loved	one,	you	will	be	able	to	consider	more	choices	and	often	you	will	find
something	more	imaginative.	You	could	use	the	time	saved	from	shopping	to
think	up	a	fun	clue	to	put	on	the	package,	or	create	a	personalized	card.	Or
you	could	spend	the	time	you	save	with	the	recipient.
We	all	recognize	the	value	of	a	knowledgeable	salesperson	when	we	are
shopping	for	insurance,	clothes,	investments,	jewelry,	a	camera,	a	home
appliance,	or	a	home.	We	also	know	the	salesperson's	advice	is	sometimes
biased	because	he	or	she	is	ultimately	hoping	to	make	a	sale	from	a	particular
inventory.
On	the	information	highway	lots	of	product	information	will	be	available
directly	from	manufacturers.	As	they	do	today,	vendors	will	use	a	variety	of
entertaining	and	provocative	techniques	to	attract	us.	Advertising	will	evolve
into	a	hybrid,	combining	today's	television	commercials,	magazine	ads,	and	a

detailed	sales	brochure.	If	an	ad	catches	your	attention,	you'll	be	able	to
request	additional	information	directly	and	very	easily.	Links	will	let	you
navigate	through	whatever	information	the	advertiser	has	made	available,
which	might	be	product	manuals	consisting	of	video,	audio,	and	text.	Vendors
will	make	getting	information	about	their	products	as	simple	as	possible.
At	Microsoft,	we're	looking	forward	to	using	the	highway	to	get	information
out	about	our	products.	Today	we	print	millions	of	pages	of	product	brochures
and	data	sheets,	and	mail	them	out	to	people	who	ask	for	them.	But	we	never
know	how	much	information	to	put	onto	a	data	sheet;	we	don't	want	to
intimidate	casual	inquirers,	and	yet	there	are	people	out	there	who	want	to
know	all	the	detailed	product	specifications.	Also,	since	the	information
changes	fairly	rapidly,	we	are	often	in	the	position	of	having	just	printed	tens
of	thousands	of	copies	of	some	brochure,	and	then	having	to	throw	them	out
because	they	describe	a	version	of	a	product	we're	replacing.	We	expect	a
high	percentage	of	our	information	dissemination	will	shift	to	electronic
inquiry,	particularly	because	we	serve	computer	users.	We	have	already
eliminated	the	printing	of	millions	of	pages	of	paper	by	sending	quarterly	CD-
ROMs	and	using	on-line	services	to	reach	professional	software	developers,
some	of	Microsoft's	most	sophisticated	customers.
But	you	won't	have	to	depend	only	on	what	we	or	any	other	manufacturer
tells	you.	You'll	be	able	to	examine	product	reviews	in	search	of	less	biased
information.	After	you've	seen	the	advertising,	reviews,	and	multi-media
manuals,	you	might	ask	for	relevant	government	regulatory	data.	You'll	check
to	see	if	the	vendor	has	surveyed	owners.	Then	you	might	dig	deeper	into	one
area	of	particular	interest	to	you—for	instance,	durability.	Or	you	could	seek
the	advice	of	sales	consultants,	human	or	electronic,	who	will	create	and
publish	specialized	reviews	for	all	kinds	of	products,	from	drill	bits	t======================================================== The	Road	Ahead
by	Bill	Gates
with	Nathon	Myhrvold
and	Peter	Rinearson

To	my	parents

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Bringing	a	major	software	project	to	market	can	require	the	combined	talents
of	hundreds	of	people.	Not	quite	that	many	helped	me	with	this	book,	but	I
certainly	couldn't	have	done	it	alone.	If	I've	inadvertently	left	someone	out
below,	I'm	really	sorry,	and	thank	you	too.
For	everything	from	conception	to	marketing,	and	lots	of	stops	along	the	way,
thanks	to	Jonathan	Lazarus	and	his	team:	Kelli	Jerome,	Mary	Engstrom,
Wendy	Langen,	and	Debbie	Walker.	Without	Jonathan's	guidance	and
persistence	this	book	never	would	have	happened.
For	their	helpful	suggestions	throughout	the	project,	special	thanks	to	Tren
Griffin,	Roger	McNamee,	Melissa	Waggener,	and	Ann	Winblad.
For	their	incisive	review	comments,	thanks	to	Stephen	Arnold,	Steve	Ballmer,
Harvey	Berger,	Paul	Carroll,	Mike	Delman,	Kimberly	Ellwanger,	Brian
Fleming,	Bill	Gates,	Sr.,	Melinda	Gates,	Bernie	Gifford,	Bob	Gomulkiewicz,
Meg	Greenfield,	Collins	Hemingway,	Jack	Hitt,	Rita	Jacobs,	Erik	Lacitis,
Mich	Matthews,	Scott	Miller,	Craig	Mundie,	Rick	Rashid,	Jon	Shirley,	Mike
Timpane,	Wendy	Wolf,	Min	Yee,	and	Mark	Zbikowski.
For	help	with	research,	transcription,	and	resource	material,	my	gratitude	to
Kerry	Carnahan,	Ina	Chang,	Peggy	Gunnoe,	Christine	Shannon,	Sean
Sheridan,	and	Amy	Dunn	Stephenson.	I'm	also	grateful	to	Elton	Welke	and
his	able	staff	at	Microsoft	Press,	including	Chris	Banks,	Judith	Bioch,	Jim
Brown,	Sally	Brunsman,	Mary	DeJong,	Jim	Fuchs,	Dail	Magee,	Jr.,	Erin
O'Connor,	JoAnne	Woodcock,	and	Mark	Young.
I'm	also	grateful	to	those	at	my	English-language	publisher,	Viking	Penguin,
for	their	help	and	patience.	In	particular,	I'd	like	to	thank	Peter	Mayer,	Marvin
Brown,	Barbara	Grossman,	Pamela	Dorman,	Cindy	Achar,	Kate	Griggs,
Theodora	Rosenbaum,	Susan	Hans	O'Connor,	and	Michael	Hardart.
Thanks,	too,	for	editorial	help,	go	to	Nancy	Nicholas	and	Nan	Graham.
My	special	gratitude	to	my	collaborators,	Peter	Rinearson	and	Nathan
Myhrvold.

FOREWORD
The	past	twenty	years	have	been	an	incredible	adventure	for	me.	It	started	on
a	day	when,	as	a	college	sophomore,	I	stood	in	Harvard	Square	with	my
friend	Paul	Allen	and	pored	over	the	description	of	a	kit	computer	in	Popular
Electronics	magazine.	As	we	read	excitedly	about	the	first	truly	personal
computer,	Paul	and	I	didn't	know	exactly	how	it	would	be	used,	but	we	were
sure	it	would	change	us	and	the	world	of	computing.	We	were	right.	The
personal-computer	revolution	happened	and	it	has	affected	millions	of	lives.	It
has	led	us	to	places	we	had	barely	imagined.
We	are	all	beginning	another	great	journey.	We	aren't	sure	where	this	one	will
lead	us	either,	but	again	I	am	certain	this	revolution	will	touch	even	more
lives	and	take	us	all	farther.	The	major	changes	coming	will	be	in	the	way
people	communicate	with	each	other.	The	benefits	and	problems	arising	from
this	upcoming	communications	revolution	will	be	much	greater	than	those
brought	about	by	the	PC	revolution.
There	is	never	a	reliable	map	for	unexplored	territory,	but	we	can
learn	important	lessons	from	the	creation	and	evolution	of	the	$120-billion
personal-computer	industry.	The	PC—its	evolving	hardware,	business
applications,	on-line	systems,	Internet	connections,	electronic	mail,	multi-
media	titles,	authoring	tools,	and	games—is	the	foundation	for	the	next
revolution.
During	the	PC	industry's	infancy,	the	mass	media	paid	little	attention	to	what
was	going	on	in	the	brand-new	business.	Those	of	us	who	were	enthralled	by
computers	and	the	possibilities	they	promised	were	unnoticed	outside	our
own	circles	and	definitely	not	considered	trendy.
But	this	next	journey,	to	the	so-called	information	highway,	is	the	topic	of
endless	newspaper	and	magazine	articles,	television	and	radio	broadcasts,
conferences,	and	rampant	speculation.	There	has	been	an	unbelievable
amount	of	interest	in	this	subject	during	the	last	few	years,	both	inside	and
outside	the	computer	industry.	The	interest	is	not	confined	only	to	developed
countries,	and	it	goes	well	beyond	even	the	very	large	numbers	of	personal-
computer	users.
Thousands	of	informed	and	uninformed	people	are	now	speculating	publicly

about	the	information	highway.	The	amount	of	misunderstanding	about	the
technology	and	its	possible	pitfalls	surprises	me.	Some	people	think	the
highway—also	called	the	network—is	simply	today's	Internet	or	the	delivery
of	500	simultaneous	channels	of	television.	Others	hope	or	fear	it	will	create
computers	as	smart	as	human	beings.	Those	developments	will	come,	but	they
are	not	the	highway.
The	revolution	in	communications	is	just	beginning.	It	will	take	place	over
several	decades,	and	will	be	driven	by	new	"applications"—new	tools,	often
meeting	currently	unforeseen	needs.	During	the	next	few	years,	major
decisions	will	have	to	be	made	by	governments,	companies,	and	individuals.
These	decisions	will	have	an	impact	on	the	way	the	highway	will	roll	out	and
how	much	benefit	those	deciding	will	realize.	It	is	crucial	that	a	broad	set	of
people—not	just	technologists	or	those	who	happen	to	be	in	the	computer
industry—participate	in	the	debate	about	how	this	technology	should	be
shaped.	If	that	can	be	done,	the	highway	will	serve	the	purposes	users	want.
Then	it	will	gain	broad	acceptance	and	become	a	reality.
I'm	writing	this	book	now	as	part	of	my	contribution	to	the	debate	and,
although	it's	a	tall	order,	I	hope	it	can	serve	as	a	travel	guide	for	the
forthcoming	journey.	I	do	this	with	some	trepidation.	We've	all	smiled	at
predictions	from	the	past	that	look	silly	today.	You	can	flip	through	old
Popular	Science	magazines	and	read	about	conveniences	to	come,	such	as	the
family	helicopter	and	nuclear	power	"too	cheap	to	meter."	History	is	full	of
now	ironic	examples—the	Oxford	professor	who	in	1878	dismissed	the
electric	light	as	a	gimmick;	the	commissioner	of	U.S.	patents	who	in	1899
asked	that	his	office	be	abolished	because	"everything	that	can	be	invented
has	been	invented."	This	is	meant	to	be	a	serious	book,	although	ten	years
from	now	it	may	not	appear	that	way.	What	I've	said	that	turned	out	to	be
right	will	be	considered	obvious	and	what	was	wrong	will	be	humorous.
I	believe	the	course	of	the	creation	of	the	highway	will	mirror,	in	many	ways,
the	history	of	the	personal-computer	industry.	I'm	including	a	bit	of	my
history—yes,	I	too	talk	about	the	house—and	that	of	computing	in	general,	to
help	explain	some	concepts	and	lessons	from	the	past.	Anyone	expecting	an
autobiography	or	a	treatise	on	what	it's	like	to	have	been	as	lucky	as	I	have
been	will	be	disappointed.	Perhaps	when	I've	retired	I	will	get	around	to
writing	that	book.	This	book	looks	primarily	to	the	future.
Anyone	hoping	for	a	technological	treatise	will	be	disappointed,	too.
Everyone	will	be	touched	by	the	information	highway,	and	everyone	ought	to
be	able	to	understand	its	implications.	That's	why	my	goal	from	the	very

beginning	was	to	write	a	book	that	as	many	people	as	possible	could
understand.
The	process	of	thinking	about	and	writing	The	Road	Ahead	took	longer	than	I
expected.	Indeed,	estimating	the	time	it	would	take	proved	to	be	as	difficult	as
projecting	the	development	schedule	of	a	major	software	project.	Even	with
able	help	from	Peter	Rinearson	and	Nathan	Myhrvold,	this	book	was	a	major
undertaking.	The	only	part	that	was	easy	was	the	cover	photo	by	Annie
Leibovitz,	which	we	finished	well	ahead	of	schedule.	I	enjoy	writing	speeches
and	had	thought	writing	a	book	would	be	like	writing	them.	I	innocently
imagined	writing	a	chapter	would	be	the	equivalent	of	writing	a	speech.	The
fallacy	in	my	thinking	was	similar	to	the	one	software	developers	often	run
into	a	program	ten	times	as	long	is	about	one	hundred	times	more	complicated
to	write.	I	should	have	known	better.	To	complete	the	book,	I	had	to	take	time
off	and	isolate	myself	in	my	summer	cabin	with	my	PC.
And	here	it	is.	I	hope	it	stimulates	understanding,	debate,	and	creative	ideas
about	how	we	can	take	advantage	of	all	that's	sure	to	be	happening	in	the
decade	ahead.

THE
ROAD
AHEAD

1
A	REVOLUTION
BEGINS
I	wrote	my	first	software	program	when	I	was	thirteen	years	old.	It	was	for
playing	tic-tac-toe.	The	computer	I	was	using	was	huge	and	cumbersome	and
slow	and	absolutely	compelling.
Letting	a	bunch	of	teenagers	loose	on	a	computer	was	the	idea	of	the	Mothers'
Club	at	Lakeside,	the	private	school	I	attended.	The	mothers	decided	that	the
proceeds	from	a	rummage	sale	should	be	used	to	install	a	terminal	and	buy
computer	time	for	students.	Letting	students	use	a	computer	in	the	late	1960s
was	a	pretty	amazing	choice	at	the	time	in	Seattle—and	one	I'll	always	be
grateful	for.
This	computer	terminal	didn't	have	a	screen.	To	play,	we	typed	in	our	moves
on	a	typewriter-style	keyboard	and	then	sat	around	until	the	results	came
chug-chugging	out	of	a	loud	printing	device	on	paper.	Then	we'd	rush	over	to
take	a	look	and	see	who'd	won	or	decide	our	next	move.	A	game	of	tic-tac-
toe,	which	would	take	thirty	seconds	with	a	pencil	and	paper,	might	consume
most	of	a	lunch	period.	But	who	cared?	There	was	just	something	neat	about
the	machine.
I	realized	later	part	of	the	appeal	was	that	here	was	an	enormous,	expensive,
grown-up	machine	and	we,	the	kids,	could	control	it.	We	were	too	young	to
drive	or	to	do	any	of	the	other	fun-seeming	adult	activities,	but	we	could	give
this	big	machine	orders	and	it	would	always	obey.	Computers	are	great
because	when	you're	working	with	them	you	get	immediate	results	that	let
you	know	if	your	program	works.	It's	feedback	you	don't	get	from	many	other
things.	That	was	the	beginning	of	my	fascination	with	software.	The	feedback
from	simple	programs	is	particularly	unambiguous.	And	to	this	day	it	still
thrills	me	to	know	that	if	I	can	get	the	program	right	it	will	always	work
perfectly,	every	time,	just	the	way	I	told	it	to.
As	my	friends	and	I	gained	confidence,	we	began	to	mess	around	with	the
computer,	speeding	things======================================================== The	Road	Ahead
by	Bill	Gates
with	Nathon	Myhrvold
and	Peter	Rinearson

To	my	parents

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Bringing	a	major	software	project	to	market	can	require	the	combined	talents
of	hundreds	of	people.	Not	quite	that	many	helped	me	with	this	book,	but	I
certainly	couldn't	have	done	it	alone.	If	I've	inadvertently	left	someone	out
below,	I'm	really	sorry,	and	thank	you	too.
For	everything	from	conception	to	marketing,	and	lots	of	stops	along	the	way,
thanks	to	Jonathan	Lazarus	and	his	team:	Kelli	Jerome,	Mary	Engstrom,
Wendy	Langen,	and	Debbie	Walker.	Without	Jonathan's	guidance	and
persistence	this	book	never	would	have	happened.
For	their	helpful	suggestions	throughout	the	project,	special	thanks	to	Tren
Griffin,	Roger	McNamee,	Melissa	Waggener,	and	Ann	Winblad.
For	their	incisive	review	comments,	thanks	to	Stephen	Arnold,	Steve	Ballmer,
Harvey	Berger,	Paul	Carroll,	Mike	Delman,	Kimberly	Ellwanger,	Brian
Fleming,	Bill	Gates,	Sr.,	Melinda	Gates,	Bernie	Gifford,	Bob	Gomulkiewicz,
Meg	Greenfield,	Collins	Hemingway,	Jack	Hitt,	Rita	Jacobs,	Erik	Lacitis,
Mich	Matthews,	Scott	Miller,	Craig	Mundie,	Rick	Rashid,	Jon	Shirley,	Mike
Timpane,	Wendy	Wolf,	Min	Yee,	and	Mark	Zbikowski.
For	help	with	research,	transcription,	and	resource	material,	my	gratitude	to
Kerry	Carnahan,	Ina	Chang,	Peggy	Gunnoe,	Christine	Shannon,	Sean
Sheridan,	and	Amy	Dunn	Stephenson.	I'm	also	grateful	to	Elton	Welke	and
his	able	staff	at	Microsoft	Press,	including	Chris	Banks,	Judith	Bioch,	Jim
Brown,	Sally	Brunsman,	Mary	DeJong,	Jim	Fuchs,	Dail	Magee,	Jr.,	Erin
O'Connor,	JoAnne	Woodcock,	and	Mark	Young.
I'm	also	grateful	to	those	at	my	English-language	publisher,	Viking	Penguin,
for	their	help	and	patience.	In	particular,	I'd	like	to	thank	Peter	Mayer,	Marvin
Brown,	Barbara	Grossman,	Pamela	Dorman,	Cindy	Achar,	Kate	Griggs,
Theodora	Rosenbaum,	Susan	Hans	O'Connor,	and	Michael	Hardart.
Thanks,	too,	for	editorial	help,	go	to	Nancy	Nicholas	and	Nan	Graham.
My	special	gratitude	to	my	collaborators,	Peter	Rinearson	and	Nathan
Myhrvold.

FOREWORD
The	past	twenty	years	have	been	an	incredible	adventure	for	me.	It	started	on
a	day	when,	as	a	college	sophomore,	I	stood	in	Harvard	Square	with	my
friend	Paul	Allen	and	pored	over	the	description	of	a	kit	computer	in	Popular
Electronics	magazine.	As	we	read	excitedly	about	the	first	truly	personal
computer,	Paul	and	I	didn't	know	exactly	how	it	would	be	used,	but	we	were
sure	it	would	change	us	and	the	world	of	computing.	We	were	right.	The
personal-computer	revolution	happened	and	it	has	affected	millions	of	lives.	It
has	led	us	to	places	we	had	barely	imagined.
We	are	all	beginning	another	great	journey.	We	aren't	sure	where	this	one	will
lead	us	either,	but	again	I	am	certain	this	revolution	will	touch	even	more
lives	and	take	us	all	farther.	The	major	changes	coming	will	be	in	the	way
people	communicate	with	each	other.	The	benefits	and	problems	arising	from
this	upcoming	communications	revolution	will	be	much	greater	than	those
brought	about	by	the	PC	revolution.
There	is	never	a	reliable	map	for	unexplored	territory,	but	we	can
learn	important	lessons	from	the	creation	and	evolution	of	the	$120-billion
personal-computer	industry.	The	PC—its	evolving	hardware,	business
applications,	on-line	systems,	Internet	connections,	electronic	mail,	multi-
media	titles,	authoring	tools,	and	games—is	the	foundation	for	the	next
revolution.
During	the	PC	industry's	infancy,	the	mass	media	paid	little	attention	to	what
was	going	on	in	the	brand-new	business.	Those	of	us	who	were	enthralled	by
computers	and	the	possibilities	they	promised	were	unnoticed	outside	our
own	circles	and	definitely	not	considered	trendy.
But	this	next	journey,	to	the	so-called	information	highway,	is	the	topic	of
endless	newspaper	and	magazine	articles,	television	and	radio	broadcasts,
conferences,	and	rampant	speculation.	There	has	been	an	unbelievable
amount	of	interest	in	this	subject	during	the	last	few	years,	both	inside	and
outside	the	computer	industry.	The	interest	is	not	confined	only	to	developed
countries,	and	it	goes	well	beyond	even	the	very	large	numbers	of	personal-
computer	users.
Thousands	of	informed	and	uninformed	people	are	now	speculating	publicly

about	the	information	highway.	The	amount	of	misunderstanding	about	the
technology	and	its	possible	pitfalls	surprises	me.	Some	people	think	the
highway—also	called	the	network—is	simply	today's	Internet	or	the	delivery
of	500	simultaneous	channels	of	television.	Others	hope	or	fear	it	will	create
computers	as	smart	as	human	beings.	Those	developments	will	come,	but	they
are	not	the	highway.
The	revolution	in	communications	is	just	beginning.	It	will	take	place	over
several	decades,	and	will	be	driven	by	new	"applications"—new	tools,	often
meeting	currently	unforeseen	needs.	During	the	next	few	years,	major
decisions	will	have	to	be	made	by	governments,	companies,	and	individuals.
These	decisions	will	have	an	impact	on	the	way	the	highway	will	roll	out	and
how	much	benefit	those	deciding	will	realize.	It	is	crucial	that	a	broad	set	of
people—not	just	technologists	or	those	who	happen	to	be	in	the	computer
industry—participate	in	the	debate	about	how	this	technology	should	be
shaped.	If	that	can	be	done,	the	highway	will	serve	the	purposes	users	want.
Then	it	will	gain	broad	acceptance	and	become	a	reality.
I'm	writing	this	book	now	as	part	of	my	contribution	to	the	debate	and,
although	it's	a	tall	order,	I	hope	it	can	serve	as	a	travel	guide	for	the
forthcoming	journey.	I	do	this	with	some	trepidation.	We've	all	smiled	at
predictions	from	the	past	that	look	silly	today.	You	can	flip	through	old
Popular	Science	magazines	and	read	about	conveniences	to	come,	such	as	the
family	helicopter	and	nuclear	power	"too	cheap	to	meter."	History	is	full	of
now	ironic	examples—the	Oxford	professor	who	in	1878	dismissed	the
electric	light	as	a	gimmick;	the	commissioner	of	U.S.	patents	who	in	1899
asked	that	his	office	be	abolished	because	"everything	that	can	be	invented
has	been	invented."	This	is	meant	to	be	a	serious	book,	although	ten	years
from	now	it	may	not	appear	that	way.	What	I've	said	that	turned	out	to	be
right	will	be	considered	obvious	and	what	was	wrong	will	be	humorous.
I	believe	the	course	of	the	creation	of	the	highway	will	mirror,	in	many	ways,
the	history	of	the	personal-computer	industry.	I'm	including	a	bit	of	my
history—yes,	I	too	talk	about	the	house—and	that	of	computing	in	general,	to
help	explain	some	concepts	and	lessons	from	the	past.	Anyone	expecting	an
autobiography	or	a	treatise	on	what	it's	like	to	have	been	as	lucky	as	I	have
been	will	be	disappointed.	Perhaps	when	I've	retired	I	will	get	around	to
writing	that	book.	This	book	looks	primarily	to	the	future.
Anyone	hoping	for	a	technological	treatise	will	be	disappointed,	too.
Everyone	will	be	touched	by	the	information	highway,	and	everyone	ought	to
be	able	to	understand	its	implications.	That's	why	my	goal	from	the	very

beginning	was	to	write	a	book	that	as	many	people	as	possible	could
understand.
The	process	of	thinking	about	and	writing	The	Road	Ahead	took	longer	than	I
expected.	Indeed,	estimating	the	time	it	would	take	proved	to	be	as	difficult	as
projecting	the	development	schedule	of	a	major	software	project.	Even	with
able	help	from	Peter	Rinearson	and	Nathan	Myhrvold,	this	book	was	a	major
undertaking.	The	only	part	that	was	easy	was	the	cover	photo	by	Annie
Leibovitz,	which	we	finished	well	ahead	of	schedule.	I	enjoy	writing	speeches
and	had	thought	writing	a	book	would	be	like	writing	them.	I	innocently
imagined	writing	a	chapter	would	be	the	equivalent	of	writing	a	speech.	The
fallacy	in	my	thinking	was	similar	to	the	one	software	developers	often	run
into	a	program	ten	times	as	long	is	about	one	hundred	times	more	complicated
to	write.	I	should	have	known	better.	To	complete	the	book,	I	had	to	take	time
off	and	isolate	myself	in	my	summer	cabin	with	my	PC.
And	here	it	is.	I	hope	it	stimulates	understanding,	debate,	and	creative	ideas
about	how	we	can	take	advantage	of	all	that's	sure	to	be	happening	in	the
decade	ahead.

THE
ROAD
AHEAD

1
A	REVOLUTION
BEGINS
I	wrote	my	first	software	program	when	I	was	thirteen	years	old.	It	was	for
playing	tic-tac-toe.	The	computer	I	was	using	was	huge	and	cumbersome	and
slow	and	absolutely	compelling.
Letting	a	bunch	of	teenagers	loose	on	a	computer	was	the	idea	of	the	Mothers'
Club	at	Lakeside,	the	private	school	I	attended.	The	mothers	decided	that	the
proceeds	from	a	rummage	sale	should	be	used	to	install	a	terminal	and	buy
computer	time	for	students.	Letting	students	use	a	computer	in	the	late	1960s
was	a	pretty	amazing	choice	at	the	time	in	Seattle—and	one	I'll	always	be
grateful	for.
This	computer	terminal	didn't	have	a	screen.	To	play,	we	typed	in	our	moves
on	a	typewriter-style	keyboard	and	then	sat	around	until	the	results	came
chug-chugging	out	of	a	loud	printing	device	on	paper.	Then	we'd	rush	over	to
take	a	look	and	see	who'd	won	or	decide	our	next	move.	A	game	of	tic-tac-
toe,	which	would	take	thirty	seconds	with	a	pencil	and	paper,	might	consume
most	of	a	lunch	period.	But	who	cared?	There	was	just	something	neat	about
the	machine.
I	realized	later	part	of	the	appeal	was	that	here	was	an	enormous,	expensive,
grown-up	machine	and	we,	the	kids,	could	control	it.	We	were	too	young	to
drive	or	to	do	any	of	the	other	fun-seeming	adult	activities,	but	we	could	give
this	big	machine	orders	and	it	would	always	obey.	Computers	are	great
because	when	you're	working	with	them	you	get	immediate	results	that	let
you	know	if	your	program	works.	It's	feedback	you	don't	get	from	many	other
things.	That	was	the	beginning	of	my	fascination	with	software.	The	feedback
from	simple	programs	is	particularly	unambiguous.	And	to	this	day	it	still
thrills	me	to	know	that	if	I	can	get	the	program	right	it	will	always	work
perfectly,	every	time,	just	the	way	I	told	it	to.
As	my	friends	and	I	gained	confidence,	we	began	to	mess	around	with	the
computer,	speeding	things======================================================== t	leaving	your	house.	Flexibility	is	going	to	be	increasingly
important	as	everyone	tries	to	balance	family	life	with	work	life.	You	won't
always	have	to	travel	to	see	friends	and	family	or	to	play	games.	Cultural
attractions	will	be	available	via	the	information	highway,	although	I'm	not
suggesting	that	a	Broadway	or	West	End	musical	will	be	the	same	experience
in	your	living	room	as	it	is	in	a	New	York	or	London	theater.	However,
improvements	in	screen	sizes	and	resolutions	will	enhance	all	video,
including	movies,	in	the	home.	Educational	programming	will	be	extensive.
All	of	this	will	liberate	those	who	would	like	to	abandon	city	living.
The	opening	of	the	interstate	highway	system	had	a	substantial	effect	on
where	in	the	United	States	people	chose	to	settle.	It	made	new	suburbs
accessible	and	contributed	to	the	culture	of	the	automobile.	There	will	be
significant	implications	for	city	planners,	real	estate	developers,	and	school
districts	if	the	opening	of	the	information	highway	also	encourages	people	to
move	away	from	city	centers.	If	large	pools	of	talent	disperse,	companies	will
feel	even	more	pressure	to	be	creative	about	how	to	work	with	consultants
and	employees	not	located	near	their	operations.	This	could	set	off	a	positive-
feedback	cycle,	encouraging	rural	living.
If	the	population	of	a	city	were	reduced	by	even	10	percent,	the	result	would
be	a	major	difference	in	property	values	and	wear	and	tear	on	transportation
and	other	urban	systems.	If	the	average	office	worker	in	any	major	city	stayed
home	one	or	two	days	a	week,	the	decreases	in	gasoline	consumption,	air
pollution,	and	traffic	congestion	would	be	significant.	The	net	effect,
however,	is	hard	to	foresee.	If	those	who	moved	out	of	cities	were	mostly	the
affluent	knowledge	workers,	the	urban	tax	base	would	be	reduced.	This	would
aggravate	the	inner	city's	woes	and	encourage	other	affluent	people	to	leave.
But	at	the	same	time,	the	urban	infrastructure	might	be	less	heavily	loaded.
Rents	would	fall,	creating	opportunities	for	a	better	standard	of	living	for
some	of	those	remaining	in	the	cities.

It	will	take	decades	to	implement	all	the	major	changes,	because	most	people
remain	comfortable	with	whatever	they	learn	early	and	are	reluctant	to	alter
familiar	patterns.	However,	new	generations	will	bring	new	perspectives.	Our
children	will	grow	up	comfortable	with	the	idea	of	working	with	information
tools	across	distances.	These	tools	will	be	as	natural	to	them	as	a	telephone	or
a	ballpoint	pen	is	to	us.	But	technology	isn't	going	to	wait	until	people	are
ready	for	it.	Within	the	next	ten	years	we	will	start	to	see	substantial	shifts	in
how	and	where	we	work,	the	companies	we	work	for,	and	the	places	we
choose	to	live.	My	advice	is	to	try	to	find	out	as	much	as	possible	about	the
technology	that	will	touch	you.	The	more	you	know	about	it,	the	less
disconcerting	it	will	seem.	Technology's	role	is	to	provide	more	flexibility	and
efficiency.	Forward-looking	business	managers	will	have	lots	of	opportunities
to	perform	better	in	the	years	ahead.

8
FRICTION-FREE
CAPITALISM
When	Adam	Smith	described	the	concept	of	markets	in	The	Wealth	of	Nations
in	1776,	he	theorized	that	if	every	buyer	knew	every	seller's	price,	and	every
seller	knew	what	every	buyer	was	willing	to	pay,	everyone	in	the	"market"
would	be	able	to	make	fully	informed	decisions	and	society's	resources	would
be	distributed	efficiently.	To	date	we	haven't	achieved	Smith's	ideal	because
would-be	buyers	and	would-be	sellers	seldom	have	complete	information
about	one	another.
Not	many	consumers	looking	to	buy	a	car	stereo	have	the	time	or	patience	to
canvass	every	dealer	and	thus	are	acting	on	imperfect	and	limited
information.	If	you've	bought	a	product	for	$500	and	see	it	advertised	in	the
paper	for	$300	a	week	or	two	later,	you	feel	foolish	for	overpaying.	But	you
feel	a	lot	worse	if	you	end	up	in	the	wrong	job	because	you	haven't	done
thorough	enough	research.
A	few	markets	are	already	working	fairly	close	to	Smith's	ideal.	Investors
buying	and	selling	currency	and	certain	other	commodities	participate	in
efficient	electronic	markets	that	provide	nearly	complete	instantaneous
information	about	worldwide	supply,	demand,	and	prices.	Everyone	gets
pretty	much	the	same	deal	because	news	about	all	offers,	bids,	and
transactions	speeds	across	wires	to	trading	desks	everywhere.	However,	most
marketplaces	are	very	inefficient.	For	instance,	if	you	are	trying	to	find	a
doctor,	lawyer,	accountant,	or	similar	professional,	or	are	buying	a	house,
information	is	incomplete	and	comparisons	are	difficult	to	make.
The	information	highway	will	extend	the	electronic	marketplace	and	make	it
the	ultimate	go-between,	the	universal	middleman.	Often	the	only	humans
involved	in	a	transaction	will	be	the	actual	buyer	and	seller.	All	the	goods	for
sale	in	the	world	will	be	available	for	you	to	examine,	compare,	and,	often,
customize.	When	you	want	to	buy	something	you'll	be	able	to	tell	your
computer	to	find	it	for	you	at	the	best	price	offered	by	any	acceptable	source
or	ask	your	computer	to	"haggle"	with	the	computers	of	various	sellers.
Information	about	vendors	and	their	products	and	services	will	be	available	to
any	computer	connected	to	the	highway.	Servers	distributed	worldwide	will

accept	bids,	resolve	offers	into	completed	transactions,	control	authentication
and	security,	and	handle	all	other	aspects	of	the	marketplace,	including	the
transfer	of	funds.	This	will	carry	us	into	a	new	world	of	low-friction,	low-
overhead	capitalism,	in	which	market	information	will	be	plentiful	and
transaction	costs	low.	It	will	be	a	shopper's	heaven.
Every	market,	from	a	bazaar	to	the	highway,	facilitates	competitive	pricing
and	allows	goods	to	move	from	seller	to	buyer	efficiently	with	modest
friction.	This	is	thanks	to	the	market	makers—those	whose	job	it	is	to	bring
buyers	and	sellers	together.	As	the	information	highway	assumes	the	role	of
market	maker	in	realm	after	realm,	traditional	middlemen	will	have	to
contribute	real	value	to	a	transaction	to	justify	a	commission.	For	example,
stores	and	services	that	until	now	have	profited	just	because	they	are
"there"—in	a	particular	geographic	location	may	find	they	have	lost	that
advantage.	But	those	who	provide	added	value	will	not	only	survive,	they	will
thrive,	because	the	information	highway	will	let	them	make	their	services
available	to	customers	everywhere.
This	idea	will	scare	a	lot	of	people.	Most	change	feels	a	bit	threatening,	and	I
expect	dramatic	changes	in	the	business	of	retailing	as	commerce	flows	across
the	highway.	But,	as	with	so	many	changes,	I	think	once	we	get	used	to	it
we'll	wonder	how	we	did	without	it.	The	consumer	will	get	not	only
competitive	cost	savings,	but	also	a	much	wider	variety	of	products	and
services	to	choose	from.	Although	there	may	be	fewer	stores,	if	people
continue	to	enjoy	shopping	in	today's	outlets,	as	many	stores	as	their	demand
justifies	will	remain	available.	And	because	the	highway	will	simplify	and
standardize	shopping,	it	will	also	save	time.	If	you	are	buying	a	gift	for	a
loved	one,	you	will	be	able	to	consider	more	choices	and	often	you	will	find
something	more	imaginative.	You	could	use	the	time	saved	from	shopping	to
think	up	a	fun	clue	to	put	on	the	package,	or	create	a	personalized	card.	Or
you	could	spend	the	time	you	save	with	the	recipient.
We	all	recognize	the	value	of	a	knowledgeable	salesperson	when	we	are
shopping	for	insurance,	clothes,	investments,	jewelry,	a	camera,	a	home
appliance,	or	a	home.	We	also	know	the	salesperson's	advice	is	sometimes
biased	because	he	or	she	is	ultimately	hoping	to	make	a	sale	from	a	particular
inventory.
On	the	information	highway	lots	of	product	information	will	be	available
directly	from	manufacturers.	As	they	do	today,	vendors	will	use	a	variety	of
entertaining	and	provocative	techniques	to	attract	us.	Advertising	will	evolve
into	a	hybrid,	combining	today's	television	commercials,	magazine	ads,	and	a

detailed	sales	brochure.	If	an	ad	catches	your	attention,	you'll	be	able	to
request	additional	information	directly	and	very	easily.	Links	will	let	you
navigate	through	whatever	information	the	advertiser	has	made	available,
which	might	be	product	manuals	consisting	of	video,	audio,	and	text.	Vendors
will	make	getting	information	about	their	products	as	simple	as	possible.
At	Microsoft,	we're	looking	forward	to	using	the	highway	to	get	information
out	about	our	products.	Today	we	print	millions	of	pages	of	product	brochures
and	data	sheets,	and	mail	them	out	to	people	who	ask	for	them.	But	we	never
know	how	much	information	to	put	onto	a	data	sheet;	we	don't	want	to
intimidate	casual	inquirers,	and	yet	there	are	people	out	there	who	want	to
know	all	the	detailed	product	specifications.	Also,	since	the	information
changes	fairly	rapidly,	we	are	often	in	the	position	of	having	just	printed	tens
of	thousands	of	copies	of	some	brochure,	and	then	having	to	throw	them	out
because	they	describe	a	version	of	a	product	we're	replacing.	We	expect	a
high	percentage	of	our	information	dissemination	will	shift	to	electronic
inquiry,	particularly	because	we	serve	computer	users.	We	have	already
eliminated	the	printing	of	millions	of	pages	of	paper	by	sending	quarterly	CD-
ROMs	and	using	on-line	services	to	reach	professional	software	developers,
some	of	Microsoft's	most	sophisticated	customers.
But	you	won't	have	to	depend	only	on	what	we	or	any	other	manufacturer
tells	you.	You'll	be	able	to	examine	product	reviews	in	search	of	less	biased
information.	After	you've	seen	the	advertising,	reviews,	and	multi-media
manuals,	you	might	ask	for	relevant	government	regulatory	data.	You'll	check
to	see	if	the	vendor	has	surveyed	owners.	Then	you	might	dig	deeper	into	one
area	of	particular	interest	to	you—for	instance,	durability.	Or	you	could	seek
the	advice	of	sales	consultants,	human	or	electronic,	who	will	create	and
publish	specialized	reviews	for	all	kinds	of	products,	from	drill	bits	t