======================================================== t	of	other	news	accounts	in	which	she	figured
recently.	Point	at	something	on	the	list,	and	you	will	be	able	to	read	it	or
watch	it,	jumping	any	number	of	times	from	topic	to	topic	and	gathering
video,	audio,	and	text	information	from	all	over	the	world.
Spatial	navigation	can	also	be	used	for	touring.	If	you	want	to	see
reproductions	of	the	artwork	in	a	museum	or	gallery,	you'll	be	able	to	"walk"
through	a	visual	representation,	navigating	among	the	works	much	as	if	you
were	physically	there.	For	details	about	a	painting	or	sculpture,	you	would	use
a	hyperlink.	No	crowds,	no	rush,	and	you	could	ask	anything	without
worrying	about	seeming	uninformed.	You	would	bump	into	interesting	things,
just	as	you	do	in	a	real	gallery.	Navigating	through	a	virtual	gallery	won't	be
like	walking	through	a	real	art	gallery,	but	it	will	be	a	rewarding
approximation—just	as	watching	a	ballet	or	basketball	game	on	television	can
be	entertaining	even	though	you're	not	in	the	theater	or	stadium.
If	other	people	are	visiting	the	same	"museum,"	you	will	be	able	to	choose	to
see	them	and	interact	with	them	or	not,	as	you	please.	Your	visits	needn't	be
solitary	experiences.	Some	locations	will	be	used	purely	for	cyberspace

socialization;	in	others	no	one	will	be	visible.	Some	will	force	you	to	appear
to	some	degree	as	you	are;	others	won't.	The	way	you	look	to	other	users	will
depend	on	your	choices	and	the	rules	of	the	particular	location.
If	you	are	using	spatial	navigation,	the	place	you're	moving	around	in	won't
have	to	be	real.	You'll	be	able	to	set	up	imaginary	places	and	return	to	them
whenever	you	want.	In	your	own	museum,	you'll	be	able	to	move	walls,	add
imaginary	galleries,	and	rearrange	the	art.	You	might	want	all	still	lifes	to	be
displayed	together,	even	if	one	is	a	fragment	of	a	Pompeian	fresco	that	hangs
in	a	gallery	of	ancient	Roman	art	and	one	is	a	Cubist	Picasso	from	a
twentieth-century	gallery.	You	will	be	able	to	play	curator	and	gather	images
of	your	favorite	artworks	from	around	the	world	to	"hang"	in	a	gallery	of	your
own.	Suppose	you	want	to	include	a	warmly	remembered	painting	of	a	man
asleep	being	nuzzled	by	a	lion,	but	you	can't	recall	either	the	artist	or	where
you	saw	it.	The	information	highway	won't	make	you	go	looking	for	the
information.	You'll	be	able	to	describe	what	you	want	by	posing	a	query.	The
query	will	start	your	computer	or	other	information	appliance	sifting	through
a	reservoir	of	information	to	deliver	those	pieces	that	match	your	request.
You	will	even	be	able	to	give	friends	tours,	whether	they	are	sitting	next	to
you	or	watching	from	the	other	side	of	the	world.	"Here,	between	the	Raphael
and	the	Modigliani,"	you	might	say,	"is	a	favorite	finger	painting	I	did	when	I
was	three	years	old."
The	last	type	of	navigational	aid,	and	in	many	ways	the	most	useful	of	all,	is
an	agent.	This	is	a	filter	that	has	taken	on	a	personality	and	seems	to	show
initiative.	An	agent's	job	is	to	assist	you.	In	the	Information	Age,	that	means
the	agent	is	there	to	help	you	find	information.
To	understand	the	ways	an	agent	can	help	with	a	variety	of	tasks,	consider
how	it	could	improve	today's	PC	interface.	The	present	state	of	the	art	in	user
interface	is	the	graphical	user	interface,	such	as	Apple's	Macintosh	and
Microsoft	Windows,	which	depicts	information	and	relationships	on	the
screen	instead	of	just	describing	them	in	text.	Graphical	interfaces	also	allow
the	user	to	point	to	and	move	objects	including	pictures—around	on	the
screen.
But	the	graphical	user	interface	isn't	easy	enough	for	future	systems.	We've
put	so	many	options	on	the	screen	that	programs	or	features	that	are	not	used
regularly	have	become	daunting.	The	features	are	great	and	fast	for	people
familiar	with	the	software,	but	for	the	average	user	not	enough	guidance
comes	from	the	machine	for	him	or	her	to	feel	comfortable.	Agents	will

remedy	that.
Agents	will	know	how	to	help	you	partly	because	the	computer	will
remember	your	past	activities.	It	will	be	able	to	find	patterns	of	use	that	will
help	it	work	more	effectively	with	you.	Through	the	magic	of	software,
information	appliances	connected	to	the	highway	will	appear	to	learn	from
your	interactions	and	will	make	suggestions	to	you.	I	call	this	"softer
software."
Software	allows	hardware	to	perform	a	number	of	functions,	but	once	the
program	is	written,	it	stays	the	same.	Softer	software	will	appear	to	get
smarter	as	you	use	it.	It	will	learn	about	your	requirements	in	pretty	much	the
same	way	a	human	assistant	does	and,	like	a	human	assistant,	will	become
more	helpful	as	it	learns	about	you	and	your	work.	The	first	day	a	new
assistant	is	on	the	job,	you	can't	simply	ask	him	to	format	a	document	like
another	memo	you	wrote	a	few	weeks	ago.	You	can't	say,	"Send	a	copy	to
everybody	who	should	know	about	this."	But	over	the	course	of	months	and
years,	the	assistant	becomes	more	valuable	as	he	picks	up	on	what	is	typical
routine	and	how	you	like	things	done.
The	computer	today	is	like	a	first-day	assistant.	It	needs	explicit	first-day
instructions	all	the	time.	And	it	remains	a	first-day	assistant	forever.	It	will
never	make	one	iota	of	adjustment	as	a	response	to	its	experience	with	you.
We're	working	to	perfect	softer	software.	No	one	should	be	stuck	with	an
assistant,	in	this	case	software,	that	doesn't	learn	from	experience.
If	an	agent	that	could	learn	were	available	now,	I	would	want	it	to	take	over
certain	functions	for	me.	For	instance,	it	would	be	very	helpful	if	it	could	scan
every	project	schedule,	note	the	changes,	and	distinguish	the	ones	I	had	to	pay
attention	to	from	the	ones	I	didn't.	It	would	learn	the	criteria	for	what	needed
my	attention:	the	size	of	the	project,	what	other	projects	are	dependent	on	it,
the	cause	and	the	length	of	any	delay.	It	would	learn	when	a	two-week	slip
could	be	ignored,	and	when	such	a	slip	indicates	real	trouble	and	I'd	better
look	into	it	right	away	before	it	gets	worse.	It	will	take	time	to	achieve	this
goal,	partly	because	it's	difficult,	as	with	an	assistant,	to	find	the	right	balance
between	initiative	and	routine.	We	don't	want	to	overdo	it.	If	the	built-in	agent
tries	to	be	too	smart	and	anticipates	and	confidently	performs	unrequested	or
undesired	services,	it	will	be	annoying	to	users	who	are	accustomed	to	having
explicit	control	over	their	computers.
When	you	use	an	agent,	you	will	be	in	a	dialogue	with	a	program	that	behaves
to	some	degree	like	a	person.	It	could	be	that	the	software	mimics	the

behavior	of	a	celebrity	or	a	cartoon	character	as	it	assists	you.	An	agent	that
takes	on	a	personality	provides	a	"social	user	interface."	A	number	of
companies,	including	Microsoft,	are	developing	agents	with	social-user-
interface	capabilities.	Agents	won't	replace	the	graphical-user-interface
software,	but,	rather,	will	supplement	it	by	providing	a	character	of	your
choosing	to	assist	you.	The	character	will	disappear	when	you	get	to	the	parts
of	the	product	you	know	very	well.	But	if	you	hesitate	or	ask	for	help,	the
agent	will	reappear	and	offer	assistance.	You	may	even	come	to	think	of	the
agent	as	a	collaborator,	built	right	into	the	software.	It	will	remember	what
you're	good	at	and	what	you've	done	in	the	past,	and	try	to	anticipate
problems	and	suggest	solutions.	It	will	bring	anything	unusual	to	your
attention.	If	you	work	on	something	for	a	few	minutes	and	then	decide	to
discard	the	revision,	the	agent	might	ask	if	you're	sure	you	want	to	throw	the
work	away.	Some	of	today's	software	already	does	that.	But	if	you	were	to
work	for	two	hours	and	then	give	an	instruction	to	delete	what	you'd	just
done,	the	social	interface	would	recognize	that	as	unusual	and	possibly	a
serious	mistake	on	your	part.	The	agent	would	say,	"You've	worked	on	this	for
two	hours.	Are	you	really,	really	sure	you	want	to	delete	it?"
Some	people,	hearing	about	softer	software	and	social	interface,	find	the	idea
of	a	humanized	computer	creepy.	But	I	believe	even	they	will	come	to	like	it,
once	they	have	tried	it.	We	humans	tend	to	anthropomorphize.	Animated
movies	take	advantage	of	this	tendency.	The	Lion	King	is	not	very	realistic,
nor	does	it	try	to	be.	Anybody	could	distinguish	little	Simba	from	a	live	lion
cub	on	film.	When	a	car	breaks	down	or	a	computer	crashes,	we	are	apt	to
yell	at	it,	or	curse	it,	or	even	ask	why	it	let	us	down.	We	know	better,	of
course,	but	still	tend	to	treat	inanimate	objects	as	if	they	were	alive	and	had
free	will.	Researchers	at	universities	and	software	companies	are	exploring
how	to	make	computer	interfaces	more	effective,	using	this	human	tendency.
In	programs	such	as	Microsoft	Bob,	they	have	demonstrated	that	people	will
treat	mechanical	agents	that	have	personalities	with	a	surprising	degree	of
deference.	It	has	also	been	found	that	users'	reactions	differed	depending	on
whether	the	agent's	voice	was	female	or	male.	Recently	we	worked	on	a
project	that	involved	users	rating	their	experience	with	a	computer.	When	we
had	the	computer	the	users	had	worked	with	ask	for	an	evaluation	of	its
performance,	the	responses	tended	to	be	positive.	But	when	we	had	a	second
computer	ask	the	same	people	to	evaluate	their	encounters	with	the	first
machine,	the	people	were	significantly	more	critical.	Their	reluctance	to
criticize	the	first	computer	"to	its	face"	suggested	that	they	didn't	want	to	hurt
its	feelings,	even	though	they	knew	it	was	only	a	machine.	Social	interfaces
may	not	be	suitable	for	all	users	or	all	situations,	but	I	think	that	we'll	see	lots
of	them	in	the	future	because	they	"humanize"	computers.

We	have	a	fairly	clear	idea	of	what	sorts	of	navigation	we'll	have	on	the
highway.	It's	less	clear	what	we'll	be	navigating	through,	but	we	can	make
some	good	guesses.	Many	applications	available	on	the	highway	will	be
purely	for	fun.	Pleasures	will	be	as	simple	as	playing	bridge	or	a	board	game
with	your	best	friends,	even	though	you	are	all	in	several	different	cities.
Televised	sporting	events	will	offer	you	the	opportunity======================================================== y	use	the	information	highway	to	shop	or	get	their	news,	they	will	miss	out
on	the	serendipity	of	running	into	a	surprisingly	interesting	article	in	the
newspapers	or	finding	an	unexpected	treat	at	the	mall.	Of	course,	these

"surprises"	are	hardly	random.	Newspapers	are	constructed	by	editors	who
know	from	experience	a	lot	about	their	readers'	interests.	Once	in	a	while	The
New	York	Times	publishes	a	front-page	article	about	an	advance	in
mathematics.	The	somewhat	specialized	information	is	presented	with	an
angle	that	makes	it	interesting	to	a	good	number	of	readers,	including	some
who	didn't	think	they	cared	about	math.	In	the	same	way,	buyers	for	stores
think	about	what	is	new	and	might	intrigue	their	type	of	customer.	Stores	fill
their	window	displays	with	products	they	hope	will	catch	those	customers'
eyes	and	lure	them	inside.
There	will	be	plenty	of	opportunities	for	calculated	surprise	on	the
information	highway.	From	time	to	time	your	software	agent	will	try	to	entice
you	to	fill	out	a	questionnaire	indicating	your	tastes.	The	questionnaire	will
incorporate	all	sorts	of	images	in	an	effort	to	draw	subtle	reactions	out	of	you.
Your	agent	will	be	able	to	make	the	process	fun	by	giving	you	feedback	on
how	you	compare	with	the	norm.	That	information	will	be	used	to	create	a
profile	of	your	tastes,	which	will	guide	the	agent.	As	you	use	the	system	for
reading	news	or	shopping,	an	agent	will	also	be	able	to	add	information	to
your	profile.	It	will	keep	track	of	what	you	have	indicated	interest	in,	as	well
as	what	you	"happened	upon"	and	then	pursued.	The	agent	will	use	this
information	to	help	prepare	various	surprises	to	attract	and	hold	your
attention.	Whenever	you	want	something	offbeat	and	appealing,	it	will	be
waiting	for	you.	Needless	to	say,	there	will	be	lots	of	controversy	and
negotiation	about	who	can	get	access	to	your	profile	information.	It	will	be
crucial	that	you	have	such	access.
Why	would	you	want	to	create	such	a	profile?	I	certainly	don't	want	to	reveal
everything	about	myself,	but	it	would	be	helpful	if	an	agent	knew	I	wanted	to
see	any	safety	features	the	new	model	Lexus	might	have	added.	Or,	it	could
alert	me	to	the	publication	of	a	new	book	by	Philip	Roth,	John	Irving,	Ernest
J.	Gaines,	Donald	Knuth,	David	Halberstam,	or	any	of	my	other	longtime
favorite	writers.	I	would	also	like	to	have	it	signal	me	when	a	new	book
appears	on	some	topic	that	interests	me:	economics	and	technology,	learning
theories,	Franklin	Delano	Roosevelt,	and	biotechnology,	to	name	a	few.	I	was
quite	stimulated	by	a	book	called	The	Language	Instinct,	written	by	Steven
Pinker,	a	professor	at	MIT,	and	I'd	like	to	know	about	new	books	or	articles
on	its	ideas.
You'll	also	be	able	to	find	surprises	by	following	links	other	people	have	set
up.	Today,	users	like	to	browse	the	Internet's	World	Wide	Web,	checking	the
display	pages	or	home	pages	that	include	links	to	other	pages	with
information	about	a	company	or	links	to	other	companies'	pages.	These	links

are	indicated	by	hot	spots,	those	pictures	or	buttons	that,	when	clicked	with	a
mouse,	cause	the	requested	page	to	be	called	to	the	screen.
Some	individuals	are	creating	their	own	home	pages.	Personal	home	pages
are	interesting	to	consider.	What	data	or	thoughts	would	you	want	to	publish
to	the	whole	world?	Will	your	page	have	links,	and,	if	so,	to	what?	Who	will
want	to	look	at	your	home	page?
The	electronic	world	will	allow	companies	to	sell	directly	to	customers.
Certainly	every	company	will	provide	a	home	page	to	facilitate	access	to
information	about	its	products.	Any	company	that	has	a	successful
distribution	strategy—in	our	case,	software	retailers—has	to	make	a	choice
about	whether	to	take	advantage	of	this.	Putting	up	the	latest	information,
including	the	names	of	your	distributors,	will	be	very	easy,	but	it's	also
important	to	protect	retailers.	Even	Rolls-Royce,	which	has	an	extremely
exclusive	distribution	system,	will	probably	have	a	home	page	where	you	can
see	its	latest	models	and	find	out	where	to	buy	them.
Retailers	have	done	a	very	good	job	for	Microsoft,	and	we	like	the	fact	that
customers	can	go	into	stores	and	see	most	of	our	products	and	the	salespeople
can	give	them	advice.	Microsoft's	plan	is	to	continue	to	sell	through	retailers,
but	some	of	them	will	be	electronic.
Consider	an	insurance	company	that	has	worked	effectively	through	agents.
Will	the	company	decide	it	wants	customers	to	buy	directly	from	the	central
office?	Will	it	let	its	agents,	who	used	to	sell	locally	only,	sell	electronically
nationwide?	Sales	requirements	will	be	tough	to	define.	Each	company	will
have	to	determine	what	factors	matter	most	to	it.	Competition	will	show
which	approach	works	best.
Home	pages	are	an	electronic	form	of	advertising.	The	information	highway's
software	platform	will	allow	companies	total	control	over	how	information	is
presented.	Advertisers	on	the	information	highway	will	have	to	be	creative	to
capture	viewers	who	will	have	grown	accustomed	to	watching	whatever	they
want,	whenever	they	want,	and	to	being	able	to	skip	through	almost	any
program.
Today,	advertising	subsidizes	nearly	all	of	the	programs	we	watch	on
television	and	articles	we	enjoy	in	magazines.	Advertisers	place	their
messages	in	the	programs	and	publications	that	attract	the	largest	appropriate
audience.	Companies	placing	ads	spend	a	lot	of	money	trying	to	make	sure
their	advertising	strategy	is	working.	On	the	highway,	advertisers	will	also
want	some	sort	of	assurance	that	their	messages	are	reaching	their	targeted

audiences.	Advertising	doesn't	pay	if	everyone	chooses	to	skip	by	the	ad.	The
highway	will	offer	alternatives.	One	might	be	software	that	lets	the	customer
fast-forward	past	everything	except	for	the	advertising,	which	will	play	at
normal	speed.	The	highway	will	possibly	offer	the	viewer	the	option	of	asking
to	see	a	group	of	commercials.	In	France,	when	commercials	were	grouped
and	aired	together,	that	five-minute	block	was	one	of	the	most	popular	time
segments.
Today,	television	viewers	are	targeted	on	a	cluster	basis.	Advertisers	know
that	a	television	newsmagazine	tends	to	attract	one	kind	of	viewer	and
professional	wrestling	another.	Television	commercials	are	purchased	with
audience	size	and	demographics	in	mind.	Ads	aimed	at	kids	subsidize
children's	shows;	those	aimed	at	homemakers	subsidize	daytime	soap	operas;
car	and	beer	ads	subsidize	sports	coverage.	The	broadcast	advertiser	is
dealing	with	aggregated	information	about	the	viewers	of	a	show,	based	on	a
statistical	sample.	Broadcast	advertising	reaches	many	people	who	aren't
interested	in	the	products.
Magazines,	because	they	can	be	and	often	are	narrowly	focused	editorially,
are	able	to	aim	their	advertising	at	somewhat	more	targeted	audiences—car
enthusiasts,	musicians,	women	interested	in	fitness,	even	groups	as	narrow	as
teddy	bear	fans.	People	buying	a	teddy	bear	magazine	want	to	see	the	ads	for
teddy	bears	and	their	accessories.	In	fact,	people	often	buy	special-interest
magazines	as	much	for	the	advertising	as	for	the	articles.	Fashion	magazines,
for	instance,	if	they're	doing	well,	are	more	than	half	advertising.	They	offer
readers	the	experience	of	window-shopping	without	the	walking.	The
advertiser	doesn't	know	the	specific	identities	of	the	magazine's	readers,	but	it
knows	something	about	the	readership	in	general.
The	information	highway	will	be	able	to	sort	consumers	according	to	much
finer	individual	distinctions,	and	to	deliver	each	a	different	stream	of
advertising.	This	will	benefit	all	parties:	the	viewers,	because	ads	will	be
better	tailored	to	their	specific	interests,	and	therefore	more	interesting;
producers	and	on-line	publications,	because	they	will	be	able	to	sell
advertisers	focused	blocks	of	viewers	and	readers.	Advertisers	will	be	able	to
spend	their	ad	dollars	more	efficiently.	Preference	data	can	be	gathered	and
disseminated	without	violating	anyone's	privacy,	because	the	interactive
network	will	be	able	to	use	information	about	consumers	to	route	advertising
without	revealing	which	specific	households	received	it.	A	restaurant	chain
would	know	only	that	a	certain	number	of	middle-income	families	with	small
children	received	their	ad.

A	middle-aged	executive	and	her	husband	might	see	an	advertisement	for
retirement	property	at	the	beginning	of	an	episode	of	Home	Improvement,
while	the	young	couple	next	door	might	see	a	family	vacation	advertisement
at	the	opening	of	the	same	show,	regardless	of	whether	they	watched	the	show
at	the	same	or	a	different	time.	These	closely	targeted	advertisements	will	be
of	more	value	to	the	advertiser,	so	a	viewer	could	subsidize	an	entire	evening
of	television	by	watching	a	small	number	of	them.
Some	advertisers—Coca-Cola,	for	example—want	to	reach	everyone.	But
even	Coca-Cola	might	decide	to	direct	diet	cola	ads	to	households	that	have
expressed	an	interest	in	diet	books.	The	Ford	Motor	Company	might	want
affluent	people	to	be	shown	a	Lincoln	Continental	ad,	young	people	to	see	a
Ford	Escort	ad,	rural	residents	to	watch	an	ad	for	full-size	pickup	trucks,	and
everyone	else	to	be	sent	a	Taurus	ad.	Or	a	company	might	advertise	the	same
product	for	everyone	but	vary	the	actors	by	gender	or	race	or	age.	They	will
certainly	want	to	revise	the	copy	to	target	particular	purchasers.	To	maximize
the	value	of	the	advertising,	complex	algorithms	will	be	required	to	allocate
ad	space	within	a	show	for	each	viewer.	This	will	take	more	effort,	but
because	it	will	make	the	messages	more	effective,	it	will	be	a	good
investment.
Even	corner	groceries	and	the	local	dry	cleaner	will	be	able	to	advertise	in
ways	they	never	could	before.	Because	individually	targeted	ad	streams	will
be	flowing	through	the	network	all	the	time,	video	advertising	is	likely	to
become	cost-effective	even	for	small	advertisers.	A	store's	ads	might	target
only	a	few	blocks	and	address	very	specific	neighborhoods	or	community
interests.
Today,	the	most	effective	way	to	reach	a	narrow	a======================================================== will	connect	to	the	wireless	part	of	the	highway,	a	switch	will
connect	that	to	the	wired	part,	and	then	to	the	computer/server	in	your	home
or	office	and	bring	you	the	information	you	asked	for.
There	will	also	be	local,	less	expensive	kinds	of	wireless	networks	available
inside	businesses	and	most	homes.	These	networks	will	allow	you	to	connect
to	the	highway	or	your	own	computer	system	without	paying	time	charges	so
long	as	you	are	within	a	certain	range.	Local	wireless	networks	will	use
technology	different	from	the	one	used	by	the	wide-area	wireless	networks.
However,	portable	information	devices	will	automatically	select	the	least
expensive	network	they	are	able	to	connect	to,	so	the	user	won't	be	aware	of
the	technological	differences.	The	indoor	wireless	networks	will	allow	wallet
PCs	to	be	used	in	place	of	remote	controls.
Wireless	service	poses	obvious	concerns	about	privacy	and	security,	because
radio	signals	can	easily	be	intercepted.	Even	wired	networks	can	be	tapped.
The	highway	software	will	have	to	encrypt	transmission	to	avoid
eavesdropping.
Governments	have	long	understood	the	importance	of	keeping	information
private,	for	both	economic	and	military	reasons.	The	need	to	make	personal,
commercial,	military,	or	diplomatic	messages	secure	(or	to	break	into	them)
has	attracted	powerful	intellects	through	the	generations.	It	is	very	satisfying
to	break	an	encoded	message.	Charles	Babbage,	who	made	dramatic	advances
in	the	art	of	code	breaking	in	the	mid-1800s,	wrote:	"Deciphering	is,	in	my
opinion,	one	of	the	most	fascinating	of	arts,	and	I	fear	I	have	wasted	upon	it
more	time	than	it	deserves."	I	discovered	its	fascination	as	a	kid	when,	like
kids	everywhere,	a	bunch	of	us	played	with	simple	ciphers.	We	would	encode
messages	by	substituting	one	letter	of	the	alphabet	for	another.	If	a	friend	sent
me	a	cipher	that	began	"ULFW	NZXX"	it	would	be	fairly	easy	to	guess	that
this	represented	"DEAR	BILL,"	and	that	U	stood	for	D,	and	L	for	E,	and	so
forth.	With	those	seven	letters	it	wasn't	hard	to	unravel	the	rest	of	the	cipher
fairly	quickly.

Past	wars	have	been	won	or	lost	because	the	most	powerful	governments	on
earth	didn't	have	the	cryptological	power	any	interested	junior	high	school
student	with	a	personal	computer	can	harness	today.	Soon	any	child	old
enough	to	use	a	computer	will	be	able	to	transmit	encoded	messages	that	no
government	on	earth	will	find	easy	to	decipher.	This	is	one	of	the	profound
implications	of	the	spread	of	fantastic	computing	power.
When	you	send	a	message	across	the	information	highway	it	will	be	"signed"
by	your	computer	or	other	information	appliance	with	a	digital	signature	that
only	you	are	capable	of	applying,	and	it	will	be	encrypted	so	that	only	the
intended	recipient	will	be	able	to	decipher	it.	You'll	send	a	message,	which
could	be	information	of	any	kind,	including	voice,	video,	or	digital	money.
The	recipient	will	be	able	to	be	almost	positive	that	the	message	is	really	from
you,	that	it	was	sent	at	exactly	the	indicated	time,	that	it	has	not	been
tampered	with	in	the	slightest,	and	that	others	cannot	decipher	it.
The	mechanism	that	will	make	this	possible	is	based	on	mathematical
principles,	including	what	are	called	"one-way	functions"	and	"public-key
encryption."	These	are	quite	advanced	concepts,	so	I'm	only	going	to	touch	on
them.	Keep	in	mind	that	regardless	of	how	complicated	the	system	is
technically,	it	will	be	extremely	easy	for	you	to	use.	You'll	just	tell	your
information	appliance	what	you	want	it	to	do	and	it	will	seem	to	happen
effortlessly.
A	one-way	function	is	something	that	is	much	easier	to	do	than	undo.
Breaking	a	pane	of	glass	is	a	one-way	function,	but	not	one	useful	for
encoding.	The	sort	of	one-way	function	required	for	cryptography	is	one	that
is	easy	to	undo	if	you	know	an	extra	piece	of	information	and	very	difficult	to
undo	without	that	information.	There	are	a	number	of	such	one-way	functions
in	mathematics.	One	involves	prime	numbers.	Kids	learn	about	prime
numbers	in	school.	A	prime	number	cannot	be	divided	evenly	by	any	number
except	1	and	itself.	Among	the	first	dozen	numbers,	the	primes	are	2,	3,	5,	7,
and	11.	The	numbers	4,	6,	8,	and	10	are	not	prime	because	2	divides	into	each
of	them	evenly.	The	number	9	is	not	prime	because	3	divides	into	it	evenly.
There	are	an	infinite	number	of	prime	numbers,	and	there	is	no	known	pattern
to	them	except	that	they	are	prime.	When	you	multiply	two	prime	numbers
together,	you	get	a	number	that	can	be	divided	evenly	only	by	those	same	two
primes.	For	example,	only	5	and	7	can	be	divided	evenly	into	35.	Finding	the
primes	is	called	"factoring"	the	number.
It	is	easy	to	multiply	the	prime	numbers	11,927	and	20,903	and	get	the
number	249,310,081,	but	it	is	much	harder	to	recover	from	the	product,

249,310,081,	the	two	prime	numbers	that	are	its	factors.	This	one-way
function,	the	difficulty	of	factoring	numbers,	underlies	an	ingenious	kind	of
cipher:	the	most	sophisticated	encryption	system	in	use	today.	It	takes	a	long
time	for	even	the	largest	computers	to	factor	a	really	large	product	back	into
its	constituent	primes.	A	coding	system	based	on	factoring	uses	two	different
decoding	keys,	one	to	encipher	a	message	and	a	different	but	related	one	to
decipher.	With	only	the	enciphering	key,	it's	easy	to	encode	a	message,	but
deciphering	it	within	any	practical	period	of	time	is	nearly	impossible.
Deciphering	requires	a	separate	key,	available	only	to	the	intended	recipient
of	the	message—or,	rather,	to	the	recipient's	computer.	The	enciphering	key	is
based	on	the	product	of	two	huge	prime	numbers,	whereas	the	deciphering
key	is	based	on	the	primes	themselves.	A	computer	can	generate	a	new	pair	of
unique	keys	in	a	flash,	because	it	is	easy	for	a	computer	to	generate	two	large
prime	numbers	and	multiply	them	together.	The	enciphering	key	thus	created
can	be	made	public	without	appreciable	risk,	because	of	the	difficulty	even
another	computer	would	have	factoring	it	to	obtain	the	deciphering	key.
The	practical	application	of	this	encryption	will	be	at	the	center	of	the
information	highway's	security	system.	The	world	will	become	quite	reliant
on	this	network,	so	it	is	important	that	security	be	handled	competently.	You
can	think	of	the	information	highway	as	a	postal	network	where	everyone	has
a	mailbox	that	is	impervious	to	tampering	and	has	an	unbreakable	lock.	Each
mailbox	has	a	slot	that	lets	anyone	slide	information	in,	but	only	the	owner	of
a	mailbox	has	the	key	to	get	information	out.	(Some	governments	may	insist
that	each	mailbox	have	a	second	door	with	a	separate	key	that	the	government
keeps,	but	we'll	ignore	that	political	consideration	for	now	and	concentrate	on
the	security	that	software	will	provide.)
Each	user's	computer	or	other	information	appliance	will	use	prime	numbers
to	generate	an	enciphering	key,	which	will	be	listed	publicly,	and	a
corresponding	deciphering	key,	which	only	the	user	will	know.	This	is	how	it
will	work	in	practice:	I	have	information	I	want	to	send	you.	My	information
appliance/computer	system	looks	up	your	public	key	and	uses	it	to	encrypt	the
information	before	sending	it.	No	one	can	read	the	message,	even	though	your
key	is	public	knowledge,	because	your	public	key	does	not	contain	the
information	needed	for	decryption.	You	receive	the	message	and	your
computer	decrypts	it	with	a	private	key	that	corresponds	to	your	public	key.
You	want	to	answer.	Your	computer	looks	up	my	public	key	and	uses	it	to
encrypt	your	reply.	No	one	else	can	read	the	message,	even	though	it	was
encrypted	with	a	key	that	is	totally	public.	Only	I	can	read	it	because	only	I
have	the	private	deciphering	key.	This	is	very	practical,	because	no	one	has	to

trade	keys	in	advance.
How	big	do	the	prime	numbers	and	their	products	have	to	be	to	ensure	an
effective	one-way	function?.
The	concept	of	public-key	encryption	was	invented	by	Whitfield	Diffie	and
Martin	Hellman	in	1977.	Another	set	of	computer	scientists,	Ron	Rivest,	Adi
Shamir,	and	Leonard	Adelman,	soon	came	up	with	the	notion	of	using	prime
factorization	as	part	of	what	is	now	known	as	the	RSA	cryptosystem,	after	the
initials	of	their	last	names.	They	projected	that	it	would	take	millions	of	years
to	factor	a	130-digit	number	that	was	the	product	of	two	primes,	regardless	of
how	much	computing	power	was	brought	to	bear.	To	prove	the	point,	they
challenged	the	world	to	find	the	two	factors	in	this	129-digit	number,	known
to	people	in	the	field	as	RSA	129:
114,381,625,757,888,867,669,235,779,976,146,612,010,218,296,
721,242,362,562,561,842,935,706,935,245,733,897,830,597,123,563,958,705,058,989,075,147,599,29.0,026,879,543,541
They	were	sure	that	a	message	they	had	encrypted	using	the	number	as	the
public	key	would	be	totally	secure	forever.	But	they	hadn't	anticipated	either
the	full	effects	of	Moore's	Law,	as	discussed	in	chapter	2,	which	has	made
computers	much	more	powerful,	or	the	success	of	the	personal	computer,
which	has	dramatically	increased	the	number	of	computers	and	computer
users	in	the	world.	In	1993	a	group	of	more	than	600	academics	and	hobbyists
from	around	the	world	began	an	assault	on	the	129-digit	number,	using	the
Internet	to	coordinate	the	work	of	various	computers.	In	less	than	a	year	they
factored	the	number	into	two	primes,	one	64	digits	long	and	the	other	65.	The
primes	are	as	follows:
3,490,529,510,847,650,949,147,849,619,903,898,133,417,764,638,
493,387,843,990,820,577
and
32,769,132,993,266,709,549,961,988,190,834,461,413,177,642,
967,992,942,539,798,288,533
And	the	encoded	message	says:	"The	magic	words	are	squeamish	and
ossifrage."
One	lesson	that	came	out	of	this	challenge	is	that	a	129-digit	public	key	is	not
long	enough	if	the	information	being	encrypted	is	really	important	and
sensitive.	Another	is	that	no	one	should	get	too	cocksure	about	the	security	of

encryption.
Increasing	the	key	just	a	few	digits	makes	it	much	more	difficult	to	crack.
Mathematicians	today	believe	that	a	250-digit-long	pr======================================================== its	sales	have	increased	because
of	its	killer	app.
The	phrase	is	new,	but	the	idea	isn't.	Thomas	Edison	was	as	great	a	business
leader	as	he	was	an	inventor.	When	he	founded	the	Edison	General	Electric
Company	in	1878,	he	understood	that	to	sell	electricity	he	had	to	demonstrate
its	value	to	consumers—to	sell	the	idea	that	light	could	fill	a	house	day	or
night	with	just	the	flick	of	a	switch.	Edison	lit	up	the	public's	imagination
with	the	promise	that	electric	lighting	would	become	so	cheap	that	only	the
rich	would	buy	candles.	He	correctly	foresaw	that	people	would	pay	to	bring

electric	power	into	their	homes	so	that	they	could	enjoy	a	great	application	of
electric	technology—light.
Electricity	found	a	place	in	most	homes	as	a	means	of	providing	lighting,	but
a	number	of	additional	applications	were	added	quite	quickly.	The	Hoover
Company	greatly	improved	the	early	electric	sweeping	machine.	Electric
cooking	was	popularized.	Soon	there	were	electric	heaters,	toasters,
refrigerators,	washing	machines,	irons,	power	tools,	hair	dryers,	and	a	host	of
other	laborsaving	appliances,	and	electricity	became	a	basic	utility.
Killer	applications	help	technological	advances	change	from	curiosities	into
moneymaking	essentials.	Without	killer	apps	an	invention	won't	catch	on—
witness	such	notable	consumer-electronics	flops	as	3-D	movies	and
quadraphonic	sound.
In	chapter	3,	I	mentioned	that	word	processing	brought	microprocessors	into
corporate	offices	in	the	1970s.	At	first	it	was	provided	by	dedicated	machines
such	as	Wang's,	which	were	used	solely	for	creating	documents.	The	market
for	dedicated	word	processors	grew	incredibly	fast,	until	it	included	more
than	fifty	manufacturers,	with	combined	sales	of	more	than	$1	billion
annually.
Within	a	couple	of	years,	personal	computers	appeared.	Their	ability	to	run
different	types	of	applications	was	something	new.	That	was	their	killer	app.
A	PC	user	could	quit	WordStar	(for	years	one	of	the	most	popular	word-
processing	applications)	and	start	up	another	application,	such	as	the
spreadsheet	program	VisiCalc	or	dBASE	for	database	management.
Collectively,	WordStar,	VisiCalc,	and	dBASE	were	attractive	enough	to
motivate	the	purchase	of	a	personal	computer.	They	were	the	killer
applications.
The	first	killer	application	for	the	original	IBM	PC	was	Lotus	1-2-3,	a
spreadsheet	tailored	to	the	strengths	of	that	machine.	The	Apple	Macintosh's
killer	business	applications	were	Aldus	PageMaker	for	designing	documents
to	be	printed,	Microsoft	Word	for	word	processing,	and	Microsoft	Excel	for
spreadsheets.	Early	on,	more	than	a	third	of	the	Macintoshes	used	in	business
and	many	in	the	home	were	purchased	for	what	became	known	as	desktop
publishing.
The	highway	will	come	about	because	of	a	confluence	of	technological
advances	in	both	communications	and	computers.	No	single	advance	would
be	able	to	produce	the	necessary	killer	applications.	But	together	these	will.
The	highway	will	be	indispensable	because	it	will	offer	a	combination	of

information,	education	services,	entertainment,	shopping,	and	person-to-
person	communication.	We	can't	be	sure	yet	exactly	when	all	the	necessary
components	will	be	ready.	Easy-to-use	information	appliances	will	be	critical
components.	In	the	years	immediately	ahead	there	will	be	a	proliferation	of
digital	devices	that	will	take	on	different	forms	and	communicate	at	different
speeds.	I'll	discuss	them	at	length	later.	For	the	moment	it's	enough	to	know
that	a	variety	of	PC-like	appliances	will	allow	each	of	us	to	stay	in	touch	over
the	highway	with	other	people	as	well	as	with	information.	These	will	include
digital	replacements	for	many	of	the	analog	devices,	including	televisions	and
telephones,	that	surround	us	today.	We	can	already	be	sure	that	the	ones	that
are	retained	will	be	those	that	become	indispensable.	Although	we	don't	know
which	forms	will	be	popular,	we	know	they	will	be	general-purpose,
programmable	computers	connected	to	the	information	highway.
Many	homes	are	already	attached	to	two	dedicated	communications
infrastructures:	telephone	lines	and	television	cables.	When	these	specialized
communication	systems	have	been	generalized	into	a	single	digital-
information	utility,	the	information	highway	will	have	arrived.
Your	television	set	will	not	look	like	a	computer	and	won't	have	a	keyboard,
but	the	additional	electronics	inside	or	attached	will	make	it	architecturally	a
computer	like	a	PC.	Television	sets	will	connect	to	the	highway	via	a	set-top
box	similar	to	ones	supplied	today	by	most	cable	TV	companies.	But	these
new	set-top	boxes	will	include	a	very	powerful	general-purpose	computer.
The	box	may	be	located	inside	a	television,	behind	a	television,	on	top	of	a
television,	on	a	basement	wall,	or	even	outside	the	house.	Both	the	PC	and	the
set-top	box	will	connect	to	the	information	highway	and	conduct	a	"dialogue"
with	the	switches	and	servers	of	the	network,	retrieving	information	and
programming	and	relaying	the	subscriber's	choices.
1995:	A	personal-computer	based	interactive	media	server
However	much	like	a	PC	the	set-top	box	becomes,	there	will	continue	to	be	a
critical	difference	between	the	way	a	PC	is	used	and	a	television	is	used:
viewing	distance.	Today,	more	than	a	third	of	U.S.	households	have	personal

computers	(not	counting	game	machines).	Eventually,	almost	every	home	will
have	at	least	one,	connected	directly	to	the	information	highway.	This	is	the
appliance	you'll	use	when	details	count	or	when	you	want	to	type.	It	places	a
high-quality	monitor	a	foot	or	two	from	your	face,	so	your	eyes	focus	easily
on	text	and	other	small	images.	A	big-screen	TV	across	the	room	doesn't	lend
itself	to	the	use	of	a	keyboard,	nor	does	it	afford	privacy,	although	it	is	ideal
for	applications	that	multiple	people	watch	at	the	same	time.
Set-top	boxes	and	PC-interface	equipment	will	be	designed	so	that	even	the
oldest	TV	sets	and	most	current	personal	computers	can	be	used	with	the
highway,	but	there	will	be	new	televisions	and	PCs	with	better	pictures.	The
images	on	today's	television	sets	are	quite	poor	compared	to	pictures	in
magazines	or	on	movie	theater	screens.	While	U.S.	television	signals	can
have	486	lines	of	picture	information,	they	are	not	all	distinguishable	on	most
sets,	and	the	typical	home	VCR	can	record	or	play	back	only	about	280	lines
of	resolution.	As	a	result,	it	is	difficult	to	read	the	credits	at	the	end	of	a	movie
on	a	television	set.	Conventional	television	screens	are	also	a	different	shape
from	most	movie	theater	screens.	Our	TVs	have	an	"aspect	ratio"	(the
relationship	of	picture	width	to	height)	of	4	by	3,	meaning	a	picture	is	a	third
wider	than	it	is	tall.	Feature	films	typically	are	made	with	an	aspect	ratio	of
about	2	to	1—twice	as	wide	as	they	are	tall.
Prototype	of	a	television	set-top	box
High-definition	television	(HDTV)	systems	that	offer	more	than	1,000	lines
of	resolution,	with	a	16-by-9	aspect	ratio	and	better	color,	have	been
demonstrated,	and	they	are	beautiful	to	watch.	But	despite	the	efforts	of	the
government	and	industry	in	Japan,	where	they	were	created,	HDTV	did	not
catch	on,	because	it	required	expensive	new	equipment	for	both	broadcasting
and	receiving.	Advertisers	wouldn't	pay	extra	to	fund	HDTV,	because	it
doesn't	make	ads	measurably	more	effective.	However,	HDTV	might	still
catch	on,	because	the	highway	will	allow	video	to	be	received	at	multiple
resolutions	and	aspect	ratios.	This	idea	of	adjustable	resolution	is	familiar	to

users	of	personal	computers	who	can	choose	the	typical	resolution	of	480
(called	VGA)	or	higher	resolutions	of	600,	768,	1,024,	or	1,200	horizontal
lines	of	resolution,	depending	on	what	their	monitor	and	display	card	can
support.
Both	TV	screens	and	PC	screens	will	continue	to	improve—to	get	smaller	and
improve	in	quality.	Most	will	be	flat-panel	displays.	One	new	form	will	be	the
digital	white	board:	a	large	wall-mounted	screen,	perhaps	an	inch	thick,	that
will	take	the	place	of	today's	blackboards	and	white	boards.	It	will	display
pictures,	movies,	and	other	visual	materials,	as	well	as	text	and	other	fine
details.	People	will	be	able	to	draw	or	make	lists	by	writing	on	it.	The
computer	controlling	the	white	board	will	recognize	a	handwritten	list	and
convert	it	into	one	with	a	readable	typeface.	These	devices	will	show	up	first
in	conference	rooms,	then	private	offices	and	even	homes.
Today's	telephone	will	connect	to	the	same	networks	as	the	PCs	and	TVs.
Many	future	phones	will	have	small,	flat	screens	and	tiny	cameras.	Otherwise,
though,	they'll	look	more	or	less	like	today's	instruments.	Kitchens	will
continue	to	have	wall	phones,	because	they	conserve	counter	space.	You'll	sit
close	to	the	phone	and	look	at	a	screen	showing	the	person	you	are	speaking
to—or	at	a	stock	picture	he	or	she	has	elected	to	transmit	in	lieu	of	live	video.
Technologically,	the	phone	hanging	over	a	dishwasher	tomorrow	will	have	a
lot	in	common	with	the	set-top	box	in	the	living	room	and	the	personal
computer	in	the	den,	but	it	will	assume	the	form	of	a	phone.	Under	the	hood,
all	information	appliances	will	have	pretty	much	the	same	computer
architecture.	Their	exterior	forms	will	be	different	to	match	their	varying
functions.
In	a	mobile	society,	people	need	to	be	able	to	work	efficiently	while	on	the
road.	Two	centuries	ago,	travelers	often	carried	a	"lap	desk,"	a	hinged	writing
board	attached	to	a	thin	mahogany	box	with	a	drawer	for	pens	and	ink.	When
folded,	it	was	reasonably	compact,	and	when	opened,	it	offered	an	ample
writing	surface.	In	fact,	the	Declaration	of	Independence	was	written	on	a	lap
desk	in	Philadelphia,	a	long	way	from	Thomas	Jefferson's	Virginia	home.	The
need	for	a	portable	writing	station	is	met	today	by	the	laptop,	a	folding,	lap-
size	personal	computer.	Many	people—including	me—who	work	from	both
office	and	home,	choose	a	laptop	(or	a	slightly	smaller	computer,	known	as	a
notebook)	as	their	primary	computer.	These	small	computers	can	then	be
connected======================================================== ical	records
before	determining	whether	it	chooses	to	insure	our	mortality.	These
companies	may	also	want	to	know	if	we	indulge	in	any	dangerous	pastimes,
such	as	hang	gliding,	smoking,	or	stock	car	racing.	Should	an	insurer's
computer	be	allowed	to	examine	the	information	highway	for	records	of	our
purchases	to	see	if	there	are	any	that	might	indicate	risky	behavior	on	our
part?	Should	a	prospective	employer's	computer	be	allowed	to	examine	our
communications	or	entertainment	records	to	develop	a	psychological	profile?
How	much	information	should	a	federal,	state,	or	city	agency	be	allowed	to
see?	What	should	a	potential	landlord	be	able	to	learn	about	you?	What
information	should	a	potential	spouse	have	access	to?	We	will	need	to	define
both	the	legal	and	practical	limits	of	privacy.
These	privacy	fears	revolve	around	the	possibility	that	someone	else	is
keeping	track	of	information	about	you.	But	the	highway	will	also	make	it
possible	for	an	individual	to	keep	track	of	his	or	her	own	whereabouts—to
lead	what	we	might	call	"a	documented	life"
Your	wallet	PC	will	be	able	to	keep	audio,	time,	location,	and	eventually	even
video	records	of	everything	that	happens	to	you.	It	will	be	able	to	record
every	word	you	say	and	every	word	said	to	you,	as	well	as	body	temperature,

blood	pressure,	barometric	pressure,	and	a	variety	of	other	data	about	you	and
your	surroundings.	It	will	be	able	to	track	your	interactions	with	the	highway
—all	of	the	commands	you	issue,	the	messages	you	send,	and	the	people	you
call	or	who	call	you.	The	resulting	record	will	be	the	ultimate	diary	and
autobiography,	if	you	want	one.	If	nothing	else,	you	would	know	exactly
when	and	where	you	took	a	photograph	when	you	organize	your	family's
digital	photo	album.
The	technology	required	is	not	difficult.	It	should	soon	be	possible	to
compress	the	human	voice	down	to	a	few	thousand	bits	of	digital	information
per	second,	which	means	that	an	hour	of	conversation	will	be	converted	into
about	1	megabyte	of	digital	data.	Small	tapes	used	for	backing	up	computer
hard	disks	already	store	10	gigabytes	or	more	of	data—enough	to	record
about	10,000	hours	of	compressed	audio.	Tapes	for	new	generations	of	digital
VCRs	will	hold	more	than	100	gigabytes,	which	means	that	a	single	tape
costing	a	few	dollars	could	hold	recordings	of	all	the	conversations	an
individual	has	over	the	course	of	a	decade	or	possibly	even	a	lifetime—
depending	on	how	talkative	he	is.	These	numbers	are	based	only	on	today's
capacities—in	the	future	storage	will	be	much	cheaper.	Audio	is	easy,	but
within	a	couple	of	years	a	full	video	recording	will	be	possible	as	well.
I	find	the	prospect	of	documented	lives	a	little	chilling,	but	some	people	will
warm	to	the	idea.	One	reason	for	documenting	a	life	will	be	defensive.	We
can	think	of	the	wallet	PC	as	an	alibi	machine,	because	encrypted	digital
signatures	will	guarantee	an	unforgeable	alibi	against	false	accusations.	If
someone	ever	accused	you	of	something,	you	could	retort:	"Hey,	buddy,	I
have	a	documented	life.	These	bits	are	stored	away.	I	can	play	back	anything
I've	ever	said.	So	don't	play	games	with	me"	On	the	other	hand,	if	you	were
guilty	of	something,	there	would	be	a	record	of	it.	There	would	also	be	a
record	of	any	tampering.	Richard	Nixon's	taping	of	conversations	in	the
White	House—and	then	the	suspicions	that	he	had	attempted	to	alter	those
tapes—contributed	to	his	undoing.	He	chose	to	have	a	documented	political
life	and	lived	to	regret	it.
The	Rodney	King	case	showed	the	evidentiary	power	of	videotape	and	its
limits.	Before	long	every	police	car,	or	individual	policeman,	may	be
equipped	with	a	digital	video	camera,	with	nonforgeable	time	and	location
stamps.	The	public	may	insist	that	the	police	record	themselves	in	the	course
of	their	work.	And	the	police	could	be	all	for	it,	to	guard	against	claims	of
brutality	or	abuse	on	one	hand	and	as	an	aid	in	gathering	better	evidence	on
the	other.	Some	police	forces	are	already	videorecording	all	arrests.	This	sort
of	record	won't	affect	just	the	police.	Medical	malpractice	insurance	might	be

cheaper,	or	only	available,	for	doctors	who	record	surgical	procedures	or	even
office	visits.	Bus,	taxi,	and	trucking	companies	have	an	obvious	interest	in	the
performance	of	their	drivers.	Some	transportation	companies	have	already
installed	equipment	to	record	mileage	and	average	speed.	I	can	imagine
proposals	that	every	automobile,	including	yours	and	mine,	be	outfitted	not
only	with	a	recorder	but	also	with	a	transmitter	that	identifies	the	car	and	its
location—a	future	license	plate.	After	all,	airplanes	have	"black	box"
recorders	today,	and	once	the	cost	drops,	there	is	no	reason	they	shouldn't	also
be	in	our	cars.	If	a	car	was	reported	stolen,	its	location	would	be	known
immediately.	After	a	hit-and-run	accident	or	a	drive-by	shooting,	a	judge
could	authorize	a	query:	"What	vehicles	were	in	the	following	two-block	area
during	this	thirty-minute	period?"	The	black	box	could	record	your	speed	and
location,	which	would	allow	for	the	perfect	enforcement	of	speeding	laws.	I
would	vote	against	that.
In	a	world	that	is	increasingly	instrumented,	we	could	reach	the	point	where
cameras	record	most	of	what	goes	on	in	public.	Video	cameras	in	public
places	are	already	relatively	commonplace.	They	perch,	often	concealed,
around	banks,	airports,	automatic-teller	machines,	hospitals,	freeways,	stores,
and	hotel	and	office-building	lobbies	and	elevators.
The	prospect	of	so	many	cameras,	always	watching,	might	have	distressed	us
fifty	years	ago,	as	it	did	George	Orwell.	But	today	they	are	unremarkable.
There	are	neighborhoods	in	the	United	States	and	Europe	where	citizens	are
welcoming	these	cameras	above	streets	and	parking	lots.	In	Monaco,	street
crime	has	been	virtually	eliminated	because	hundreds	of	video	cameras	have
been	placed	around	the	tiny	principality.	Monaco,	however,	is	small	enough	in
area,	370	acres	(150	hectares),	that	a	few	hundred	cameras	can	pretty	much
cover	it	all.	Many	parents	would	welcome	cameras	around	schoolyards	to
discourage	or	help	apprehend	drug	dealers,	child	molesters,	and	even
playground	bullies.	Every	city	streetlight	represents	a	substantial	investment
by	a	community	in	public	safety.	In	a	few	years	it	will	require	only	a
relatively	modest	additional	sum	to	add	and	operate	cameras	with	connections
to	the	information	highway.	Within	a	decade,	computers	will	be	able	to	scan
video	records	very	inexpensively	looking	for	a	particular	person	or	activity.	I
can	easily	imagine	proposals	that	virtually	every	pole	supporting	a	streetlight
should	also	have	one	or	more	cameras.	The	images	from	these	cameras	might
be	accessed	only	in	the	event	of	a	crime,	and	even	then	possibly	only	under
court	order.	Some	people	might	argue	that	every	image	from	every	camera
should	be	available	for	viewing	by	everyone	at	any	time.	This	raises	serious
privacy	questions	in	my	mind,	but	advocates	might	argue	that	it's	appropriate
if	the	cameras	are	only	in	public	places.

Almost	everyone	is	willing	to	accept	some	restrictions	in	exchange	for	a	sense
of	security.	From	a	historical	perspective,	people	living	in	Western
democracies	already	enjoy	a	degree	of	privacy	and	personal	freedom
unprecedented	in	all	of	human	history.	If	ubiquitous	cameras	tied	into	the
information	highway	should	prove	to	reduce	serious	crime	dramatically	in	test
communities,	a	real	debate	would	begin	over	whether	people	fear	surveillance
more	or	less	than	they	fear	crime.	It	is	difficult	to	imagine	a	government-
sanctioned	experiment	along	these	lines	in	the	United	States	because	of	the
privacy	issues	it	raises	and	the	likelihood	of	constitutional	challenges.
However,	opinion	can	change.	It	might	take	only	a	few	more	incidents	like
the	bombing	in	Oklahoma	City	within	the	borders	of	the	United	States	for
attitudes	toward	strong	privacy	protection	to	shift.	What	today	seems	like
digital	Big	Brother	might	one	day	become	the	norm	if	the	alternative	is	being
left	to	the	mercy	of	terrorists	and	criminals.	I	am	not	advocating	either
position—technology	will	enable	society	to	make	a	political	decision.
At	the	same	time	technology	is	making	it	easier	to	create	video	records,	it	is
also	making	it	possible	to	keep	all	your	personal	documents	and	messages
totally	private.	Encryption-technology	software,	which	anyone	can	download
from	the	Internet,	can	transform	a	PC	into	a	virtually	unbreakable	code
machine.	As	the	highway	is	deployed,	security	services	will	be	applied	to	all
forms	of	digital	information—phone	calls,	files,	databases,	you	name	it.	As
long	as	you	protect	the	password,	the	information	stored	on	your	computer
can	be	held	under	the	strongest	lock	and	key	that	has	ever	existed.	This	allows
for	the	greatest	degree	of	information	privacy	any	individual	has	ever	had.
Many	in	government	are	opposed	to	this	encryption	capability,	because	it
reduces	their	ability	to	gather	information.	Unfortunately	for	them,	the
technology	can't	be	stopped.	The	National	Security	Agency	is	a	part	of	the
U.S.	government	defense	and	intelligence	community	that	protects	this
country's	secret	communications	and	decrypts	foreign	communications	to
gather	intelligence	data.	The	NSA	does	not	want	software	containing
advanced	encryption	capabilities	to	be	sent	outside	the	United	States.
However,	this	software	is	already	available	throughout	the	world,	and	any
computer	can	run	it.	No	policy	decision	will	be	able	to	restore	the	tapping
capabilities	governments	had	in	the	past.
Today's	legislation	that	prevents	the	export	of	software	with	good	encryption
capability	could	harm	U.S.	software	and	hardware	companies.	The
restrictions	give	foreign	companies	an	advantage	over	U.S.	competitors.
American	companies	almost	unanimously	agree	that	the	current	encryption
export	restrictions	don't	work.

Each	media	advance	has	had	a	substantial	effect	on	how	people	and
governments	interact.	The	printing	press	and,	later,	mass-circulation
newspapers	changed	the	nature	o======================================================== t	of	other	news	accounts	in	which	she	figured
recently.	Point	at	something	on	the	list,	and	you	will	be	able	to	read	it	or
watch	it,	jumping	any	number	of	times	from	topic	to	topic	and	gathering
video,	audio,	and	text	information	from	all	over	the	world.
Spatial	navigation	can	also	be	used	for	touring.	If	you	want	to	see
reproductions	of	the	artwork	in	a	museum	or	gallery,	you'll	be	able	to	"walk"
through	a	visual	representation,	navigating	among	the	works	much	as	if	you
were	physically	there.	For	details	about	a	painting	or	sculpture,	you	would	use
a	hyperlink.	No	crowds,	no	rush,	and	you	could	ask	anything	without
worrying	about	seeming	uninformed.	You	would	bump	into	interesting	things,
just	as	you	do	in	a	real	gallery.	Navigating	through	a	virtual	gallery	won't	be
like	walking	through	a	real	art	gallery,	but	it	will	be	a	rewarding
approximation—just	as	watching	a	ballet	or	basketball	game	on	television	can
be	entertaining	even	though	you're	not	in	the	theater	or	stadium.
If	other	people	are	visiting	the	same	"museum,"	you	will	be	able	to	choose	to
see	them	and	interact	with	them	or	not,	as	you	please.	Your	visits	needn't	be
solitary	experiences.	Some	locations	will	be	used	purely	for	cyberspace

socialization;	in	others	no	one	will	be	visible.	Some	will	force	you	to	appear
to	some	degree	as	you	are;	others	won't.	The	way	you	look	to	other	users	will
depend	on	your	choices	and	the	rules	of	the	particular	location.
If	you	are	using	spatial	navigation,	the	place	you're	moving	around	in	won't
have	to	be	real.	You'll	be	able	to	set	up	imaginary	places	and	return	to	them
whenever	you	want.	In	your	own	museum,	you'll	be	able	to	move	walls,	add
imaginary	galleries,	and	rearrange	the	art.	You	might	want	all	still	lifes	to	be
displayed	together,	even	if	one	is	a	fragment	of	a	Pompeian	fresco	that	hangs
in	a	gallery	of	ancient	Roman	art	and	one	is	a	Cubist	Picasso	from	a
twentieth-century	gallery.	You	will	be	able	to	play	curator	and	gather	images
of	your	favorite	artworks	from	around	the	world	to	"hang"	in	a	gallery	of	your
own.	Suppose	you	want	to	include	a	warmly	remembered	painting	of	a	man
asleep	being	nuzzled	by	a	lion,	but	you	can't	recall	either	the	artist	or	where
you	saw	it.	The	information	highway	won't	make	you	go	looking	for	the
information.	You'll	be	able	to	describe	what	you	want	by	posing	a	query.	The
query	will	start	your	computer	or	other	information	appliance	sifting	through
a	reservoir	of	information	to	deliver	those	pieces	that	match	your	request.
You	will	even	be	able	to	give	friends	tours,	whether	they	are	sitting	next	to
you	or	watching	from	the	other	side	of	the	world.	"Here,	between	the	Raphael
and	the	Modigliani,"	you	might	say,	"is	a	favorite	finger	painting	I	did	when	I
was	three	years	old."
The	last	type	of	navigational	aid,	and	in	many	ways	the	most	useful	of	all,	is
an	agent.	This	is	a	filter	that	has	taken	on	a	personality	and	seems	to	show
initiative.	An	agent's	job	is	to	assist	you.	In	the	Information	Age,	that	means
the	agent	is	there	to	help	you	find	information.
To	understand	the	ways	an	agent	can	help	with	a	variety	of	tasks,	consider
how	it	could	improve	today's	PC	interface.	The	present	state	of	the	art	in	user
interface	is	the	graphical	user	interface,	such	as	Apple's	Macintosh	and
Microsoft	Windows,	which	depicts	information	and	relationships	on	the
screen	instead	of	just	describing	them	in	text.	Graphical	interfaces	also	allow
the	user	to	point	to	and	move	objects	including	pictures—around	on	the
screen.
But	the	graphical	user	interface	isn't	easy	enough	for	future	systems.	We've
put	so	many	options	on	the	screen	that	programs	or	features	that	are	not	used
regularly	have	become	daunting.	The	features	are	great	and	fast	for	people
familiar	with	the	software,	but	for	the	average	user	not	enough	guidance
comes	from	the	machine	for	him	or	her	to	feel	comfortable.	Agents	will

remedy	that.
Agents	will	know	how	to	help	you	partly	because	the	computer	will
remember	your	past	activities.	It	will	be	able	to	find	patterns	of	use	that	will
help	it	work	more	effectively	with	you.	Through	the	magic	of	software,
information	appliances	connected	to	the	highway	will	appear	to	learn	from
your	interactions	and	will	make	suggestions	to	you.	I	call	this	"softer
software."
Software	allows	hardware	to	perform	a	number	of	functions,	but	once	the
program	is	written,	it	stays	the	same.	Softer	software	will	appear	to	get
smarter	as	you	use	it.	It	will	learn	about	your	requirements	in	pretty	much	the
same	way	a	human	assistant	does	and,	like	a	human	assistant,	will	become
more	helpful	as	it	learns	about	you	and	your	work.	The	first	day	a	new
assistant	is	on	the	job,	you	can't	simply	ask	him	to	format	a	document	like
another	memo	you	wrote	a	few	weeks	ago.	You	can't	say,	"Send	a	copy	to
everybody	who	should	know	about	this."	But	over	the	course	of	months	and
years,	the	assistant	becomes	more	valuable	as	he	picks	up	on	what	is	typical
routine	and	how	you	like	things	done.
The	computer	today	is	like	a	first-day	assistant.	It	needs	explicit	first-day
instructions	all	the	time.	And	it	remains	a	first-day	assistant	forever.	It	will
never	make	one	iota	of	adjustment	as	a	response	to	its	experience	with	you.
We're	working	to	perfect	softer	software.	No	one	should	be	stuck	with	an
assistant,	in	this	case	software,	that	doesn't	learn	from	experience.
If	an	agent	that	could	learn	were	available	now,	I	would	want	it	to	take	over
certain	functions	for	me.	For	instance,	it	would	be	very	helpful	if	it	could	scan
every	project	schedule,	note	the	changes,	and	distinguish	the	ones	I	had	to	pay
attention	to	from	the	ones	I	didn't.	It	would	learn	the	criteria	for	what	needed
my	attention:	the	size	of	the	project,	what	other	projects	are	dependent	on	it,
the	cause	and	the	length	of	any	delay.	It	would	learn	when	a	two-week	slip
could	be	ignored,	and	when	such	a	slip	indicates	real	trouble	and	I'd	better
look	into	it	right	away	before	it	gets	worse.	It	will	take	time	to	achieve	this
goal,	partly	because	it's	difficult,	as	with	an	assistant,	to	find	the	right	balance
between	initiative	and	routine.	We	don't	want	to	overdo	it.	If	the	built-in	agent
tries	to	be	too	smart	and	anticipates	and	confidently	performs	unrequested	or
undesired	services,	it	will	be	annoying	to	users	who	are	accustomed	to	having
explicit	control	over	their	computers.
When	you	use	an	agent,	you	will	be	in	a	dialogue	with	a	program	that	behaves
to	some	degree	like	a	person.	It	could	be	that	the	software	mimics	the

behavior	of	a	celebrity	or	a	cartoon	character	as	it	assists	you.	An	agent	that
takes	on	a	personality	provides	a	"social	user	interface."	A	number	of
companies,	including	Microsoft,	are	developing	agents	with	social-user-
interface	capabilities.	Agents	won't	replace	the	graphical-user-interface
software,	but,	rather,	will	supplement	it	by	providing	a	character	of	your
choosing	to	assist	you.	The	character	will	disappear	when	you	get	to	the	parts
of	the	product	you	know	very	well.	But	if	you	hesitate	or	ask	for	help,	the
agent	will	reappear	and	offer	assistance.	You	may	even	come	to	think	of	the
agent	as	a	collaborator,	built	right	into	the	software.	It	will	remember	what
you're	good	at	and	what	you've	done	in	the	past,	and	try	to	anticipate
problems	and	suggest	solutions.	It	will	bring	anything	unusual	to	your
attention.	If	you	work	on	something	for	a	few	minutes	and	then	decide	to
discard	the	revision,	the	agent	might	ask	if	you're	sure	you	want	to	throw	the
work	away.	Some	of	today's	software	already	does	that.	But	if	you	were	to
work	for	two	hours	and	then	give	an	instruction	to	delete	what	you'd	just
done,	the	social	interface	would	recognize	that	as	unusual	and	possibly	a
serious	mistake	on	your	part.	The	agent	would	say,	"You've	worked	on	this	for
two	hours.	Are	you	really,	really	sure	you	want	to	delete	it?"
Some	people,	hearing	about	softer	software	and	social	interface,	find	the	idea
of	a	humanized	computer	creepy.	But	I	believe	even	they	will	come	to	like	it,
once	they	have	tried	it.	We	humans	tend	to	anthropomorphize.	Animated
movies	take	advantage	of	this	tendency.	The	Lion	King	is	not	very	realistic,
nor	does	it	try	to	be.	Anybody	could	distinguish	little	Simba	from	a	live	lion
cub	on	film.	When	a	car	breaks	down	or	a	computer	crashes,	we	are	apt	to
yell	at	it,	or	curse	it,	or	even	ask	why	it	let	us	down.	We	know	better,	of
course,	but	still	tend	to	treat	inanimate	objects	as	if	they	were	alive	and	had
free	will.	Researchers	at	universities	and	software	companies	are	exploring
how	to	make	computer	interfaces	more	effective,	using	this	human	tendency.
In	programs	such	as	Microsoft	Bob,	they	have	demonstrated	that	people	will
treat	mechanical	agents	that	have	personalities	with	a	surprising	degree	of
deference.	It	has	also	been	found	that	users'	reactions	differed	depending	on
whether	the	agent's	voice	was	female	or	male.	Recently	we	worked	on	a
project	that	involved	users	rating	their	experience	with	a	computer.	When	we
had	the	computer	the	users	had	worked	with	ask	for	an	evaluation	of	its
performance,	the	responses	tended	to	be	positive.	But	when	we	had	a	second
computer	ask	the	same	people	to	evaluate	their	encounters	with	the	first
machine,	the	people	were	significantly	more	critical.	Their	reluctance	to
criticize	the	first	computer	"to	its	face"	suggested	that	they	didn't	want	to	hurt
its	feelings,	even	though	they	knew	it	was	only	a	machine.	Social	interfaces
may	not	be	suitable	for	all	users	or	all	situations,	but	I	think	that	we'll	see	lots
of	them	in	the	future	because	they	"humanize"	computers.

We	have	a	fairly	clear	idea	of	what	sorts	of	navigation	we'll	have	on	the
highway.	It's	less	clear	what	we'll	be	navigating	through,	but	we	can	make
some	good	guesses.	Many	applications	available	on	the	highway	will	be
purely	for	fun.	Pleasures	will	be	as	simple	as	playing	bridge	or	a	board	game
with	your	best	friends,	even	though	you	are	all	in	several	different	cities.
Televised	sporting	events	will	offer	you	the	opportunity======================================================== oduct	of	two	primes
would	take	millions	of	years	to	factor	with	any	foreseeable	amount	of	future
computing	power.	But	who	really	knows.	This	uncertainty—and	the	unlikely
but	conceivable	possibility	that	someone	could	come	up	with	an	easy	way	of
factoring	big	numbers—means	that	a	software	platform	for	the	information
highway	will	have	to	be	designed	in	such	a	way	that	its	encryption	scheme
can	be	changed	readily.
One	thing	we	don't	have	to	worry	about	is	running	out	of	prime	numbers,	or
the	prospect	of	two	computers'	accidentally	using	the	same	numbers	as	keys.
There	are	far	more	prime	numbers	of	appropriate	length	than	there	are	atoms
in	the	universe,	so	the	chance	of	an	accidental	duplication	is	vanishingly
small.
Key	encryption	allows	more	than	just	privacy.	It	can	also	assure	the
authenticity	of	a	document	because	a	private	key	can	be	used	to	encode	a
message	that	only	the	public	key	can	decode.	It	works	like	this:	If	I	have
information	I	want	to	sign	before	sending	it	to	you,	my	computer	uses	my
private	key	to	encipher	it.	Now	the	message	can	be	read	only	if	my	public	key
—which	you	and	everyone	else	knows—is	used	to	decipher	it.	This	message
is	verifiably	from	me,	because	no	one	else	has	the	private	key	that	could	have
encrypted	it	in	this	way.
My	computer	takes	this	enciphered	message	and	enciphers	it	again,	this	time
using	your	public	key.	Then	it	sends	this	double-coded	message	to	you	across
the	information	highway.
Your	computer	receives	the	message	and	uses	your	private	key	to	decipher	it.
This	removes	the	second	level	of	encoding	but	leaves	the	level	I	applied	with
my	private	key.	Then	your	computer	uses	my	public	key	to	decipher	the
message	again.	Because	it	really	is	from	me,	the	message	deciphers	correctly
and	you	know	it	is	authentic.	If	even	one	bit	of	information	was	changed,	the
message	would	not	decode	properly	and	the	tampering	or	communications
error	would	be	apparent.	This	extraordinary	security	will	enable	you	to
transact	business	with	strangers	or	even	people	you	distrust,	because	you'll	be
able	to	be	sure	that	digital	money	is	valid	and	signatures	and	documents	are
provably	authentic.
Security	can	be	increased	further	by	having	time	stamps	incorporated	into
encrypted	messages.	If	anyone	tries	to	tinker	with	the	time	that	a	document

supposedly	was	written	or	sent,	the	tinkering	will	be	detectable.	This	will
rehabilitate	the	evidentiary	value	of	photographs	and	videos,	which	has	been
under	assault	because	digital	retouching	has	become	so	easy	to	do.
My	description	of	public-key	encryption	oversimplifies	the	technical	details
of	the	system.	For	one	thing,	because	it	is	relatively	slow,	it	will	not	be	the
only	form	of	encipherment	used	on	the	highway.	But	public-key	encryption
will	be	the	way	that	documents	are	signed,	authenticity	is	established,	and	the
keys	to	other	kinds	of	encryption	are	distributed	securely.
The	major	benefit	of	the	PC	revolution	has	been	the	way	it	has	empowered
people.	The	highway's	low-cost	communications	will	empower	in	an	even
more	fundamental	way.	The	beneficiaries	won't	just	be	technology-oriented
individuals.	As	more	and	more	computers	are	connected	to	high-bandwidth
networks,	and	as	software	platforms	provide	a	foundation	for	great
applications,	everyone	will	have	access	to	most	of	the	world's	information.

6
THE	CONTENT
REVOLUTION
For	more	than	500	years,	the	bulk	of	human	knowledge	and	information	has
been	stored	as	paper	documents.	You've	got	one	in	your	hands	right	now
(unless	you're	reading	this	from	the	CD-ROM	or	a	future	on-line	edition).
Paper	will	be	with	us	indefinitely,	but	its	importance	as	a	means	of	finding,
preserving,	and	distributing	information	is	already	diminishing.
When	you	think	of	a	"document"	you	probably	visualize	pieces	of	paper	with
something	printed	on	them,	but	that	is	a	narrow	definition.	A	document	can	be
any	body	of	information.	A	newspaper	article	is	a	document,	but	the	broadest
definition	also	includes	a	television	show,	a	song,	or	an	interactive	video
game.	Because	all	information	can	be	stored	in	a	digital	form,	documents	will
be	easy	to	find,	store,	and	send	on	the	highway.	Paper	is	harder	to	transmit
and	very	limiting	if	the	contents	are	more	than	text	with	drawings	and	images.
Future	digitally	stored	documents	will	include	pictures,	audio,	programming
instructions	for	interactivity,	and	animation,	or	a	combination	of	these	and
other	elements.
On	the	information	highway,	rich	electronic	documents	will	be	able	to	do
things	no	piece	of	paper	can.	The	highway's	powerful	database	technology
will	allow	them	to	be	indexed	and	retrieved	using	interactive	exploration.	It
will	be	extremely	cheap	and	easy	to	distribute	them.	In	short,	these	new
digital	documents	will	replace	many	printed	paper	ones	because	they	will	be
able	to	help	us	in	new	ways.
But	not	for	quite	some	time.	The	paper-based	book,	magazine,	or	newspaper
still	has	a	lot	of	advantages	over	its	digital	counterpart.	To	read	a	digital
document	you	need	an	information	appliance	such	as	a	personal	computer.	A
book	is	small,	lightweight,	high-resolution,	and	inexpensive	compared	to	the
cost	of	a	computer.	For	at	least	a	decade	it	won't	be	as	convenient	to	read	a
long,	sequential	document	on	a	computer	screen	as	on	paper.	The	first	digital
documents	to	achieve	widespread	use	will	do	so	by	offering	new	functionality
rather	than	simply	duplicating	the	older	medium.	A	television	set	is	also
larger,	more	expensive,	more	cumbersome,	and	lower	resolution	than	a	book
or	magazine,	but	that	hasn't	limited	its	popularity.	Television	brought	video

entertainment	into	our	homes,	and	it	was	so	compelling	that	television	sets
found	their	place	alongside	books	and	magazines.
Ultimately,	incremental	improvements	in	computer	and	screen	technology
will	give	us	a	lightweight,	universal	electronic	book,	or	"e-book,"	which	will
approximate	today's	paper	book.	Inside	a	case	roughly	the	same	size	and
weight	as	today's	hardcover	or	paperback	book,	you'll	have	a	display	that	can
show	high-resolution	text,	pictures,	and	video.	You'll	be	able	to	flip	pages
with	your	finger	or	use	voice	commands	to	search	for	the	passages	you	want.
Any	document	on	the	network	will	be	accessible	from	such	a	device.
The	real	point	of	electronic	documents	is	not	simply	that	we	will	read	them	on
hardware	devices.	Going	from	paper	book	to	e-book	is	just	the	final	stage	of	a
process	already	well	under	way.	The	exciting	aspect	of	digital	documentation
is	the	redefinition	of	the	document	itself.
This	will	cause	dramatic	repercussions.	We	will	have	to	rethink	not	only	what
is	meant	by	the	term	"document,"	but	also	by	"author,"	"publisher,"	"office,"
"classroom,"	and	"textbook."
Today,	if	two	companies	are	negotiating	a	contract,	the	first	draft	is	probably
typed	into	a	computer,	then	printed	on	paper.	Chances	are	it	is	then	faxed	to
the	other	party,	who	edits,	amends,	and	alters	it	by	writing	on	the	paper	or	by
reentering	the	changed	document	into	another	computer,	from	which	it	is
printed.	He	then	faxes	it	back;	the	changes	are	incorporated;	a	new	paper
document	is	printed	and	faxed	back	again;	and	the	editing	process	is	repeated.
During	this	transaction	it	is	hard	to	tell	who	made	which	changes.
Coordinating	all	the	alterations	and	transmittals	introduces	a	lot	of	overhead.
Electronic	documents	can	simplify	this	process	by	allowing	a	version	of	the
contract	to	be	passed	back	and	forth	with	corrections	and	annotations	and
indications	who	made	them	and	when	printed	alongside	the	original	text.
Within	a	few	years	the	digital	document,	complete	with	authenticatable	digital
signatures,	will	be	the	original,	and	paper	printouts	will	be	secondary.	Already
many	businesses	are	advancing	beyond	paper	and	fax	machines	and
exchanging	editable	documents,	computer	to	computer,	through	electronic
mail.	This	book	would	have	been	much	harder	to	write	without	e-mail.
Readers	whose	opinions	I	was	soliciting	were	sent	drafts	electronically,	and	it
was	helpful	to	be	able	to	look	at	the	suggested	revisions	and	see	who	had
made	them	and	when.
By	the	end	of	the	decade	a	significant	percentage	of	documents,	even	in
offices,	won't	even	be	fully	printable	on	paper.	They	will	be	like	a	movie	or	a

song	is	today.	You	will	still	be	able	to	print	a	two-dimensional	view	of	its
content,	but	it	will	be	like	reading	a	musical	score	instead	of	experiencing	an
audio	recording.
Some	documents	are	so	superior	in	digital	form	that	the	paper	version	is
rarely	used.	Boeing	decided	to	design	its	new	777	jetliner	using	a	gigantic
electronic	document	to	hold	all	the	engineering	information.	To	coordinate
collaboration	among	the	design	teams,	manufacturing	groups	and	outside
contractors	during	development	of	previous	airplanes,	Boeing	had	used
blueprints	and	constructed	an	expensive	full-scale	mock-up	of	the	airplane.
The	mock-up	had	been	necessary	to	make	sure	that	parts	of	the	airplane,
designed	by	different	engineers,	actually	fit	together	properly.	During
development	of	the	777,	Boeing	did	away	with	blueprints	and	the	mock-up
and	from	the	start	used	an	electronic	document	that	contained	digital	3-D
models	of	all	the	parts	and	how	they	fit	together.	Engineers	at	computer
terminals	were	able	to	look	at	the	design	and	see	different	views	of	the
content.	They	could	track	the	progress	in	any	area,	search	for	interesting	test
results,	annotate	with	cost	information,	and	change	any	part	of	the	design	in
ways	that	would	be	impossible	on	paper.	Each	person,	working	with	the	same
data,	was	able	to	look	for	what	specifically	concerned	him.	Every	change
could	be	shared,	and	everyone	could	see	who	made	any	change,	when	it	was
made,	and	why.	Boeing	was	able	to	save	hundreds	of	thousands	of	pieces	of
paper	and	many	person-years	of	drafting	and	copying	by	using	digital
documents.
Digital	documents	can	also	be	faster	to	work	with	than	paper.	You	can
transmit	information	instantly	and	retrieve	it	almost	as	quickly.	Those	using
digital	documents	are	already	discovering	how	much	sim======================================================== their	vacations.	However,	to	edit
video	you	have	to	be	a	professional	with	expensive	equipment.	This	will
change.	Advances	in	PC	word	processors	and	desktop-publishing	software
have	already	made	professional-quality	tools	for	creating	simple	paper
documents	available	relatively	inexpensively	to	millions.	Desktop-publishing
software	has	progressed	to	the	point	that	many	magazines	and	newspapers	are
produced	with	the	same	sort	of	PC	and	software	package	you	can	buy	at	any
local	computer	store	and	use	to	design	an	invitation	to	your	daughter's
birthday	party.	PC	software	for	editing	film	and	creating	special	effects	will
become	as	commonplace	as	desktop-publishing	software.	Then	the	difference
between	professionals	and	amateurs	will	be	one	of	talent	rather	than	access	to
tools.
Georges	Méliès	created	one	of	the	first	special	effects	in	movies	when,	in
1899,	he	turned	a	woman	into	feathers	on	the	screen	in	The	Conjurer,	and
moviemakers	have	been	playing	cinematic	tricks	ever	since.	Recently,
special-effects	technology	has	improved	dramatically	through	the	use	of	the
digital	manipulation	of	images.	First	a	photograph	is	converted	into	binary
information,	which,	as	we	have	seen,	software	applications	are	able	to
manipulate	easily.	Then	the	digital	information	is	altered	and	finally	returned
to	photographic	form,	as	a	frame	in	a	movie.	The	alterations	are	nearly
undetectable	if	well	done,	and	the	results	can	be	spectacular.	Computer
software	gave	life	to	the	dinosaurs	in	Jurassic	Park,	the	thundering
wildebeest	herd	in	The	Lion	King,	and	the	crazy	cartoon	effects	in	The	Mask.
As	Moore's	Law	increases	hardware	speed,	and	software	becomes
increasingly	sophisticated,	there	is	virtually	no	limit	to	what	can	be	achieved.
Hollywood	will	continue	to	push	the	state	of	the	art	and	create	amazing	new
effects.
It	will	be	possible	for	a	software	program	to	fabricate	scenes	that	will	look	as
real	as	anything	created	with	a	camera.	Audiences	watching	Forrest	Gump
could	recognize	that	the	scenes	with	Presidents	Kennedy,	Johnson,	and	Nixon
were	fabricated.	Everyone	knew	Tom	Hanks	hadn't	really	been	there.	It	was	a
lot	harder	to	spot	the	digital	processing	that	removed	Gary	Sinise's	two	good
legs	for	his	role	as	an	amputee.	Synthesized	figures	and	digital	editing	are
being	used	to	make	movie	stunts	safer.	You'll	soon	be	able	to	use	a	standard
PC	to	make	the	software	to	create	the	effects.	The	ease	with	which	PCs	and
photo-editing	software	already	manipulate	complex	images	will	make	it	easy
to	counterfeit	photographic	documents	or	alter	photographs	undetectably.	And

as	synthesis	gets	cheaper	it	will	be	used	more	and	more;	if	we	can	bring
Tyrannosaurus	rex	back	to	life,	can	Elvis	be	far	behind?
Even	those	who	don't	aspire	to	becoming	the	next	C.	B.	DeMille	or	Lina
Wertmuller	will	routinely	include	multi-media	in	the	documents	they
construct	every	day.	Someone	might	start	by	typing,	handwriting,	or	speaking
an	electronic	mail	message:	"Lunch	in	the	park	may	not	be	such	a	great	idea.
Look	at	the	forecast."	To	make	the	message	more	informative,	he	could	then
point	his	cursor	at	an	icon	representing	a	local	television	weather	forecast	and
drag	it	across	his	screen	to	move	the	icon	inside	his	document.	When	his
friends	get	the	message,	they	will	be	able	to	look	at	the	forecast	right	on	their
screens—a	professional-looking	communication.
Kids	in	school	will	be	able	to	produce	their	own	albums	or	movies	and	make
them	available	to	friends	and	family	on	the	information	highway.	When	I
have	time,	I	enjoy	making	special	greeting	cards	and	invitations.	If	I'm
making	a	birthday	card	for	my	sister,	for	instance,	to	personalize	it	I
sometimes	add	pictures	reminding	her	of	fun	events	of	the	past	year.	In	the
future	I'll	be	able	to	include	movie	clips	that	I've
customized	with	only	a	few	minutes'	work.	It	will	be	simple	to	create	an
interactive	"album"	of	photographs,	videos,	or	conversations.	Businesses	of
all	types	and	sizes	will	communicate	using	multi-media.	Lovers	will	use
special	effects	to	blend	some	text,	a	video	clip	from	an	old	movie,	and	a
favorite	song	to	create	a	personal	valentine.
As	the	fidelity	of	visual	and	audio	elements	improves,	reality	in	all	its	aspects
will	be	more	closely	simulated.	This	"virtual	reality,"	or	VR,	will	allow	us	to
"go"	places	and	"do"	things	we	never	would	be	able	to	otherwise.
Vehicle	simulators	for	airplanes,	race	cars,	and	spacecraft	already	provide	a
taste	of	virtual	reality.	Some	of	the	most	popular	rides	at	Disneyland	are
simulated	voyages.	Software	vehicle	simulators,	such	as	Microsoft	Flight
Simulator,	are	among	the	most	popular	games	ever	created	for	PCs,	but	they
force	you	to	use	your	imagination.	Multimillion-dollar	flight	simulators	at
companies	such	as	Boeing	give	you	a	much	better	ride.	Viewed	from	the
outside,	they're	boxy,	stilt-legged	mechanical	creatures	that	would	look	at
home	in	a	Star	Wars	movie.	Inside,	the	cockpit	video	displays	offer
sophisticated	data.	Flight	and	maintenance	instruments	are	linked	to	a
computer	that	simulates	flight	characteristics—including	emergencies—with
an	accuracy	pilots	say	is	remarkable.
A	couple	of	friends	and	I	"flew"	a	747	simulator	a	couple	years	ago.	You	sit

down	to	a	control	panel	in	a	cockpit	identical	to	one	in	a	real	plane.	Outside
the	windows,	you	see	computer-generated	color	video	images.	When	you
"take	off"	in	the	simulator,	you	see	an	identifiable	airport	and	its
surroundings.	The	simulation	of	Boeing	Field,	for	instance,	might	show	a	fuel
truck	on	the	runway	and	Mount	Rainier	in	the	distance.	You	hear	the	rush	of
air	around	wings	that	aren't	there,	the	clunk	of	nonexistent	landing	gear
retracting.	Six	hydraulic	systems	under	the	simulator	tilt	and	shake	the
cockpit.	It's	pretty	convincing.
The	main	purpose	of	these	simulators	is	to	give	pilots	a	chance	to	gain
experience	in	handling	emergencies.	When	I	was	using	the	simulator	my
friends	decided	to	give	me	a	surprise	by	having	a	small	plane	fly	by.	While	I
sat	in	the	pilot's	seat	the	all-too-real-looking	image	of	a	Cessna	flashed	into
view.	I	wasn't	prepared	for	the	"emergency"	and	I	crashed	into	it.
A	number	of	companies,	from	entertainment	giants	to	small	start-ups,	are
planning	to	put	smaller-scale	simulator	rides	into	shopping	malls	and	urban
sites.	As	the	price	of	technology	comes	down,	entertainment	simulators	may
become	as	common	as	movie	theaters	are	today.	And	it	won't	be	too	many
years	until	you'll	be	able	to	have	a	high-quality	simulation	in	your	own	living
room.
Want	to	explore	the	surface	of	Mars?	It's	a	lot	safer	to	do	it	via	VR.	How
about	visiting	somewhere	humans	never	will	be	able	to	go?	A	cardiologist
might	be	able	to	swim	through	the	heart	of	a	patient	to	examine	it	in	a	way
she	never	would	have	been	able	to	with	conventional	instrumentation.	A
surgeon	could	practice	a	tricky	operation	many	times,	including	simulated
catastrophes,	before	she	ever	touches	a	scalpel	to	a	real	patient.	Or	you	could
use	VR	to	wander	through	a	fantasy	of	your	own	design.
In	order	to	work,	VR	needs	two	different	sets	of	technology—software	that
creates	the	scene	and	makes	it	respond	to	new	information,	and	devices	that
allow	the	computer	to	transmit	the	information	to	our	senses.	The	software
will	have	to	figure	out	how	to	describe	the	look,	sound,	and	feel	of	the
artificial	world	down	to	the	smallest	detail.	That	might	sound	overwhelmingly
difficult,	but	actually	it's	the	easy	part.	We	could	write	the	software	for	VR
today,	but	we	need	a	lot	more	computer	power	to	make	it	truly	believable.	At
the	pace	technology	is	moving,	though,	that	power	will	be	available	soon.	The
really	hard	part	about	VR	is	getting	the	information	to	convince	the	user's
senses.
Hearing	is	the	easiest	sense	to	fool;	all	you	have	to	do	is	wear	headphones.	In

real	life,	your	two	ears	hear	slightly	different	things	because	of	their	location
on	your	head	and	the	directions	they	point.	Subconsciously	you	use	those
differences	to	tell	where	a	sound	is	coming	from.	Software	can	re-create	this
by	calculating	for	a	given	sound	what	each	ear	would	be	hearing.	This	works
amazingly	well.	You	can	put	on	a	set	of	headphones	connected	to	a	computer
and	hear	a	whisper	in	your	left	ear	or	footsteps	walking	up	behind	you.
Your	eyes	are	harder	to	fool	than	your	ears,	but	vision	is	still	pretty
straightforward	to	simulate.	VR	equipment	almost	always	includes	a	special
set	of	goggles	with	lenses	that	focus	each	eye	on	its	own	small	computer
display.	A	head-tracking	sensor	allows	the	computer	to	figure	out	which
direction	your	head	is	facing,	so	the	computer	can	synthesize	what	you	would
be	seeing.	Turn	your	head	to	the	right,	and	the	scene	portrayed	by	the	goggles
is	farther	to	the	right.	Lift	your	face,	and	the	goggles	show	the	ceiling	or	sky.
Today's	VR	goggles	are	too	heavy,	too	expensive,	and	don't	have	enough
resolution.	The	computer	systems	that	drive	them	are	still	a	bit	too	slow.	If
you	turn	your	head	quickly,	the	scene	lags	somewhat	behind.	This	is	very
disorienting	and	after	a	short	period	of	time	causes	most	people	to	get
headaches.	The	good	news	is	that	size,	speed,	weight,	and	cost	are	precisely
the	kinds	of	things	that	technology	following	Moore's	Law	will	correct	soon.
Other	senses	are	much	more	difficult	to	fool,	because	there	are	no	good	ways
of	connecting	a	computer	to	your	nose	or	tongue,	or	to	the	surface	of	your
skin.	In	the	case	of	touch,	the	prevailing	idea	is	that	a	full	bodysuit	could	be
made	lined	with	tiny	sensor	and	force	feedback	devices	that	would	be	in
contact	with	the	whole	surface	of	your	skin.	I	don't	think	bodysuits	will	be
common,	but	they'll	be	feasible.
There	are	between	72	and	120	tiny	points	of	color	(called	pixels)	per	inch	on	a
typical	computer	monitor,	for	a	total	of	between	300,000	and	1	million.	A	full
bodysuit	would	presumably	be	lined	with	little	touch	sensor	points—each	of
which	could	poke	one	specific	tiny	spot.	Let's	call	these	little	touch	elements
"tactels."
If	the	suit	had	enough	of	these	tactel======================================================== the	costs
of	switching	equipment	and	fiber	are	coming	down	every	year.
This	means	the	companies	are	faced	with	the	sort	of	decision	that	has
confronted	almost	everyone	who	has	contemplated	buying	a	PC.	Do	you	wait
for	prices	to	come	down	and	performance	to	improve,	or	do	you	bite	the
bullet	and	start	getting	use	out	of	the	equipment	sooner?	The	dilemma	will	be
acute	for	some	network	companies.	They	will	have	to	move	very	fast	and
upgrade	constantly.	A	company	will	get	bargain	prices	if	it	waits	long	enough
before	making	investments	in	cabling	and	switches,	but	it	may	never	recover
the	market	share	it	will	have	lost	to	less	cautious	competitors.

Phone	companies,	despite	their	enviable	revenues,	could	be	strapped	for	the
cash	required	to	fund	the	expensive	upgrade	of	the	new	network,	because
regulatory	rate	commissions	may	not	permit	them	to	raise	telephone	rates	or
even	to	use	profits	from	current	service	to	cross-subsidize	this	new	kind	of
business.	Shareholders,	accustomed	to	attractive	dividends	from	the	RBOCs,
might	balk	at	a	diversion	of	profits	to	build	the	information	highway.	For
more	than	a	hundred	years	telephony	has	been	quietly	making	its	profits	as	a
regulated	monopoly.	Suddenly	the	RBOCs	must	become	growth	companies,
which	is	about	as	radical	as	turning	a	tractor	into	a	sports	car.	It	can	be	done
(just	ask	the	folks	at	the	Lamborghini	Company,	which	makes	both),	but	it's
hard	to	do.
The	opportunity	to	provide	ISDN	to	PC	users	will	provide	new	revenues	to
phone	companies	that	want	to	bring	the	price	levels	down	to	establish	a	mass
market.	I	expect	ISDN	adoption	to	get	off	to	a	faster	start	than	PC	cable
modes.	Phone	companies	are	doing	some	clever	work	to	find	out	how	to	use
their	twisted-pair	connections	for	at	least	the	last	few	hundred	feet	to	the
home	and	still	deliver	broadband	data	rates.	Phone	and	cable	companies	can
both	succeed	as	demand	for	new	services	increases	their	revenue
opportunities.
The	ambitions	of	cable	and	phone	companies	go	well	beyond	simply
providing	a	pipe	for	bits.	Imagine	you	are	running	a	bit-delivery	company.
Once	you	own	a	network	in	a	given	area	and	have	hooked	up	most	of	the
homes,	how	can	you	make	more	money?	By	getting	customers	to	consume
more	bits,	but	there	are	only	twenty-four	hours	in	a	day	for	people	to	watch
TV	or	sit	at	their	PCs.	If	you	can't	ship	more	bits,	an	alternative	is	to	have	a
financial	interest	in	the	bits	being	shipped.	Many	see	the	highway	as	a	sort	of
economic	food	chain,	with	the	delivery	and	distribution	of	bits	at	the	bottom,
and	various	types	of	applications,	services,	and	content	layered	on	top.
Companies	in	the	bit-distribution	business	are	attracted	to	the	idea	of	moving
themselves	up	the	food	chain—profiting	from	owning	the	bits	rather	than
from	just	delivering	them.	This	is	why	cable	companies,	regional	telephone
companies,	and	consumer-electronics	manufacturers	are	rushing	to	work	with
Hollywood	studios,	television	and	cable	broadcasters,	and	other	content
businesses.
Some	companies	are	investing	because	they	are	afraid	not	to.	For	a	long	time
distribution	has	been	pretty	lucrative,	largely	because	of	the	monopolies
granted	by	the	government.	As	these	monopolies	disappear	and	competition
begins,	bit	distribution	might	become	less	profitable.	Companies	that	hope	to
participate	in	the	creation	of	the	applications	and	services	and	enter	the

content	business	through	investment	and/or	influence	want	to	move	now,
while	the	opportunities	are	open.	Some	of	these	companies	may	choose	to
give	away	or	subsidize	the	set-top	box	that	connects	up	the	television	set.	Part
of	their	strategy	could	be	to	offer,	for	a	single	monthly	fee,	the	connectivity	to
the	highway,	the	set-top	box,	and	a	package	of	programming,	applications,
and	services	to	go	with	it.	Cable	TV	systems	work	this	way,	and	telephone
companies	in	the	United	States	used	to,	before	deregulation.
Network	operators	that	include	the	set-top	box	as	part	of	the	standard	service
fee	will	attract	customers	who	might	hesitate	to	spend	several	hundred	dollars
to	buy	one.	As	I	explained,	in	the	early	years	there	is	a	real	danger	that	the
box	will	quickly	become	obsolete,	so	why	buy	one?	Although	supplying	the
boxes	will	increase	the	up-front	capital	required	by	the	network	operator,	the
outlay	will	be	worth	it	if	it	helps	create	a	critical	mass	of	users.	But
government	regulators	worry	that	allowing	the	network	operators	to	have
control	of	the	boxes	will	put	them	in	a	position	to	capitalize	on	their
privileged	position.	A	network	operator	that	owns	the	boxes	could	also	seek	to
exert	control	over	what	software,	applications,	and	services	run	on	those
boxes.	There	could	be	limited	choices	for	studios	that	wanted	to	sell	their
movies.	Whether	or	not	to	allow	various	services	equal	access	to	the	wires
and	boxes	is	one	of	the	tough	issues	deregulation	is	going	to	have	to	address.
One	argument	for	equal	access	is	that	if	multiple	services	can	use	the	same
wire,	the	government	can	avoid	setting	standards	for	those	services	and	their
interoperability.
Retailers	would	like	the	opportunity	to	sell	you	the	set-top	boxes.	After	all,
they	already	sell	the	TV	sets	and	PCs,	so	why	not	the	set-top	box	too?
Consumer-electronics	companies	want	to	compete	to	manufacture
the	boxes.	They	want	to	be	able	to	offer	many	models—fancy,	expensive	ones
for	gadget	buffs	and	simple	ones	for	other	folks.	If	the	network	company
supplies	the	boxes,	there	is	no	profit	for	the	retailers.	The	cellular	telephone
industry	solved	this	competition	with	a	partial	subsidy:	You	acquire	your
cellular	phone	from	any	retailer,	but	the	price	is	partially	underwritten	by	the
cellular	company	that	you	commit	to	buy	service	from.
Cable	and	phone	industries	will	be	the	primary,	but	not	the	only,	competitors
to	provide	the	network.	Railroad	companies	in	Japan,	for	example,	recognize
that	the	rights-of-way	they	have	for	their	tracks	would	be	ideal	for	long	fiber-
optic	cable	runs.	Electric,	gas,	and	water	utilities	in	many	countries	point	out
that	they,	too,	run	lines	into	homes	and	businesses.	Some	of	them	have	argued
that	the	energy	savings	from	computerized	management	of	home	heating

alone	might	defray	much	of	the	cost	of	stringing	fiber-optic	cables	because
energy	demand	would	be	lowered,	which	reduces	the	need	for	expensive	new
generating	plants.	In	France	most	of	the	cable	TV	connections	are	owned	by
two	big	water	companies.	But	outside	France,	at	least,	conventional	utility
companies	seem	less	obvious	candidates	for	building	highway	connections.
You	may	wonder	why	I	haven't	mentioned	direct-broadcast	satellites	and
other	technologies	as	mainstream	competitors	of	the	telephone	and	cable
companies.	As	I	said	earlier,	current	satellite	technology	is	a	good	interim
step.	It	delivers	a	great	broadcast	video	signal,	but	there	would	have	to	be	a
major	technological	breakthrough	before	it	could	provide	a	unique	video
bandwidth	feed	to	every	television	set	and	PC.	For	the	United	States	market	it
would	have	to	go	from	today's	300-channel-per-satellite	system	to	a	300,000-
channel	system,	even	assuming	fewer	than	1	percent	of	the	displays	needed	a
unique	feed	simultaneously.
Because	these	satellites	also	have	a	problem	delivering	data	from	the	home
back	into	the	network	(the	back	channel)	to	provide	true	interactivity,
applications	such	as	videoconferencing	aren't	possible.	A	partial	solution	is	to
use	the	phone	for	the	back	channel.	Direct-broadcast	satellites	such	as	the
Hughes	Electronics'	DIRECTV	system	use	your	regular	home	telephone	line
to	submit	back	to	their	billing	center	a	record	of	any	pay-per-view	programs
you	have	chosen.	With	a	special	add-in	circuit,	direct-broadcast	satellites	can
send	data	to	PCs	as	well	as	to	television	sets.	Data	broadcasting	is	a	valuable
interim	conduit	for	some	applications.
Teledesic,	a	company	that	my	friend,	cellular	telephone	pioneer	Craig
McCaw,	and	I	have	invested	in,	is	working	on	overcoming	the	limits	of
satellite	technology	by	using	a	large	number	of	low-orbit	satellites.	The	scope
of	the	proposed	system	is	quite	ambitious.	It	involves	nearly	1,000	satellites
orbiting	fifty	times	closer	to	Earth	than	traditional	geo-stationary	satellites.
Being	closer	to	Earth	means	these	satellites	require	2,500	times	less	power
and	have	increased	two-way	channel	resources.	This	solves	the	back-channel
problem.	Also,	the	significant	transmission	delay	associated	with	satellites	is
also	overcome.	Over	long	distances	these	low-orbit	satellites	can	provide
transmission	speeds	comparable	to	those	available	on	fiber.	Teledesic	has
regulatory,	technical,	and	financial	challenges	and	it	will	be	several	years
before	we'll	know	whether	the	company	can	overcome	them.	If	it	can,
Teledesic	or	other	systems	like	it	may	be	the	first,	the	cheapest,	or	indeed	the
only	way	to	bring	the	highway	to	many	parts	of	Earth.	Most	of	the	population
of	Asia	and	Africa,	for	example,	is	unlikely	to	have	local	access	to	fiber
connections	within	the	next	twenty	years.

Another	rapidly	advancing	technology	is	ground-based	wireless
communication.	Television	signals,	which	have	been	broadcast	over	the	air
using	wireless	VHF	and	UHF,	will	be	carried	primarily	on	fiber.	The	purpose
of	this	change	is	to	enable	everyone	to	have	a	personal	video	feed	and
interact.	Meanwhile,	voice	and	other	low-data-rate	connections	are	moving
from	the	wired	infrastructure	to	wireless	transmission	in	order	to	support
increased	mobility.	The	ideal	system	would	allow	for	the	sort	of	personalized
high-quality	video	and	mobility	I	talked	about	having	with	a	wallet	PC.	So
far,	that	combination	cannot	be	supported	by	any	of	today's	technologies,
because	wireless	systems	can't	provide	the	bandwidth	for	individual	video
feeds	that	a	fiber	network	can.
Early	on,	competitors	will	race	to	supply	the	first	interactive	services	to
communities,	but	once	all	of	the	attractive	territories	are	served	by	one
company	or	another,	rivals	will	begin	head-to-head	competition	by	entering
mar======================================================== logy.	As	she	scrolls	through	the	document,	the
two	of	you	would	discuss	your	needs.	Then,	if	she	was	particularly	adept,	you
might	even	watch	her	do	the	editing.	However,	if	you	wanted	a	hand	in
editing	the	document	instead	of	just	watching	it	run	on	your	lawyer's
computer,	you	could	join	in	and	work	together.	You	would	be	able	not	only	to
talk	to	each	other	but	also	to	see	the	same	image	on	your	computer	screens.

You	won't	need	to	have	the	same	software.	The	application	just	has	to	run	on
one	end	of	the	connection,	the	lawyer's	end	in	this	case.	On	your	end,	you
would	need	only	an	appropriate	modem	and	DSVD	software.
Another	important	use	of	voice/data	connections	will	be	to	improve	product
support.	Microsoft	has	thousands	of	employees	whose	job	is	to	answer
product-support	questions	about	Microsoft	software.	In	fact,	we	have	as	many
product-support	people	answering	questions	about	our	software	as	we	have
engineers	building	it.	This	is	wonderful,	because	we	log	all	that	feedback	and
use	it	to	improve	our	products.	We	get	lots	of	these	questions	by	e-mail,	but
most	of	our	customers	still	telephone	us.	These	phone	conversations	are
inefficient.	A	customer	calls	in	to	say	his	particular	computer	is	configured	in
a	specific	way	and	is	giving	a	certain	error	message.	The	product-support
specialist	listens	to	this	description,	and	then	suggests	something,	which	it
takes	the	caller	a	few	minutes	to	do.	Then	the	conversation	resumes.	The
average	call	takes	fifteen	minutes,	and	some	take	an	hour.	But	once	everyone
is	using	DSVD,	the	product-support	specialist	will	be	able	to	see	what's	on	the
caller's	computer	screen	(with	the	caller's	explicit	permission,	of	course)	and
examine	the	caller's	computer	directly	rather	than	having	to	rely	on	the	caller
to	explain	what	he	is	seeing.	This	will	have	to	be	done	carefully,	to	ensure	that
no	one's	privacy	is	invaded.	The	process	will	reduce	the	length	of	the	average
call	by	30	or	40	percent,	which	will	make	customers	a	lot	happier	and	will	cut
costs	and	product	prices.
The	picture	transmitted	during	a	DSVD	(or	ISDN)	telephone	connection
won't	necessarily	have	to	be	of	a	document.	One	or	both	people	participating
will	also	be	able	to	transmit	still	images	of	themselves.	If	you	are	calling	in	to
buy	a	product,	you	might	expect	the	company's	service	representative	to	be
there,	smiling.	But	you,	as	the	customer,	might	choose	to	transmit	only	your
voice.	You	can	select	images	of	yourself	dressed	appropriately	for	the
occasion,	so	it	won't	matter	what	you	are	actually	wearing.	Or	you	might
decide	to	have	available	several	pictures	of	yourself,	one	smiling,	one
laughing,	one	contemplative,	and	maybe	one	that	is	angry.	During	the	course
of	the	conversation,	you	could	change	the	image	to	suit	your	mood	or	the
point	you	were	making.
Electronic	mail	and	shared	screens	will	eliminate	the	need	for	many	meetings.
Presentation	meetings,	called	primarily	so	participants	can	listen	and	learn,
can	be	replaced	with	e-mail	messages	with	spreadsheets	and	other	exhibits
enclosed	as	attachments.	When	face-to-face	meetings	do	take	place,	they	will
be	more	efficient	because	participants	will	already	have	exchanged
background	information	by	e-mail.

It	will	also	be	easier	to	schedule	meetings	because	software	will	handle	it.	For
example,	if	you	want	to	sit	down	face-to-face	with	your	lawyer,	your
scheduling	program	and	hers	will	be	able	to	communicate	across	the	network
—even	the	phone	network—and	pick	a	date	and	time	that	you	both	have	free.
Then	the	appointment	would	just	show	up	on	your	respective	electronic
calendars.
This	will	also	be	an	efficient	way	to	schedule	restaurant	or	theater
reservations,	but	it	raises	an	interesting	issue.	Let's	say	a	restaurant	isn't
getting	much	business,	or	tickets	to	a	show	aren't	selling	well,	or	your	lawyer
doesn't	want	you	to	know	that	you're	her	only	client.	Such	companies	and
individuals	might	instruct	their	scheduling	programs	just	to	respond	to
meeting	requests.	Your	scheduling	program	wouldn't	be	able	to	ask	your
lawyer's	program	to	list	all	the	times	she	is	free.	However,	if	it	asked	for	a
specific	two-hour	block,	the	response	would	be:	"Yes,	we	can	schedule	you
for	Tuesday	at	eleven	o'clock."
Clients	will	expect	their	lawyers,	dentists,	accountants,	and	other
professionals	to	be	able	to	schedule	appointments	and	exchange	documents
electronically.	You	might	have	a	quick	follow-up	question	for	your	doctor—
for	instance,	whether	a	generic	version	of	a	drug	is	acceptable.	It	is	hard	to
interrupt	a	doctor,	but	you'll	expect	to	be	able	to	trade	e-mail	with	all	of	the
professionals	you	work	with.	We're	going	to	see	competition	based	on	how
effectively	one	professional	group	has	adopted	these	communications	tools
and	how	much	more	accessible	and	efficient	this	makes	them.	I'm	sure	we'll
then	begin	seeing	ads	in	which	a	firm	will	tout	how	much	more	advanced	it
has	become	in	the	use	of	PC	communications.
When	the	information	highway	is	available,	people	won't	be	limited	to	audio
and	still	images,	because	the	highway	will	also	transmit	high-quality	video.
The	meetings	they	schedule	will	more	and	more	often	be	conducted
electronically,	using	shared-screen	videoconferencing.	Each	electronic
participant,	wherever	he	or	she	is,	will	look	at	a	different	physical	screen:	a
video	white	board,	a	television	set,	or	a	PC,	but	each	screen	will	show	much
the	same	image.	Part	of	the	screen	might	show	someone's	face,	while	another
part	might	display	a	document.	If	anyone	modifies	the	document,	the	change
will	appear	almost	immediately	on	all	the	screens.	Geographically	distant
collaborators	will	be	able	to	work	together	in	rich	ways.	This	is	synchronous
or	real-time	sharing,	which	means	that	the	computer	screens	will	keep	up	with
the	people	using	them.
If	a	group	were	to	meet	electronically	to	collaborate	on	a	press	release,	each

member	would	be	able	to	use	his	or	her	PC	or	notebook	computer	to	move
paragraphs	around	and	drop	in	a	photograph	or	a	video.	The	rest	of	the	group
would	be	able	to	look	at	the	result	on	their	individual	screens	and	see	each
contributor's	work	as	it	is	actually	happening.
We're	already	accustomed	to	watching	video	meetings.	Anyone	who	tunes	in
to	television	news	shows,	such	as	Nightline,	which	feature	long-distance
debates,	is	seeing	a	videoconference.	The	host	and	guests	may	be	separated
by	continents,	yet	they	engage	in	give-and-take	as	if	they	were	in	the	same
room,	and	to	viewers	it	almost	appears	that	they	are.
Today,	in	order	to	videoconference,	it	is	necessary	to	go	to	a	specially
equipped	facility	with	special	phone	lines.	Microsoft	has	at	least	one
dedicated	videoconference	room	in	each	of	its	sales	offices	around	the	world.
They're	used	quite	a	bit,	but	the	setting	is	fairly	formal.	These	facilities	have
saved	us	lots	of	traveling.	Employees	in	other	offices	"sit	in"	on	staff
meetings,	and	customers	and	vendors	have	"visited"	us	without	traveling	to
our	headquarters	outside	Seattle.	Such	meetings	will	become	very	popular
because	they	save	time	and	money	and	are	often	more	productive	than	audio-
only	phone	conferences	or	even	face-to-face	meetings,	because	people	seem
to	be	more	attentive	if	they	know	they	are	on-camera.
I've	noticed	that	it	does	take	some	getting	used	to,	though.	If	one	person	is	on
a	videoconference	screen,	he	or	she	tends	to	get	much	more	attention	than
others	in	the	meeting.	I	first	noticed	this	when	a	bunch	of	us	in	Seattle	were
videoconferencing	with	Steve	Ballmer,	who	was	in	Europe.	It	was	as	if	we
were	all	glued	to	The	Steve	Ballmer	Show.	If	Steve	took	off	his	shoes,	we'd
all	look	at	each	other's	reactions.	When	the	meeting	was	over	I	could	have
told	you	all	about	Steve's	new	haircut	but	I	might	not	have	been	able	to	name
the	other	people	who'd	been	in	the
room	with	me.	I	think	this	distortion	will	go	away	as	videoconferences
become	commonplace.
It's	currently	fairly	expensive	to	set	up	a	videoconference	room—it	costs	at
least	$40,000.	However,	desktop	systems	that	attach	to	PCs	are	coming,	and
they	will	reduce	the	cost—and	the	formality—dramatically.	Our	facilities	are
generally	connected	with	ISDN	lines	operating	at	384,000	bits	per	second,
which	provide	reasonable	picture	and	sound	quality	for	about	$20	to	$35	an
hour	for	connections	within	the	United	States	and	about	$250	to	$300	an	hour
for	an	international	connection.
The	cost	of	videoconferencing,	like	that	of	almost	every	other	computer-

driven	service,	is	going	to	drop	as	technology	and	communications	costs	do.
Small	video	devices	using	cameras	attached	to	personal	computers	or
television	sets	will	allow	us	to	meet	readily	across	the	information	highway
with	much	higher	quality	pictures	and	sound	for	lower	prices.	As	ISDN
connected	to	PCs	becomes	popular,	videoconferences	will	be	as	standard	a
business	procedure	as	using	a	copier	to	duplicate	a	document	for	distribution
is	now.
Some	people	worry	that,	by	eliminating	the	subtlety	of	human	dynamics	in	a
meeting,	videoconferences	and	shared	screens	will	give	corporate	gatherings
all	the	spontaneity	of	a	congressional	photo	opportunity.	How	will	people
whisper,	roll	their	eyes	at	a	tedious	speaker,	or	pass	notes?	Actually,
clandestine	communication	will	be	simpler	at	a	video	meeting	because	the
network	will	facilitate	individual	communications	on	the	side.	Meetings	have
always	had	unwritten	rules,	but	when	the	network	is	mediating
videoconferences,	some	rules	will	have	to	become	explicit.	Will	people	be
able	to	signal,	publicly	or	privately,	individually	or	collectively,	that	they	are
bored?	To	what	degree	should	a	participant	be	allowed	to	block	his	or	her
video	or	audio	from	others?	Should	private	side	conversations,	one	PC	to
another,	be	permitted?	Over	time,	as	we	use	these	facilities,	new	rules	of
meeting	etiquette	will	emerge.
Home	videoconferences	will	naturally	be	somewhat	different.	If	the
conference	has	only	two	participants,	it	will	amount	to	a	video	phone	call.
That	will	be	great	for	saying	hello	to	y======================================================== unications
companies.	Federal	regulations	currently	prevent	cable	and	phone	companies
from	offering	a	general-purpose	network	that	would	put	them	in	competition
with	each	other.	The	first	thing	most	governments	have	to	do	to	help	the
highway	start	is	to	deregulate	communications.
The	old	approach	in	most	countries	was	to	create	monopolies	in	the	various
forms	of	telecommunication.	The	theory	behind	this	approach	was	that
companies	wouldn't	make	the	huge	investments	necessary	to	run	telephone
wires	out	to	everyone	unless	they	had	the	incentive	of	being	the	exclusive
supplier.	A	set	of	rules	drawn	up	by	the	government	binds	the	monopoly
holders	to	act	in	the	public	interest	with	restricted	but	essentially	guaranteed
profit.	The	outcome	has	been	a	very	reliable	network	with	broad	services	but
limited	innovation.	Later	regulations	extended	the	concept	to	cable	television
as	well	as	to	local	telephone	systems.	Both	federal	and	local	governments
granted	monopolies	and	curtailed	competition	in	exchange	for	regulatory
control.
A	highway	that	delivers	both	telephone	and	video	services	is	not	allowed
under	current	U.S.	laws.	Economists	and	historians	can	argue	the	pros	and
cons	of	whether	granting	regulated	monopolies	was	a	good	idea	back	in	1934,
but	today	there	is	a	general	agreement	that	the	rules	should	be	changed.	As	of
mid-1995,	however,	policy	makers	haven't	been	able	to	agree	on	exactly	when
or	in	what	ways.	Billions	of	dollars	are	at	stake	and	lawmakers	have	found	it

easy	to	get	lost	in	the	complicated	details	of	how	competition	should	start.
The	problem	is	to	figure	out	how	to	move	from	the	old	system	to	a	new	one
while	keeping	most	of	the	participants	happy.	This	dilemma	is	the	reason
telecommunications	reform	has	been	in	limbo	for	years.	Congress	was
embroiled	much	of	the	summer	of	1995	in	a	debate,	not	about	whether	the
telecommunications	industry	should	be	deregulated,	but	rather	about	how	it
should	be	deregulated.	I	hope	that	by	the	time	you	read	this,	the	information
highway	will	be	legal	in	the	United	States!
Outside	the	United	States,	matters	are	complicated	by	the	fact	that	in	many
countries	the	regulated	monopolies	have	been	agencies	owned	by	the
government	itself.	They	were	called	PTTs	because	they	managed	postal,
telephone,	and	telegraph	services.	In	some	countries	the	PTT	is	being	allowed
to	go	ahead	and	develop	the	highway,	but	when	government	organizations	are
involved,	things	often	move	slowly.	I	think	the	pace	of	investment	and
deregulation	worldwide	will	increase	in	the	next	ten	years	because	politicians
are	recognizing	that	this	issue	is	critical	if	their	countries	are	to	remain
competitive	in	the	long	term.	In	many	election	campaigns	candidates'
platform	planks	will	include	policies	that	will	allow	their	country	to	lead	in
the	creation	of	the	highway.	The	political	use	of	these	issues	will	make	them
more	visible,	which	will	help	clear	various	international	roadblocks.
Countries	like	the	United	States	and	Canada,	where	a	high	percentage	of
homes	have	cable	television,	are	at	an	advantage	because	the	competition
between	cable	companies	and	phone	companies	will	accelerate	the	pace	of
investment	in	the	highway	infrastructure.	Great	Britain,	however,	is	the
farthest	along	in	actually	using	a	single	network	to	provide	both	television
and	cable	services.	The	cable	companies	there	were	allowed	to	offer	phone
service	in	1990.	Foreign	companies,	primarily	U.S.	phone	and	cable
companies,	made	major	investments	in	fiber	infrastructure	in	the	United
Kingdom.	British	consumers	now	can	choose	to	get	telephone	service	from
their	cable	TV	company.	This	competition	has	forced	British	Telecom	to
improve	its	rates	and	services.
If	we	look	back	in	ten	years,	I	think	we'll	see	a	clear	correlation	between	the
amount	of	telecommunications	reform	in	each	country	and	the	state	of	its
information	economy.	Few	investors	will	want	to	put	money	into	places	that
don't	have	great	communications	infrastructures.	There	are	so	many
politicians	and	lobbyists	involved	in	creating	new	regulations	in	so	many
countries,	I'm	sure	the	entire	spectrum	of	different	regulatory	schemes	will	be
tried.	The	"right"	solution	will	vary	somewhat	in	different	countries.

One	area	it's	clear	government	should	stay	out	of	is	compatibility.	Some	have
suggested	that	governments	set	standards	for	networks,	to	guarantee	that	they
interoperate.	In	1994,	legislation	was	put	before	a	subcommittee	in	the	U.S.
House	of	Representatives	calling	for	all	set-top	boxes	to	be	made	so	they
would	be	compatible.	This	sounded	like	a	great	idea	to	those	who	drafted	the
legislation.	It	would	ensure	that	if	Aunt	Bessie	invested	in	a	set-top	box,	she
could	be	confident	it	would	work	if	she	moved	to	another	part	of	the	country.
Compatibility	is	important.	It	makes	the	consumer-electronics	and	personal-
computer	businesses	thrive.	When	the	PC	industry	was	new,	many	machines
came	and	went.	The	Altair	8800	was	superseded	by	the	Apple	I.	Then	came
the	Apple	II,	the	original	IBM	PC,	the	Apple	Macintosh,	IBM	PC	AT,	386
and	486	PCs,	Power	Macintoshes,	and	Pentium	PCs.	Each	of	these	machines
was	somewhat	compatible	with	the	others.	For	instance,	all	were	able	to	share
plain-text	files.	But	there	was	also	a	lot	of	incompatibility	because	each
successive	computer	generation	showcased	fundamental	breakthroughs	the
older	systems	didn't	support.
Compatibility	with	prior	machines	is	a	great	virtue	in	some	cases.	Both	PC-
compatibles	and	the	Apple	Macintosh	provide	some	backwards	compatibility.
However,	they	are	incompatible	with	each	other.	And	at	the	time	the	PC	was
introduced,	it	was	not	compatible	with	IBM's	prior	machines.	Likewise,	the
Mac	was	incompatible	with	Apple's	earlier	machines.	In	the	world	of
computing,	technology	is	so	dynamic	that	any	company	should	be	able	to
come	out	with	whatever	new	product	it	wants	and	let	the	market	decide	if	it
has	made	the	right	set	of	trade-offs.	Because	the	set-top	box	is	in	every	sense
a	computer,	it	stands	to	reason	it	will	follow	the	same	pattern	of	rapid
innovation	that	has	driven	the	PC	industry.	In	fact,	the	set-top	box	will	be	sold
to	a	far	more	uncertain	market	than	the	PC	was,	so	the	case	for	letting	it	be
market	driven	is	even	stronger.	It	would	be	foolish	to	impose	the	constraint	of
government-dictated	design	on	an	unfinished	invention.
The	original	set-top	box	compatibility	legislation	in	the	United	States
ultimately	died	in	Congress	in	1994,	but	related	issues	arose	in	1995,	and	I
expect	that	similar	efforts	will	be	made	in	other	countries.	It	seems	easy	to
legislate	reasonable-sounding	constraints,	but	if	we	don't	watch	out,	those
constraints	could	strangle	the	market.
The	highway	will	develop	at	a	different	pace	in	different	communities	and	in
different	countries.	When	I	travel	abroad,	the	foreign	press	often	asks	how
many	years	behind	the	developments	in	the	United	States	their	country	is.	It's
a	difficult	question.	The	advantages	that	the	United	States	has	are	the	size	of

the	market,	the	popularity	of	the	personal	computer	in	American	homes,	and
the	way	the	phone	and	cable	companies	will	compete	with	each	other	for
current	and	future	revenues.	Of	the	various	technologies	that	will	be	part	of
building	the	highway,	U.S.-based	companies	are	leaders	in	almost	every	one:
microprocessors,	software,	entertainment,	personal	computers,	set-top	boxes,
and	network-switching	equipment.	The	only	significant	exceptions	are	display
technology	and	memory	chips.
Other	countries	have	advantages	of	their	own.	In	Singapore,	the	population
density	and	political	focus	on	infrastructure	makes	it	certain	that	this	nation
will	be	a	leader.	A	decision	by	the	Singaporean	government	to	make
something	happen	means	quite	a	bit	in	this	unique	country.	The	highway
infrastructure	is	already	under	construction.	Every	developer	will	soon	be
required	to	provide	every	new	house	or	apartment	with	a	broadband	cable	in
the	same	way	he	is	required	by	law	to	provide	lines	for	water,	gas,	electricity,
and	telephone.	When	I	visited	with	Lee	Kuan	Yew,	the	seventy-two-year-old
senior	minister	who	was	the	political	head	of	Singapore	from	1959	to	1990,	I
was	extremely	impressed	with	his	understanding	of	the	opportunity	and	his
belief	that	it	is	a	top	priority	to	move	ahead	at	full	speed.	He	views	it	as
imperative	that	his	small	country	continue	to	be	a	premier	location	in	Asia	for
high-value	jobs.	I	was	quite	blunt	in	asking	Mr.	Lee	if	he	understood	that	the
Singaporean	government	would	be	giving	up	the	tight	control	over
information	it	exercises	today	as	a	way	of	ensuring	shared	values	that	tend	to
keep	societal	problems	in	check.	He	said	Singapore	recognizes	that	in	the
future	it	will	have	to	rely	on	methods	other	than	censorship	to	maintain	a
culture	that	sacrifices	some	Western-style	freedom	in	exchange	for	a	strong
sense	of	community.
In	China,	however,	the	government	seems	to	believe	it	can	have	it	both	ways.
Post	and	Telecommunications	Minster	Wu	Jichuan	told	reporters	at	a	news
briefing,	"By	linking	with	the	Internet	we	don't	mean	absolute	freedom	of
information.	I	think	there	is	general	understanding	about	this.	If	you	go
through	customs,	you	have	to	show	your	passport.	It's	the	same	with
management	of	information."	Wu	said	Beijing	will	adopt	unspecified
"management	measures"	to	control	inflows	of	data	on	all	telecommunications
services	as	they	evolve	in	China.	"There	is	no	contradiction	at	all	between	the
development	of	telecoms	infrastructure	and	the	exercise	of	state	sovereignty.
The	International	Telecommunications	Union	states	that	any	country	has
sovereignty	over	its	own	telecoms."	He	may	not	understand	that	to	implement
full	Internet	access	and	maintain	censorship,	you	would	almost	have	to	have
someone	looking	over	the	shoulder	of	every	user.

In	France,	the	pioneering	on-line	service,	Minitel,	has	fostered	a	community
of	information	publishers	and	stimulated	broad	familiarity	with	on-line
systems	generally.	Even	though	both	terminals	and	bandwidth	a======================================================== unications
companies.	Federal	regulations	currently	prevent	cable	and	phone	companies
from	offering	a	general-purpose	network	that	would	put	them	in	competition
with	each	other.	The	first	thing	most	governments	have	to	do	to	help	the
highway	start	is	to	deregulate	communications.
The	old	approach	in	most	countries	was	to	create	monopolies	in	the	various
forms	of	telecommunication.	The	theory	behind	this	approach	was	that
companies	wouldn't	make	the	huge	investments	necessary	to	run	telephone
wires	out	to	everyone	unless	they	had	the	incentive	of	being	the	exclusive
supplier.	A	set	of	rules	drawn	up	by	the	government	binds	the	monopoly
holders	to	act	in	the	public	interest	with	restricted	but	essentially	guaranteed
profit.	The	outcome	has	been	a	very	reliable	network	with	broad	services	but
limited	innovation.	Later	regulations	extended	the	concept	to	cable	television
as	well	as	to	local	telephone	systems.	Both	federal	and	local	governments
granted	monopolies	and	curtailed	competition	in	exchange	for	regulatory
control.
A	highway	that	delivers	both	telephone	and	video	services	is	not	allowed
under	current	U.S.	laws.	Economists	and	historians	can	argue	the	pros	and
cons	of	whether	granting	regulated	monopolies	was	a	good	idea	back	in	1934,
but	today	there	is	a	general	agreement	that	the	rules	should	be	changed.	As	of
mid-1995,	however,	policy	makers	haven't	been	able	to	agree	on	exactly	when
or	in	what	ways.	Billions	of	dollars	are	at	stake	and	lawmakers	have	found	it

easy	to	get	lost	in	the	complicated	details	of	how	competition	should	start.
The	problem	is	to	figure	out	how	to	move	from	the	old	system	to	a	new	one
while	keeping	most	of	the	participants	happy.	This	dilemma	is	the	reason
telecommunications	reform	has	been	in	limbo	for	years.	Congress	was
embroiled	much	of	the	summer	of	1995	in	a	debate,	not	about	whether	the
telecommunications	industry	should	be	deregulated,	but	rather	about	how	it
should	be	deregulated.	I	hope	that	by	the	time	you	read	this,	the	information
highway	will	be	legal	in	the	United	States!
Outside	the	United	States,	matters	are	complicated	by	the	fact	that	in	many
countries	the	regulated	monopolies	have	been	agencies	owned	by	the
government	itself.	They	were	called	PTTs	because	they	managed	postal,
telephone,	and	telegraph	services.	In	some	countries	the	PTT	is	being	allowed
to	go	ahead	and	develop	the	highway,	but	when	government	organizations	are
involved,	things	often	move	slowly.	I	think	the	pace	of	investment	and
deregulation	worldwide	will	increase	in	the	next	ten	years	because	politicians
are	recognizing	that	this	issue	is	critical	if	their	countries	are	to	remain
competitive	in	the	long	term.	In	many	election	campaigns	candidates'
platform	planks	will	include	policies	that	will	allow	their	country	to	lead	in
the	creation	of	the	highway.	The	political	use	of	these	issues	will	make	them
more	visible,	which	will	help	clear	various	international	roadblocks.
Countries	like	the	United	States	and	Canada,	where	a	high	percentage	of
homes	have	cable	television,	are	at	an	advantage	because	the	competition
between	cable	companies	and	phone	companies	will	accelerate	the	pace	of
investment	in	the	highway	infrastructure.	Great	Britain,	however,	is	the
farthest	along	in	actually	using	a	single	network	to	provide	both	television
and	cable	services.	The	cable	companies	there	were	allowed	to	offer	phone
service	in	1990.	Foreign	companies,	primarily	U.S.	phone	and	cable
companies,	made	major	investments	in	fiber	infrastructure	in	the	United
Kingdom.	British	consumers	now	can	choose	to	get	telephone	service	from
their	cable	TV	company.	This	competition	has	forced	British	Telecom	to
improve	its	rates	and	services.
If	we	look	back	in	ten	years,	I	think	we'll	see	a	clear	correlation	between	the
amount	of	telecommunications	reform	in	each	country	and	the	state	of	its
information	economy.	Few	investors	will	want	to	put	money	into	places	that
don't	have	great	communications	infrastructures.	There	are	so	many
politicians	and	lobbyists	involved	in	creating	new	regulations	in	so	many
countries,	I'm	sure	the	entire	spectrum	of	different	regulatory	schemes	will	be
tried.	The	"right"	solution	will	vary	somewhat	in	different	countries.

One	area	it's	clear	government	should	stay	out	of	is	compatibility.	Some	have
suggested	that	governments	set	standards	for	networks,	to	guarantee	that	they
interoperate.	In	1994,	legislation	was	put	before	a	subcommittee	in	the	U.S.
House	of	Representatives	calling	for	all	set-top	boxes	to	be	made	so	they
would	be	compatible.	This	sounded	like	a	great	idea	to	those	who	drafted	the
legislation.	It	would	ensure	that	if	Aunt	Bessie	invested	in	a	set-top	box,	she
could	be	confident	it	would	work	if	she	moved	to	another	part	of	the	country.
Compatibility	is	important.	It	makes	the	consumer-electronics	and	personal-
computer	businesses	thrive.	When	the	PC	industry	was	new,	many	machines
came	and	went.	The	Altair	8800	was	superseded	by	the	Apple	I.	Then	came
the	Apple	II,	the	original	IBM	PC,	the	Apple	Macintosh,	IBM	PC	AT,	386
and	486	PCs,	Power	Macintoshes,	and	Pentium	PCs.	Each	of	these	machines
was	somewhat	compatible	with	the	others.	For	instance,	all	were	able	to	share
plain-text	files.	But	there	was	also	a	lot	of	incompatibility	because	each
successive	computer	generation	showcased	fundamental	breakthroughs	the
older	systems	didn't	support.
Compatibility	with	prior	machines	is	a	great	virtue	in	some	cases.	Both	PC-
compatibles	and	the	Apple	Macintosh	provide	some	backwards	compatibility.
However,	they	are	incompatible	with	each	other.	And	at	the	time	the	PC	was
introduced,	it	was	not	compatible	with	IBM's	prior	machines.	Likewise,	the
Mac	was	incompatible	with	Apple's	earlier	machines.	In	the	world	of
computing,	technology	is	so	dynamic	that	any	company	should	be	able	to
come	out	with	whatever	new	product	it	wants	and	let	the	market	decide	if	it
has	made	the	right	set	of	trade-offs.	Because	the	set-top	box	is	in	every	sense
a	computer,	it	stands	to	reason	it	will	follow	the	same	pattern	of	rapid
innovation	that	has	driven	the	PC	industry.	In	fact,	the	set-top	box	will	be	sold
to	a	far	more	uncertain	market	than	the	PC	was,	so	the	case	for	letting	it	be
market	driven	is	even	stronger.	It	would	be	foolish	to	impose	the	constraint	of
government-dictated	design	on	an	unfinished	invention.
The	original	set-top	box	compatibility	legislation	in	the	United	States
ultimately	died	in	Congress	in	1994,	but	related	issues	arose	in	1995,	and	I
expect	that	similar	efforts	will	be	made	in	other	countries.	It	seems	easy	to
legislate	reasonable-sounding	constraints,	but	if	we	don't	watch	out,	those
constraints	could	strangle	the	market.
The	highway	will	develop	at	a	different	pace	in	different	communities	and	in
different	countries.	When	I	travel	abroad,	the	foreign	press	often	asks	how
many	years	behind	the	developments	in	the	United	States	their	country	is.	It's
a	difficult	question.	The	advantages	that	the	United	States	has	are	the	size	of

the	market,	the	popularity	of	the	personal	computer	in	American	homes,	and
the	way	the	phone	and	cable	companies	will	compete	with	each	other	for
current	and	future	revenues.	Of	the	various	technologies	that	will	be	part	of
building	the	highway,	U.S.-based	companies	are	leaders	in	almost	every	one:
microprocessors,	software,	entertainment,	personal	computers,	set-top	boxes,
and	network-switching	equipment.	The	only	significant	exceptions	are	display
technology	and	memory	chips.
Other	countries	have	advantages	of	their	own.	In	Singapore,	the	population
density	and	political	focus	on	infrastructure	makes	it	certain	that	this	nation
will	be	a	leader.	A	decision	by	the	Singaporean	government	to	make
something	happen	means	quite	a	bit	in	this	unique	country.	The	highway
infrastructure	is	already	under	construction.	Every	developer	will	soon	be
required	to	provide	every	new	house	or	apartment	with	a	broadband	cable	in
the	same	way	he	is	required	by	law	to	provide	lines	for	water,	gas,	electricity,
and	telephone.	When	I	visited	with	Lee	Kuan	Yew,	the	seventy-two-year-old
senior	minister	who	was	the	political	head	of	Singapore	from	1959	to	1990,	I
was	extremely	impressed	with	his	understanding	of	the	opportunity	and	his
belief	that	it	is	a	top	priority	to	move	ahead	at	full	speed.	He	views	it	as
imperative	that	his	small	country	continue	to	be	a	premier	location	in	Asia	for
high-value	jobs.	I	was	quite	blunt	in	asking	Mr.	Lee	if	he	understood	that	the
Singaporean	government	would	be	giving	up	the	tight	control	over
information	it	exercises	today	as	a	way	of	ensuring	shared	values	that	tend	to
keep	societal	problems	in	check.	He	said	Singapore	recognizes	that	in	the
future	it	will	have	to	rely	on	methods	other	than	censorship	to	maintain	a
culture	that	sacrifices	some	Western-style	freedom	in	exchange	for	a	strong
sense	of	community.
In	China,	however,	the	government	seems	to	believe	it	can	have	it	both	ways.
Post	and	Telecommunications	Minster	Wu	Jichuan	told	reporters	at	a	news
briefing,	"By	linking	with	the	Internet	we	don't	mean	absolute	freedom	of
information.	I	think	there	is	general	understanding	about	this.	If	you	go
through	customs,	you	have	to	show	your	passport.	It's	the	same	with
management	of	information."	Wu	said	Beijing	will	adopt	unspecified
"management	measures"	to	control	inflows	of	data	on	all	telecommunications
services	as	they	evolve	in	China.	"There	is	no	contradiction	at	all	between	the
development	of	telecoms	infrastructure	and	the	exercise	of	state	sovereignty.
The	International	Telecommunications	Union	states	that	any	country	has
sovereignty	over	its	own	telecoms."	He	may	not	understand	that	to	implement
full	Internet	access	and	maintain	censorship,	you	would	almost	have	to	have
someone	looking	over	the	shoulder	of	every	user.

In	France,	the	pioneering	on-line	service,	Minitel,	has	fostered	a	community
of	information	publishers	and	stimulated	broad	familiarity	with	on-line
systems	generally.	Even	though	both	terminals	and	bandwidth	a======================================================== fore	asking	if	you
want	to	buy	it.	This	kind	of	"demo"	usage	might	replace	part	of	the	function
served	by	radio	stations	today.	An	author	could	allow	you	to	mail	a	new	song
to	a	friend,	but	she	will	only	be	able	to	listen	to	it	a	few	times	before	getting
charged.	A	musical	group	could	have	a	special	price,	far	lower	than	if	every
album	was	bought	individually,	for	a	buyer	who	wanted	all	their	work.
Even	today,	paying	for	entertainment	information	isn't	without	nuances.	The
limited	time	value	of	entertainment	information	affects	the	way	publishers
and	film	studios	market	their	products.	The	book	publisher	often	does	this	by
having	two	release	windows,	hardcover	and	paperback.	If	a	customer	wants	a
book	and	can	comfortably	afford	it,	he	or	she	pays	$25	to	$30.	Or	the
customer	can	wait	for	between	six	months	and	two	years	and	buy	the	same
book,	in	a	somewhat	less	expensive	and	long-lasting	format,	for	$5	to	$10.
Successful	movies	are	progressively	shown	in	first-run	theaters,	secondary
theaters,	hotel	rooms,	on	pay-per-view	TV,	and	on	airplanes.	Then	they	are
available	as	video	rentals,	on	premium	channels	such	as	HBO,	and	eventually
on	network	TV.	Still	later	they	appear	on	local	television	or	basic	cable
channels.	Each	new	form	brings	the	movie	to	a	different	audience	as
customers	who	missed	the	previous	forms	of	release	(accidentally	or	on
purpose)	take	advantage	of	the	new	opportunity.
On	the	information	highway	various	release	windows	for	content	will	almost
certainly	be	tried.	When	a	hot	movie,	multi-media	title,	or	electronic	book	is
released,	there	may	be	an	initial	period	during	which	it	is	priced	at	a	premium.
Some	will	be	willing	to	pay	a	high	fee,	perhaps	as	much	as	$30,	to	see	a
movie	at	the	same	time	it	appears	in	the	first-run	theaters.	After	a	week,	a
month,	or	a	season,	the	price	will	drop	to	the	$3	or	$4	we	are	charged	today

for	pay-per-view	movies.	Marketers	may	try	some	wild	things.	Perhaps	a
movie	will	come	along	that	you	won't	be	able	to	see	at	all	in	its	first	month	of
release	unless	you're	one	of	the	top	1,000	bidders	in	an	electronic	auction	on
the	highway.	At	the	other	extreme,	if	you	have	a	track	record	of	buying	movie
posters	and	merchandise	related	to	what	you	watch,	you	may	find	you	can	get
certain	movies	for	next	to	nothing	or	with	few,	if	any,	commercial
interruptions.	Purchases	of	The	Little	Mermaid	and	Aladdin	videotapes	and
associated	merchandise	might	justify	Disney's	allowing	every	child	in	the
world	one	free	viewing.
The	transferability	of	information	will	be	another	big	pricing	issue.	The
information	highway	will	allow	the	transfer	of	intellectual	property	rights
from	one	person	to	another	at	the	speed	of	light.	Almost	all	the	music,
writing,	or	other	intellectual	properties	stored	on	disks	or	in	books	sits	unused
most	of	the	time.	When	you're	not	consuming	your	particular	copy	of	Thriller
or	Bonfire	of	the	Vanities,	most	likely	no	one	else	is,	either.	Publishers	count
on	this.	If	the	average	buyer	lent	his	or	her	albums	and	books	frequently,
fewer	would	be	sold	and	prices	would	be	higher.	If	we	assume	that	an	album
is	in	use,	say,	0.1	percent	of	the	time,	"light	speed"	lending	might	cut	the
number	of	copies	sold	by	a	factor	of	1,000.	Lending	will	probably	be
restricted	so	users	will	only	be	allowed	to	lend	a	copy	out	perhaps	up	to	ten
times	a	year.
Public	libraries	will	become	places	where	anyone	can	sit	down	and	use	high-
quality	equipment	to	gain	access	to	the	information	highway's	resources.
Library	committees	might	use	the	budgets	that	today	pay	for	buying	books,
albums,	movies,	and	subscriptions	to	fund	the	royalties	for	using	educational
electronic	materials.	Authors	may	decide	to	forfeit	some	or	all	of	their
royalties	if	their	work	is	to	be	used	in	a	library.
New	copyright	laws	will	be	required	to	clarify	the	purchaser's	rights	to	the
content	under	different	schemes.	The	highway	will	force	us	to	think	more
explicitly	about	what	rights	users	have	to	intellectual	property.
Videos,	which	tend	to	be	watched	only	once,	will	continue	to	be	rented,	but
probably	not	from	stores.	Instead,	consumers	will	shop	on	the	information
highway	to	find	movies	and	other	programs	deliverable	on	demand.
Neighborhood	video-rental	stores	and	music	stores	will	face	a	dwindling
market.	Bookstores	will	continue	to	stock	printed	books	for	a	long	time,	but
nonfiction	and	especially	reference	material	will	probably	be	used	much	more
often	in	electronic	rather	than	print	form.

Efficient	electronic	markets	are	going	to	change	a	lot	more	than	just	the	ratio
of	renting	to	buying	for	entertainment.	Almost	any	person	or	business	that
serves	as	a	middleman	will	feel	the	heat	of	electronic	competition.
A	small-town	lawyer	will	face	new	competition	when	legal	services	are
available	by	videoconference	over	the	network.	A	person	buying	a	piece	of
property	might	choose	to	consult	with	a	sharp	real	estate	attorney	from	the
other	side	of	the	county	rather	than	using	a	local	lawyer	who	is	a	generalist.
The	resources	of	the	highway,	however,	will	allow	the	local	lawyer	to	retrain
and	become	an	expert	in	any	specialty	of	her	choice.	She	will	be	able	to
compete	in	this	specialty	because	of	her	lower	overhead.	Clients	will	benefit
as	well.	The	prices	for	executing	routine	legal	tasks,	such	as	the	drafting	of
wills,	will	be	driven	down	by	the	efficiency	and	specialization	of	the
electronic	marketplace.	The	information	highway	will	also	be	able	to	deliver
complicated	medical,	financial,	and	other	video	consulting	services.	These
will	be	convenient	and	popular,	especially	when	they	are	short.	It	will	be
much	easier	to	make	an	appointment	and	turn	on	your	television	or	computer
screen	for	a	fifteen-minute	meeting	than	it	will	be	to	drive	somewhere,	park,
sit	in	a	waiting	room,	and	then	drive	back	to	your	home	or	office.
Videoconferences	of	all	sorts	will	increasingly	become	alternatives	to	having
to	drive	or	fly	to	a	meeting.	When	you	do	go	somewhere,	it	will	be	because	it
is	important	that	a	particular	meeting	be	face-to-face,	or	because	something
fun	requires	that	you	be	there	physically.	Business	travel	may	fall	off,	but
leisure	travel	will	rise	because	people	will	be	able	to	take	working	vacations,
knowing	they	can	stay	connected	to	their	ofrices	and	homes	through	the
information	highway.
The	travel	industry	will	change	even	though	the	total	amount	of	traveling	may
stay	the	same.	Travel	agents,	like	all	professionals	whose	service	has	been	to
offer	specialized	access	to	information,	will	have	to	add	value	in	new	ways.
Travel	agents	now	search	for	the	availability	of	travel	arrangements	using
databases	and	reference	books	customers	don't	have	access	to.	Once	they
become	familiar	with	the	power	of	the	highway	and	all	the	information	that
will	be	on	it,	many	travelers	will	prefer	to	conduct	searches	themselves.
Smart,	experienced,	and	creative	travel	agents	will	prosper,	but	they	will
specialize	and	do	more	than	book	reservations.	Say	you	want	to	visit	Africa.
You	will	be	able	to	find	the	cheapest	tickets	to	Kenya,	so	the	travel	agency
will	have	to	be	able	to	provide	something	else.	Perhaps	the	agency	books
nothing	but	trips	to	East	Africa—hence,	they'll	be	able	to	tell	you	what	other
customers	especially	liked,	or	that	the	Tsavo	National	Park	is	too	crowded,	or

that	if	you're	really	interested	in	seeing	herds	of	zebra,	you	are	better	off
visiting	Tanzania.	Some	other	travel	agents	may	decide	to	specialize	in	selling
travel	to,	rather	than	from,	their	own	cities.	An	agent	in	Chicago	might	offer
services	across	the	network	to	people	around	the	world	who	want	to	visit	his
hometown,	rather	than	selling	services	to	Chicagoans	who	want	to	visit	other
places.	Customers	wouldn't	know	the	travel	agent,	but	the	travel	agent
certainly	would	know	Chicago,	which	might	be	more	important.
Although	today's	newspapers	will	be	around	for	a	long,	long	time,	the
newspaper	business	will	be	fundamentally	altered	when	the	consumer	has
access	to	the	information	highway.	In	the	United	States,	daily	newspapers	are
dependent	on	local	advertising	for	most	of	their	revenue.	In	1950,	when
television	sets	were	still	novelties,	national	advertising	contributed	25	percent
of	the	advertising	revenue	of	American	newspapers.	By	1993,	national
advertising	contributed	only	12	percent,	in	large	measure	because	of
competition	from	television.	The	number	of	daily	newspapers	in	the	United
States	has	declined	dramatically	and	the	burden	of	financing	those	that	remain
has	shifted	to	local	retail	and	classified	advertising.	Classifieds	don't	really
work	on	radio	or	television.	In	1950,	only	18	percent	of	the	advertising
revenue	of	daily	newspapers	in	the	United	States	came	from	classifieds,	but
by	1993	that	had	risen	to	35	percent	and	represented	billions	of	dollars.
The	information	highway	will	provide	alternative,	more	efficient	ways	for
individual	buyers	and	sellers	to	get	together.	Once	the	majority	of	customers
in	a	market	use	electronic	access	to	shop,	classified	revenues	will	be
threatened.	That	means	much	of	the	newspaper	advertising	base	could	be	in
jeopardy.
It	does	not,	however,	mean	that	newspapers	will	disappear	overnight,	or	that
newspaper	companies	can't	continue	to	be	important	and	profitable	players	in
the	delivery	of	news	and	advertising.	But,	like	all	companies	that	have	a
middleman	or	brokering	role,	they'll	have	to	be	alert	to	change	and	take
advantage	of	their	unique	qualities	to	succeed	in	the	electronic	world.
Banking	is	another	industry	destined	for	change.	There	are	about	14,000
banks	in	the	United	States	that	cater	to	retail	customers.	Most	people	bank
with	a	firm	that	has	a	branch	office	near	their	home	or	on	their	commuting
path.	Although	minor	differences	in	interest	rates	and	services	might	shift
people	from	one	local	bank	to	another,	few	customers	would	consider
switching	to	a	branch	ten	miles	out	of	their	way.	Today,	moving	your	bank
records	is	time-consuming.

But	when	the	information	highway	makes	geography	less	important,======================================================== a	disk-based	server	will	be	able	to	serve	thousands	of
customers	simultaneously.	The	extra	cost	for	each	user	is	simply	the	cost	of
using	the	disk	storage	for	a	short	period	of	time	and	the	communications
charge.	And	that	is	becoming	extremely	cheap.	So	the	extra	per-user	cost	will
be	nearly	zero.
This	doesn't	mean	that	information	will	be	free,	but	the	cost	of	distributing	it
will	be	very	small.	When	you	buy	a	paper	book,	a	good	portion	of	your
money	pays	for	the	cost	of	producing	and	distributing	it,	rather	than	for	the
author's	work.	Trees	have	to	be	cut	down,	ground	into	pulp,	and	turned	into
paper.	The	book	must	be	printed	and	bound.	Most	publishers	invest	capital	in
a	first	printing	that	reflects	the	largest	number	of	copies	they	think	will	sell
right	away,	because	the	printing	technology	is	efficient	only	if	lots	of	books
are	made	at	once.	The	capital	tied	up	in	this	inventory	is	a	financial	risk	for
the	publishers:	They	may	never	sell	all	the	copies,	and	even	if	they	do,	it	will

take	a	while	to	sell	them	all.	Meanwhile,	the	publisher	has	to	store	the	books
and	ship	them	to	wholesalers	and	ultimately	to	retail	bookstores.	Those	folks
also	invest	capital	in	their	inventory	and	expect	a	financial	return	from	it.
By	the	time	the	consumer	selects	the	book	and	the	cash	register	rings,	the
profit	for	the	author	can	be	a	pretty	small	piece	of	the	pie	compared	to	the
money	that	goes	to	the	physical	aspect	of	delivering	information	on	processed
wood	pulp.	I	like	to	call	this	the	"friction"	of	distribution,	because	it	holds
back	variety	and	dissipates	money	away	from	the	author	and	to	other	people.
The	information	highway	will	be	largely	friction	free,	a	theme	I	will	explore
further	in	chapter	8.	This	lack	of	friction	in	information	distribution	is
incredibly	important.	It	will	empower	more	authors,	because	very	little	of	the
customer's	dollar	will	be	used	to	pay	for	distribution.
Gutenberg's	invention	of	the	printing	press	brought	about	the	first	real	shift	in
distribution	friction—it	allowed	information	on	any	subject	to	be	distributed
quickly	and	relatively	cheaply.	The	printing	press	created	a	mass	medium
because	it	offered	low-friction	duplication.	The	proliferation	of	books
motivated	the	general	public	to	read	and	write,	but	once	people	had	the	skills
there	were	many	other	things	that	could	be	done	with	the	written	word.
Businesses	could	keep	track	of	inventory	and	write	contracts.	Lovers	could
exchange	letters.	Individuals	could	keep	notes	and	diaries.	By	themselves
these	applications	were	not	sufficiently	compelling	to	get	large	numbers	of
people	to	make	the	effort	to	learn	to	read	and	write.	Until	there	was	a	real
reason	to	create	an	"installed	base"	of	literate	people,	the	written	word	wasn't
really	useful	as	a	means	for	storing	information.	Books	gave	literacy	critical
mass,	so	you	can	almost	say	that	the	printing	press	taught	us	to	read.
The	printing	press	made	it	easy	to	make	lots	of	copies	of	a	document,	but
what	about	something	written	for	a	few	people?	New	technology	was	required
for	small-scale	publishing.	Carbon	paper	was	fine	if	you	wanted	just	one	or
two	more	copies.	Mimeographs	and	other	messy	machines	could	make
dozens,	but	to	use	any	of	these	processes	you	had	to	have	planned	for	them
when	you	prepared	your	original	document.
In	the	1930s,	Chester	Carlson,	frustrated	by	how	difficult	it	was	to	prepare
patent	applications	(which	involved	copying	drawings	and	text	by	hand),	set
out	to	invent	a	better	way	to	duplicate	information	in	small	quantities.	What
he	came	up	with	was	a	process	he	called	"xerography"	when	he	patented	it	in
1940.	In	1959,	the	company	he	had	hooked	up	with—later	known	as	Xerox—
released	its	first	successful	production-line	copier.	The	914	copier,	by	making

it	possible	to	reproduce	modest	numbers	of	documents	easily	and
inexpensively,	set	off	an	explosion	in	the	kinds	and	amount	of	information
distributed	to	small	groups.	Market	research	had	projected	that	Xerox	would
sell	at	most	3,000	of	their	first	copier	model.	They	actually	placed	about
200,000.	A	year	after	the	copier	was	introduced,	50	million	copies	a	month
were	being	made.	By	1986,	more	than	200	billion	copies	were	being	made
each	month,	and	the	number	has	been	rising	ever	since.	Most	of	these	copies
would	never	be	made	if	the	technology	wasn't	so	cheap	and	easy.
The	photocopier	and	its	later	cousin,	the	desktop	laser	printer—along	with	PC
desktop	publishing	software—facilitated	newsletters,	memos,	maps	to	parties,
flyers,	and	other	documents	intended	for	modest-sized	audiences.	Carlson	was
another	who	reduced	the	distribution	friction	of	information.	The	wild	success
of	his	copier	demonstrates	that	amazing	things	happen	once	you	reduce
distribution	friction.
Of	course,	it's	easier	to	make	copies	of	a	document	than	it	is	to	make	it	worth
reading.	There	is	no	intrinsic	limit	to	the	number	of	books	that	can	be
published	in	a	given	year.	A	typical	bookstore	has	10,000	different	titles,	and
some	of	the	new	superstores	might	carry	100,000.	Only	a	small	fraction,
under	10	percent,	of	all	trade	books	published	make	money	for	their
publishers,	but	some	succeed	beyond	anybody's	wildest	expectations.
My	favorite	recent	example	is	A	Brief	History	of	Time,	by	Stephen	W.
Hawking,	a	brilliant	scientist	who	has	amyotrophic	lateral	sclerosis	(Lou
Gehrig's	disease),	which	confines	him	to	a	wheelchair	and	allows	him	to
communicate	only	with	great	difficulty.	What	are	the	odds	that	his	treatise	on
the	origins	of	the	universe	would	have	been	published	if	there	were	only	a
handful	of	publishers	and	each	of	them	could	produce	only	a	few	books	a
year?	Suppose	an	editor	had	one	spot	left	on	his	list	and	had	to	choose
between	publishing	Hawking's	book	and	Madonna's	Sex?	The	obvious	bet
would	be	Madonna's	book,	because	it	would	likely	sell	a	million	copies.	It
did.	But	Hawking's	book	sold	5.5	million	copies	and	is	still	selling.
Every	now	and	then	this	sort	of	sleeper	best-seller	surprises	everyone	(but	the
author).	A	book	I	enjoyed	greatly,	The	Bridges	of	Madison	County,	was	the
first	published	novel	by	a	business-school	teacher	of	communications.	It
wasn't	positioned	by	the	publisher	to	be	a	bestseller,	but	nobody	really	knows
what	will	appeal	to	the	public's	taste.	Like	most	examples	of	central	planning
trying	to	outguess	a	market	decision,	this	is	fundamentally	a	losing
proposition.	There	are	almost	always	a	couple	of	books	on	The	New	York
Times	best-seller	list	that	have	bubbled	up	from	nowhere,	because	books	cost

so	relatively	little	to	publish—compared	to	other	media—that	publishers	can
afford	to	give	them	a	chance.
Costs	are	much	higher	in	broadcast	television	or	movies,	so	it's	tougher	to	try
something	risky.	In	the	early	days	of	TV	there	were	only	a	few	stations	in
each	geographic	area	and	most	programming	was	targeted	for	the	broadest
possible	audience.
Cable	television	increased	the	number	of	programming	choices,	although	it
wasn't	started	with	that	intention.	It	began	in	the	late	1940s	as	a	way	of
providing	better	television	reception	to	outlying	areas.	Community	antennas
to	feed	a	local	cable	system	were	erected	by	viewers	whose	broadcast
reception	was	blocked	by	hills.	No	one	then	imagined	that	communities	with
perfectly	good	broadcast	television	reception	would	pay	to	have	cable	so	they
could	watch	a	steady	stream	of	music	videos	or	channels	that	offered	nothing
but	news	or	weather	twenty-four	hours	a	day.
When	the	number	of	stations	carried	went	from	three	or	five	to	twenty-four	or
thirty-six,	the	programming	dynamic	changed.	If	you	were	in	charge	of
programming	for	the	thirtieth	channel,	you	wouldn't	attract	much	of	an
audience	if	you	just	tried	to	imitate	channels	1	through	29.	Instead,	cable
channel	programmers	were	forced	to	specialize.	Like	special-interest
magazines	and	newsletters,	these	new	channels	attract	viewers	by	appealing
to	strong	interests	held	by	a	relatively	smaller	number	of	enthusiasts.	This	is
in	contrast	to	general	programming,	which	tries	to	provide	something	for
everyone.	But	the	costs	of	production	and	the	small	number	of	channels	still
limit	the	number	of	television	programs	produced.
Although	it	costs	far	less	to	publish	a	book	than	to	broadcast	a	TV	show,	it's
still	a	lot	compared	to	the	cost	involved	in	electronic	publishing.	To	get	a
book	into	print	a	publisher	has	to	agree	to	pay	the	up-front	expense	of
manufacturing,	distribution,	and	marketing.	The	information	highway	will
create	a	medium	with	entry	barriers	lower	than	any	we	have	ever	seen.	The
Internet	is	the	greatest	self-publishing	vehicle	ever.	Its	bulletin	boards	have
demonstrated	some	of	the	changes	that	will	occur	when	everyone	has	access
to	low-friction	distribution	and	individuals	can	post	messages,	images,	or
software	of	their	own	creation.
Bulletin	boards	have	contributed	a	lot	to	the	popularity	of	the	Internet.	To	be
published	there	all	you	have	to	do	is	type	your	thoughts	and	post	them
someplace.	This	means	that	there	is	a	lot	of	garbage	on	the	Internet,	but	also	a
few	gems.	A	typical	message	is	only	a	page	or	two	long.	A	single	message

posted	on	a	popular	bulletin	board	or	sent	to	a	mailing	list	might	reach	and
engage	millions	of	people.	Or	it	might	sit	there	and	languish	with	no	impact
whatsoever.	The	reason	anyone	is	willing	to	risk	the	latter	eventuality	is	the
low	distribution	friction.	The	network	bandwidth	is	so	great	and	the	other
factors	that	contribute	to	the	cost	are	so	low	that	nobody	thinks	about	the	cost
of	sending	messages.	At	worst	you	might	be	a	bit	embarrassed	if	your
message	just	sits	there	and	nobody	responds	to	it.	On	the	other	hand,	if	your
message	is	popular,	a	lot	of	people	will	see	it,	forward	it	as	e-mail	to	their
friends,	and	post	their	own	comments	on	it.
It	is	amazingly	fast	and	inexpensive	to	communicate	with	bulletin	boards.
Mail	or	telephone	communications	are	fine	for	a	one-on-one	discussion,	but
they	are	also	pretty	expensive	if	you	are	trying	to	communicate	with	a	group.
It	costs	nearly======================================================== will	connect	to	the	wireless	part	of	the	highway,	a	switch	will
connect	that	to	the	wired	part,	and	then	to	the	computer/server	in	your	home
or	office	and	bring	you	the	information	you	asked	for.
There	will	also	be	local,	less	expensive	kinds	of	wireless	networks	available
inside	businesses	and	most	homes.	These	networks	will	allow	you	to	connect
to	the	highway	or	your	own	computer	system	without	paying	time	charges	so
long	as	you	are	within	a	certain	range.	Local	wireless	networks	will	use
technology	different	from	the	one	used	by	the	wide-area	wireless	networks.
However,	portable	information	devices	will	automatically	select	the	least
expensive	network	they	are	able	to	connect	to,	so	the	user	won't	be	aware	of
the	technological	differences.	The	indoor	wireless	networks	will	allow	wallet
PCs	to	be	used	in	place	of	remote	controls.
Wireless	service	poses	obvious	concerns	about	privacy	and	security,	because
radio	signals	can	easily	be	intercepted.	Even	wired	networks	can	be	tapped.
The	highway	software	will	have	to	encrypt	transmission	to	avoid
eavesdropping.
Governments	have	long	understood	the	importance	of	keeping	information
private,	for	both	economic	and	military	reasons.	The	need	to	make	personal,
commercial,	military,	or	diplomatic	messages	secure	(or	to	break	into	them)
has	attracted	powerful	intellects	through	the	generations.	It	is	very	satisfying
to	break	an	encoded	message.	Charles	Babbage,	who	made	dramatic	advances
in	the	art	of	code	breaking	in	the	mid-1800s,	wrote:	"Deciphering	is,	in	my
opinion,	one	of	the	most	fascinating	of	arts,	and	I	fear	I	have	wasted	upon	it
more	time	than	it	deserves."	I	discovered	its	fascination	as	a	kid	when,	like
kids	everywhere,	a	bunch	of	us	played	with	simple	ciphers.	We	would	encode
messages	by	substituting	one	letter	of	the	alphabet	for	another.	If	a	friend	sent
me	a	cipher	that	began	"ULFW	NZXX"	it	would	be	fairly	easy	to	guess	that
this	represented	"DEAR	BILL,"	and	that	U	stood	for	D,	and	L	for	E,	and	so
forth.	With	those	seven	letters	it	wasn't	hard	to	unravel	the	rest	of	the	cipher
fairly	quickly.

Past	wars	have	been	won	or	lost	because	the	most	powerful	governments	on
earth	didn't	have	the	cryptological	power	any	interested	junior	high	school
student	with	a	personal	computer	can	harness	today.	Soon	any	child	old
enough	to	use	a	computer	will	be	able	to	transmit	encoded	messages	that	no
government	on	earth	will	find	easy	to	decipher.	This	is	one	of	the	profound
implications	of	the	spread	of	fantastic	computing	power.
When	you	send	a	message	across	the	information	highway	it	will	be	"signed"
by	your	computer	or	other	information	appliance	with	a	digital	signature	that
only	you	are	capable	of	applying,	and	it	will	be	encrypted	so	that	only	the
intended	recipient	will	be	able	to	decipher	it.	You'll	send	a	message,	which
could	be	information	of	any	kind,	including	voice,	video,	or	digital	money.
The	recipient	will	be	able	to	be	almost	positive	that	the	message	is	really	from
you,	that	it	was	sent	at	exactly	the	indicated	time,	that	it	has	not	been
tampered	with	in	the	slightest,	and	that	others	cannot	decipher	it.
The	mechanism	that	will	make	this	possible	is	based	on	mathematical
principles,	including	what	are	called	"one-way	functions"	and	"public-key
encryption."	These	are	quite	advanced	concepts,	so	I'm	only	going	to	touch	on
them.	Keep	in	mind	that	regardless	of	how	complicated	the	system	is
technically,	it	will	be	extremely	easy	for	you	to	use.	You'll	just	tell	your
information	appliance	what	you	want	it	to	do	and	it	will	seem	to	happen
effortlessly.
A	one-way	function	is	something	that	is	much	easier	to	do	than	undo.
Breaking	a	pane	of	glass	is	a	one-way	function,	but	not	one	useful	for
encoding.	The	sort	of	one-way	function	required	for	cryptography	is	one	that
is	easy	to	undo	if	you	know	an	extra	piece	of	information	and	very	difficult	to
undo	without	that	information.	There	are	a	number	of	such	one-way	functions
in	mathematics.	One	involves	prime	numbers.	Kids	learn	about	prime
numbers	in	school.	A	prime	number	cannot	be	divided	evenly	by	any	number
except	1	and	itself.	Among	the	first	dozen	numbers,	the	primes	are	2,	3,	5,	7,
and	11.	The	numbers	4,	6,	8,	and	10	are	not	prime	because	2	divides	into	each
of	them	evenly.	The	number	9	is	not	prime	because	3	divides	into	it	evenly.
There	are	an	infinite	number	of	prime	numbers,	and	there	is	no	known	pattern
to	them	except	that	they	are	prime.	When	you	multiply	two	prime	numbers
together,	you	get	a	number	that	can	be	divided	evenly	only	by	those	same	two
primes.	For	example,	only	5	and	7	can	be	divided	evenly	into	35.	Finding	the
primes	is	called	"factoring"	the	number.
It	is	easy	to	multiply	the	prime	numbers	11,927	and	20,903	and	get	the
number	249,310,081,	but	it	is	much	harder	to	recover	from	the	product,

249,310,081,	the	two	prime	numbers	that	are	its	factors.	This	one-way
function,	the	difficulty	of	factoring	numbers,	underlies	an	ingenious	kind	of
cipher:	the	most	sophisticated	encryption	system	in	use	today.	It	takes	a	long
time	for	even	the	largest	computers	to	factor	a	really	large	product	back	into
its	constituent	primes.	A	coding	system	based	on	factoring	uses	two	different
decoding	keys,	one	to	encipher	a	message	and	a	different	but	related	one	to
decipher.	With	only	the	enciphering	key,	it's	easy	to	encode	a	message,	but
deciphering	it	within	any	practical	period	of	time	is	nearly	impossible.
Deciphering	requires	a	separate	key,	available	only	to	the	intended	recipient
of	the	message—or,	rather,	to	the	recipient's	computer.	The	enciphering	key	is
based	on	the	product	of	two	huge	prime	numbers,	whereas	the	deciphering
key	is	based	on	the	primes	themselves.	A	computer	can	generate	a	new	pair	of
unique	keys	in	a	flash,	because	it	is	easy	for	a	computer	to	generate	two	large
prime	numbers	and	multiply	them	together.	The	enciphering	key	thus	created
can	be	made	public	without	appreciable	risk,	because	of	the	difficulty	even
another	computer	would	have	factoring	it	to	obtain	the	deciphering	key.
The	practical	application	of	this	encryption	will	be	at	the	center	of	the
information	highway's	security	system.	The	world	will	become	quite	reliant
on	this	network,	so	it	is	important	that	security	be	handled	competently.	You
can	think	of	the	information	highway	as	a	postal	network	where	everyone	has
a	mailbox	that	is	impervious	to	tampering	and	has	an	unbreakable	lock.	Each
mailbox	has	a	slot	that	lets	anyone	slide	information	in,	but	only	the	owner	of
a	mailbox	has	the	key	to	get	information	out.	(Some	governments	may	insist
that	each	mailbox	have	a	second	door	with	a	separate	key	that	the	government
keeps,	but	we'll	ignore	that	political	consideration	for	now	and	concentrate	on
the	security	that	software	will	provide.)
Each	user's	computer	or	other	information	appliance	will	use	prime	numbers
to	generate	an	enciphering	key,	which	will	be	listed	publicly,	and	a
corresponding	deciphering	key,	which	only	the	user	will	know.	This	is	how	it
will	work	in	practice:	I	have	information	I	want	to	send	you.	My	information
appliance/computer	system	looks	up	your	public	key	and	uses	it	to	encrypt	the
information	before	sending	it.	No	one	can	read	the	message,	even	though	your
key	is	public	knowledge,	because	your	public	key	does	not	contain	the
information	needed	for	decryption.	You	receive	the	message	and	your
computer	decrypts	it	with	a	private	key	that	corresponds	to	your	public	key.
You	want	to	answer.	Your	computer	looks	up	my	public	key	and	uses	it	to
encrypt	your	reply.	No	one	else	can	read	the	message,	even	though	it	was
encrypted	with	a	key	that	is	totally	public.	Only	I	can	read	it	because	only	I
have	the	private	deciphering	key.	This	is	very	practical,	because	no	one	has	to

trade	keys	in	advance.
How	big	do	the	prime	numbers	and	their	products	have	to	be	to	ensure	an
effective	one-way	function?.
The	concept	of	public-key	encryption	was	invented	by	Whitfield	Diffie	and
Martin	Hellman	in	1977.	Another	set	of	computer	scientists,	Ron	Rivest,	Adi
Shamir,	and	Leonard	Adelman,	soon	came	up	with	the	notion	of	using	prime
factorization	as	part	of	what	is	now	known	as	the	RSA	cryptosystem,	after	the
initials	of	their	last	names.	They	projected	that	it	would	take	millions	of	years
to	factor	a	130-digit	number	that	was	the	product	of	two	primes,	regardless	of
how	much	computing	power	was	brought	to	bear.	To	prove	the	point,	they
challenged	the	world	to	find	the	two	factors	in	this	129-digit	number,	known
to	people	in	the	field	as	RSA	129:
114,381,625,757,888,867,669,235,779,976,146,612,010,218,296,
721,242,362,562,561,842,935,706,935,245,733,897,830,597,123,563,958,705,058,989,075,147,599,29.0,026,879,543,541
They	were	sure	that	a	message	they	had	encrypted	using	the	number	as	the
public	key	would	be	totally	secure	forever.	But	they	hadn't	anticipated	either
the	full	effects	of	Moore's	Law,	as	discussed	in	chapter	2,	which	has	made
computers	much	more	powerful,	or	the	success	of	the	personal	computer,
which	has	dramatically	increased	the	number	of	computers	and	computer
users	in	the	world.	In	1993	a	group	of	more	than	600	academics	and	hobbyists
from	around	the	world	began	an	assault	on	the	129-digit	number,	using	the
Internet	to	coordinate	the	work	of	various	computers.	In	less	than	a	year	they
factored	the	number	into	two	primes,	one	64	digits	long	and	the	other	65.	The
primes	are	as	follows:
3,490,529,510,847,650,949,147,849,619,903,898,133,417,764,638,
493,387,843,990,820,577
and
32,769,132,993,266,709,549,961,988,190,834,461,413,177,642,
967,992,942,539,798,288,533
And	the	encoded	message	says:	"The	magic	words	are	squeamish	and
ossifrage."
One	lesson	that	came	out	of	this	challenge	is	that	a	129-digit	public	key	is	not
long	enough	if	the	information	being	encrypted	is	really	important	and
sensitive.	Another	is	that	no	one	should	get	too	cocksure	about	the	security	of

encryption.
Increasing	the	key	just	a	few	digits	makes	it	much	more	difficult	to	crack.
Mathematicians	today	believe	that	a	250-digit-long	pr======================================================== ical	records
before	determining	whether	it	chooses	to	insure	our	mortality.	These
companies	may	also	want	to	know	if	we	indulge	in	any	dangerous	pastimes,
such	as	hang	gliding,	smoking,	or	stock	car	racing.	Should	an	insurer's
computer	be	allowed	to	examine	the	information	highway	for	records	of	our
purchases	to	see	if	there	are	any	that	might	indicate	risky	behavior	on	our
part?	Should	a	prospective	employer's	computer	be	allowed	to	examine	our
communications	or	entertainment	records	to	develop	a	psychological	profile?
How	much	information	should	a	federal,	state,	or	city	agency	be	allowed	to
see?	What	should	a	potential	landlord	be	able	to	learn	about	you?	What
information	should	a	potential	spouse	have	access	to?	We	will	need	to	define
both	the	legal	and	practical	limits	of	privacy.
These	privacy	fears	revolve	around	the	possibility	that	someone	else	is
keeping	track	of	information	about	you.	But	the	highway	will	also	make	it
possible	for	an	individual	to	keep	track	of	his	or	her	own	whereabouts—to
lead	what	we	might	call	"a	documented	life"
Your	wallet	PC	will	be	able	to	keep	audio,	time,	location,	and	eventually	even
video	records	of	everything	that	happens	to	you.	It	will	be	able	to	record
every	word	you	say	and	every	word	said	to	you,	as	well	as	body	temperature,

blood	pressure,	barometric	pressure,	and	a	variety	of	other	data	about	you	and
your	surroundings.	It	will	be	able	to	track	your	interactions	with	the	highway
—all	of	the	commands	you	issue,	the	messages	you	send,	and	the	people	you
call	or	who	call	you.	The	resulting	record	will	be	the	ultimate	diary	and
autobiography,	if	you	want	one.	If	nothing	else,	you	would	know	exactly
when	and	where	you	took	a	photograph	when	you	organize	your	family's
digital	photo	album.
The	technology	required	is	not	difficult.	It	should	soon	be	possible	to
compress	the	human	voice	down	to	a	few	thousand	bits	of	digital	information
per	second,	which	means	that	an	hour	of	conversation	will	be	converted	into
about	1	megabyte	of	digital	data.	Small	tapes	used	for	backing	up	computer
hard	disks	already	store	10	gigabytes	or	more	of	data—enough	to	record
about	10,000	hours	of	compressed	audio.	Tapes	for	new	generations	of	digital
VCRs	will	hold	more	than	100	gigabytes,	which	means	that	a	single	tape
costing	a	few	dollars	could	hold	recordings	of	all	the	conversations	an
individual	has	over	the	course	of	a	decade	or	possibly	even	a	lifetime—
depending	on	how	talkative	he	is.	These	numbers	are	based	only	on	today's
capacities—in	the	future	storage	will	be	much	cheaper.	Audio	is	easy,	but
within	a	couple	of	years	a	full	video	recording	will	be	possible	as	well.
I	find	the	prospect	of	documented	lives	a	little	chilling,	but	some	people	will
warm	to	the	idea.	One	reason	for	documenting	a	life	will	be	defensive.	We
can	think	of	the	wallet	PC	as	an	alibi	machine,	because	encrypted	digital
signatures	will	guarantee	an	unforgeable	alibi	against	false	accusations.	If
someone	ever	accused	you	of	something,	you	could	retort:	"Hey,	buddy,	I
have	a	documented	life.	These	bits	are	stored	away.	I	can	play	back	anything
I've	ever	said.	So	don't	play	games	with	me"	On	the	other	hand,	if	you	were
guilty	of	something,	there	would	be	a	record	of	it.	There	would	also	be	a
record	of	any	tampering.	Richard	Nixon's	taping	of	conversations	in	the
White	House—and	then	the	suspicions	that	he	had	attempted	to	alter	those
tapes—contributed	to	his	undoing.	He	chose	to	have	a	documented	political
life	and	lived	to	regret	it.
The	Rodney	King	case	showed	the	evidentiary	power	of	videotape	and	its
limits.	Before	long	every	police	car,	or	individual	policeman,	may	be
equipped	with	a	digital	video	camera,	with	nonforgeable	time	and	location
stamps.	The	public	may	insist	that	the	police	record	themselves	in	the	course
of	their	work.	And	the	police	could	be	all	for	it,	to	guard	against	claims	of
brutality	or	abuse	on	one	hand	and	as	an	aid	in	gathering	better	evidence	on
the	other.	Some	police	forces	are	already	videorecording	all	arrests.	This	sort
of	record	won't	affect	just	the	police.	Medical	malpractice	insurance	might	be

cheaper,	or	only	available,	for	doctors	who	record	surgical	procedures	or	even
office	visits.	Bus,	taxi,	and	trucking	companies	have	an	obvious	interest	in	the
performance	of	their	drivers.	Some	transportation	companies	have	already
installed	equipment	to	record	mileage	and	average	speed.	I	can	imagine
proposals	that	every	automobile,	including	yours	and	mine,	be	outfitted	not
only	with	a	recorder	but	also	with	a	transmitter	that	identifies	the	car	and	its
location—a	future	license	plate.	After	all,	airplanes	have	"black	box"
recorders	today,	and	once	the	cost	drops,	there	is	no	reason	they	shouldn't	also
be	in	our	cars.	If	a	car	was	reported	stolen,	its	location	would	be	known
immediately.	After	a	hit-and-run	accident	or	a	drive-by	shooting,	a	judge
could	authorize	a	query:	"What	vehicles	were	in	the	following	two-block	area
during	this	thirty-minute	period?"	The	black	box	could	record	your	speed	and
location,	which	would	allow	for	the	perfect	enforcement	of	speeding	laws.	I
would	vote	against	that.
In	a	world	that	is	increasingly	instrumented,	we	could	reach	the	point	where
cameras	record	most	of	what	goes	on	in	public.	Video	cameras	in	public
places	are	already	relatively	commonplace.	They	perch,	often	concealed,
around	banks,	airports,	automatic-teller	machines,	hospitals,	freeways,	stores,
and	hotel	and	office-building	lobbies	and	elevators.
The	prospect	of	so	many	cameras,	always	watching,	might	have	distressed	us
fifty	years	ago,	as	it	did	George	Orwell.	But	today	they	are	unremarkable.
There	are	neighborhoods	in	the	United	States	and	Europe	where	citizens	are
welcoming	these	cameras	above	streets	and	parking	lots.	In	Monaco,	street
crime	has	been	virtually	eliminated	because	hundreds	of	video	cameras	have
been	placed	around	the	tiny	principality.	Monaco,	however,	is	small	enough	in
area,	370	acres	(150	hectares),	that	a	few	hundred	cameras	can	pretty	much
cover	it	all.	Many	parents	would	welcome	cameras	around	schoolyards	to
discourage	or	help	apprehend	drug	dealers,	child	molesters,	and	even
playground	bullies.	Every	city	streetlight	represents	a	substantial	investment
by	a	community	in	public	safety.	In	a	few	years	it	will	require	only	a
relatively	modest	additional	sum	to	add	and	operate	cameras	with	connections
to	the	information	highway.	Within	a	decade,	computers	will	be	able	to	scan
video	records	very	inexpensively	looking	for	a	particular	person	or	activity.	I
can	easily	imagine	proposals	that	virtually	every	pole	supporting	a	streetlight
should	also	have	one	or	more	cameras.	The	images	from	these	cameras	might
be	accessed	only	in	the	event	of	a	crime,	and	even	then	possibly	only	under
court	order.	Some	people	might	argue	that	every	image	from	every	camera
should	be	available	for	viewing	by	everyone	at	any	time.	This	raises	serious
privacy	questions	in	my	mind,	but	advocates	might	argue	that	it's	appropriate
if	the	cameras	are	only	in	public	places.

Almost	everyone	is	willing	to	accept	some	restrictions	in	exchange	for	a	sense
of	security.	From	a	historical	perspective,	people	living	in	Western
democracies	already	enjoy	a	degree	of	privacy	and	personal	freedom
unprecedented	in	all	of	human	history.	If	ubiquitous	cameras	tied	into	the
information	highway	should	prove	to	reduce	serious	crime	dramatically	in	test
communities,	a	real	debate	would	begin	over	whether	people	fear	surveillance
more	or	less	than	they	fear	crime.	It	is	difficult	to	imagine	a	government-
sanctioned	experiment	along	these	lines	in	the	United	States	because	of	the
privacy	issues	it	raises	and	the	likelihood	of	constitutional	challenges.
However,	opinion	can	change.	It	might	take	only	a	few	more	incidents	like
the	bombing	in	Oklahoma	City	within	the	borders	of	the	United	States	for
attitudes	toward	strong	privacy	protection	to	shift.	What	today	seems	like
digital	Big	Brother	might	one	day	become	the	norm	if	the	alternative	is	being
left	to	the	mercy	of	terrorists	and	criminals.	I	am	not	advocating	either
position—technology	will	enable	society	to	make	a	political	decision.
At	the	same	time	technology	is	making	it	easier	to	create	video	records,	it	is
also	making	it	possible	to	keep	all	your	personal	documents	and	messages
totally	private.	Encryption-technology	software,	which	anyone	can	download
from	the	Internet,	can	transform	a	PC	into	a	virtually	unbreakable	code
machine.	As	the	highway	is	deployed,	security	services	will	be	applied	to	all
forms	of	digital	information—phone	calls,	files,	databases,	you	name	it.	As
long	as	you	protect	the	password,	the	information	stored	on	your	computer
can	be	held	under	the	strongest	lock	and	key	that	has	ever	existed.	This	allows
for	the	greatest	degree	of	information	privacy	any	individual	has	ever	had.
Many	in	government	are	opposed	to	this	encryption	capability,	because	it
reduces	their	ability	to	gather	information.	Unfortunately	for	them,	the
technology	can't	be	stopped.	The	National	Security	Agency	is	a	part	of	the
U.S.	government	defense	and	intelligence	community	that	protects	this
country's	secret	communications	and	decrypts	foreign	communications	to
gather	intelligence	data.	The	NSA	does	not	want	software	containing
advanced	encryption	capabilities	to	be	sent	outside	the	United	States.
However,	this	software	is	already	available	throughout	the	world,	and	any
computer	can	run	it.	No	policy	decision	will	be	able	to	restore	the	tapping
capabilities	governments	had	in	the	past.
Today's	legislation	that	prevents	the	export	of	software	with	good	encryption
capability	could	harm	U.S.	software	and	hardware	companies.	The
restrictions	give	foreign	companies	an	advantage	over	U.S.	competitors.
American	companies	almost	unanimously	agree	that	the	current	encryption
export	restrictions	don't	work.

Each	media	advance	has	had	a	substantial	effect	on	how	people	and
governments	interact.	The	printing	press	and,	later,	mass-circulation
newspapers	changed	the	nature	o======================================================== ighway.	We	are	providing	software	tools	to	a	number	of	hardware	companies
building	new	applications.	Many	media	and	communications	companies	from
around	the	world	will	be	working	with	us	and	observing	the	ways	customers
respond	to	the	applications.	It	will	be	critical	to	listen	to	customer	feedback.
You	too	will	be	able	to	read	about	the	results	of	the	highway	trials.	Are	people
gravitating	toward	new	types	of	multiplayer	games?	Are	they	socializing	in
new	ways?	Are	they	working	together	across	the	network?	Are	they	shopping
in	the	new	marketplace?	Are	exciting	applications	you	never	would	have
imagined	coming	along?	Are	people	willing	to	pay	for	these	new	capabilities?
The	answers	to	these	questions	are	the	key	to	how	the	Information	Age
develops.	Mergers	and	mania	are	fun	to	watch.	But	if	you	want	to	know	how
the	race	to	build	the	information	highway	is	really	going,	keep	your	eye	on
PCs	connected	to	the	Internet,	and	on	the	software	applications	that	are
popular	in	highway	trials.	At	least	that's	what	I'm	going	to	do.

12
CRITICAL	ISSUES
This	is	an	exciting	time	in	the	Information	Age.	It	is	the	very	beginning.
Almost	everywhere	I	go,	whether	to	speak	to	a	group	or	to	have	dinner	with
friends,	questions	come	up	about	how	information	technology	will	change	our
lives.	People	want	to	understand	how	it	will	make	the	future	different.	Will	it
make	our	lives	better	or	worse?
I've	already	said	I'm	an	optimist,	and	I'm	optimistic	about	the	impact	of	the
new	technology.	It	will	enhance	leisure	time	and	enrich	culture	by	expanding
the	distribution	of	information.	It	will	help	relieve	pressures	on	urban	areas	by
enabling	individuals	to	work	from	home	or	remote-site	offices.	It	will	relieve
pressure	on	natural	resources	because	increasing	numbers	of	products	will	be
able	to	take	the	form	of	bits	rather	than	of	manufactured	goods.	It	will	give	us
more	control	over	our	lives	and	allow	experiences	and	products	to	be	custom
tailored	to	our	interests.	Citizens	of	the	information	society	will	enjoy	new
opportunities	for	productivity,	learning,	and	entertainment.	Countries	that
move	boldly	and	in	concert	with	each	other	will	enjoy	economic	rewards.
Whole	new	markets	will	emerge,	and	a	myriad	new	opportunities	for
employment	will	be	created.
When	measured	by	decades,	the	economy	is	always	in	upheaval.	For	the	past
few	hundred	years,	every	generation	has	found	more	efficient	ways	of	getting
work	done,	and	the	cumulative	benefits	have	been	enormous.	The	average
person	today	enjoys	a	much	better	life	than	the	nobility	did	a	few	centuries
ago.	It	would	be	great	to	have	a	king's	land,	but	what	about	his	lice?	Medical
advances	alone	have	greatly	increased	life	spans	and	improved	standards	of
living.
Henry	Ford,	in	the	first	part	of	the	twentieth	century,	was	the	automotive
industry,	but	your	car	is	superior	to	anything	he	ever	drove.	It's	safer,	more
reliable,	and	surely	has	a	better	sound	system.	This	pattern	of	improvement
isn't	going	to	change.	Advancing	productivity	propels	societies	forward,	and	it
is	only	a	matter	of	time	before	the	average	person	in	a	developed	country	will
be	"richer"	in	many	ways	than	anyone	is	today.
Just	because	I'm	optimistic	doesn't	mean	I	don't	have	concerns	about	what	is
going	to	happen	to	all	of	us.	As	with	all	major	changes,	the	benefits	of	the

information	society	will	carry	costs.	There	will	be	dislocations	in	some
business	sectors	that	will	create	a	need	for	worker	retraining.	The	availability
of	virtually	free	communications	and	computing	will	alter	the	relationships	of
nations,	and	of	socioeconomic	groups	within	nations.	The	power	and
versatility	of	digital	technology	will	raise	new	concerns	about	individual
privacy,	commercial	confidentiality,	and	national	security.	There	are,
moreover,	equity	issues	that	will	have	to	be	addressed.	The	information
society	should	serve	all	of	its	citizens,	not	only	the	technically	sophisticated
and	economically	privileged.	In	short,	a	range	of	important	issues	confronts
us.	I	don't	necessarily	have	the	solutions,	but,	as	I	started	off	the	book	saying,
now	is	a	good	time	for	a	broad	discussion.	Technological	progress	will	force
all	of	society	to	confront	tough	new	problems,	only	some	of	which	we	can
foresee.	The	pace	of	technological	change	is	so	fast	that	sometimes	it	seems
the	world	will	be	completely	different	from	one	day	to	the	next.	It	won't.	But
we	should	be	prepared	for	change.	Societies	are	going	to	be	asked	to	make
hard	choices	in	such	areas	as	universal	availability,	investment	in	education,
regulation,	and	the	balance	between	individual	privacy	and	community
security.
While	it	is	important	that	we	start	thinking	about	the	future,	we	should	guard
against	the	impulse	to	take	hasty	action.	We	can	ask	only	the	most	general
kinds	of	questions	today,	so	it	doesn't	make	sense	to	come	up	with	detailed,
specific	regulations.	We've	got	a	good	number	of	years	to	observe	the	course
of	the	coming	revolution,	and	we	should	use	that	time	to	make	intelligent
rather	than	reflexive	decisions.
Perhaps	the	most	widespread	and	personal	anxiety	is,	"How	will	I	fit	into	the
evolving	economy?"	Men	and	women	are	worried	that	their	own	jobs	will
become	obsolete,	that	they	won't	be	able	to	adapt	to	new	ways	of	working,
that	their	children	will	get	into	industries	that	will	cease	to	exist,	or	that
economic	upheaval	will	create	wholesale	unemployment,	especially	among
older	workers.	These	are	legitimate	concerns.	Entire	professions	and
industries	will	fade.	But	new	ones	will	flourish.	This	will	be	happening	over
the	next	two	or	three	decades,	which	is	fast	by	historical	standards,	but	may
turn	out	to	be	no	more	disruptive	than	the	pace	at	which	the	microprocessor
revolution	brought	about	its	changes	in	the	workplace,	or	the	upheavals	in	the
airline,	trucking,	and	banking	industries	over	the	last	decade.
Although	the	microprocessor	and	the	personal	computer	that	it	enabled	have
altered	and	even	eliminated	some	jobs	and	companies,	it	is	hard	to	find	any
large	sector	of	the	economy	that	has	been	negatively	affected.	Mainframe,
mini-computer,	and	typewriter	companies	have	downsized,	but	the	computer

industry	as	a	whole	has	grown,	with	a	substantial	net	increase	in	employment.
As	big	computer	companies	such	as	IBM	or	DEC	have	laid	people	off,	many
of	those	workers	have	found	employment	within	the	industry—usually	at
companies	doing	something	related	to	PCs.
Outside	the	computer	industry	it	is	also	hard	to	find	a	complete	business
sector	hurt	by	the	PC.	There	are	some	typesetters	who	were	displaced	by
desktop-publishing	programs—but	for	every	worker	in	that	situation	there	are
several	whose	jobs	desktop	publishing	created.	All	the	change	hasn't	always
been	good	for	all	the	people,	but	as	revolutions	go,	the	one	set	in	motion	by
the	personal	computer	has	been	remarkably	benign.
Some	people	worry	that	there	are	only	a	finite	number	of	jobs	in	the	world,
and	that	each	time	a	job	goes	away	someone	is	left	stranded	with	no	further
purpose.	Fortunately,	this	is	not	how	the	economy	works.	The	economy	is	a
vast	interconnected	system	in	which	any	resource	that	is	freed	up	becomes
available	to	another	area	of	the	economy	that	finds	it	most	valuable.	Each
time	a	job	is	made	unnecessary,	the	person	who	was	filling	that	job	is	freed	to
do	something	else.	The	net	result	is	that	more	gets	done,	raising	the	overall
standard	of	living	in	the	long	run.	If	there	is	a	general	downturn	across	the
economy—a	recession	or	a	depression—there	is	a	cyclical	loss	of	jobs,	but
the	shifts	that	have	come	about	as	a	result	of	technology	have	tended,	if
anything,	to	create	jobs.
Job	categories	change	constantly	in	an	evolving	economy.	Once	all	telephone
calls	were	made	through	an	operator.	When	I	was	a	child,	long-distance	calls
from	our	home	were	made	by	dialing	"0"	and	giving	an	operator	the	number,
and	when	I	was	a	teenager,	many	companies	still	employed	in-house
telephone	operators	who	routed	calls	by	plugging	cables	into	receptacles.
Today	there	are	comparatively	few	telephone	operators,	even	though	the
volume	of	calls	is	greater	than	ever.	Automation	has	taken	over.
Before	the	Industrial	Revolution,	most	people	lived	or	worked	on	farms.
Growing	food	was	mankind's	main	preoccupation.	If	someone	had	predicted
back	then	that	within	a	couple	of	centuries	only	a	tiny	percentage	of	the
population	would	be	needed	to	produce	food,	all	those	farmers	would	have
worried	about	what	everyone	would	do	for	a	living.	The	great	majority	of	the
501	job	categories	recognized	in	1990	by	the	U.S.	Census	Bureau	didn't	even
exist	fifty	years	earlier.	Although	we	can't	predict	new	job	categories,	most
will	relate	to	unmet	needs	in	education,	social	services,	and	leisure
opportunities.

We	know	that	when	the	highway	connects	buyers	and	sellers	directly,	it	will
put	pressure	on	people	who	are	currently	acting	as	middlemen.	This	is	the
same	sort	of	pressure	that	mass	merchants	such	as	WalMart,	Price-Costco,
and	other	companies	with	particularly	efficient	consumer-merchandising
approaches	have	already	put	on	more	traditional	stores.	When	Wal-Mart
moves	into	a	rural	area,	the	merchants	in	the	local	towns	feel	the	pinch.	Some
survive,	some	do	not,	but	the	net	economic	effect	on	the	region	is	modest.	We
may	regret	the	cultural	ramifications,	but	warehouse	stores	and	fast-food
chains	are	thriving	because	consumers,	who	vote	with	their	dollars,	tend	to
support	outlets	that	pass	their	productivity	savings	along	in	the	form	of	lower
prices.
Reducing	the	number	of	middlemen	is	another	way	of	lowering	costs.	It	will
also	cause	economic	shifts,	but	no	faster	than	the	changes	happened	in
retailing	in	the	last	decade.	It	will	take	many	years	for	the	highway	to	be
utilized	so	widely	for	shopping	that	there	will	be	significantly	fewer
middlemen.	There	is	plenty	of	time	to	prepare.	The	jobs	those	displaced
middlemen	change	to	might	not	even	have	been	thought	of	yet.	We'll	have	to
wait	and	see	what	kinds	of	creative	work	the	new	economy	devises.	But	as======================================================== our	kids	when	you're	out	of	town	or
showing	your	veterinarian	the	way	your	dog	or	cat	limps.	But	when	you're	at
home,	chances	are	you'll	keep	cameras	off	during	most	calls,	especially	with
strangers.	You	may	choose	to	transmit	a	canned	photograph	of	yourself,	your
family,	or	something	else	you	believe	expresses	your	individuality	yet
protects	your	visual	privacy.	It	will	be	something	like	choosing	a	message	for
your	answering	machine.	Live	video	could	be	switched	on	for	a	friend	or
when	business	required	it.
All	of	the	synchronous	and	asynchronous	images	I	have	discussed	up	to	this
point—photographs,	videos,	or	documents—have	been	pictures	of	real	things.
As	computers	become	more	powerful,	it	will	be	possible	for	a	standard	PC	to
fabricate	realistic	synthetic	images.	Your	phone	or	computer	will	be	able	to
generate	a	lifelike	digital	image	of	your	face,	showing	you	listening	or	even
talking.	You	really	will	be	talking	it's	just	that	you've	taken	the	call	at	home
and	are	dripping	wet	from	the	shower.	As	you	talk,	your	phone	will	synthesize
an	image	of	you	in	your	most	businesslike	suit.	Your	facial	expressions	will
match	your	words	(remember,	small	computers	are	going	to	get	very

powerful).	Just	as	easily,	your	phone	will	be	able	to	transmit	an	image	of	your
words	issuing	from	the	mouth	of	someone	else,	or	from	an	idealized	version
of	you.	If	you	are	talking	to	someone	you've	never	met,	and	you	don't	want	to
show	a	mole	or	a	flabby	chin,	your	caller	won't	be	able	to	tell	if	you	really
look	so	much	like	Cary	Grant	(or	Meg	Ryan)	or	whether	you're	getting	a	little
help	from	your	computer.
All	of	these	electronic	innovations—e-mail,	shared	screens,
videoconferencing,	and	video	phone	calls—are	ways	of	overcoming	physical
separation.	By	the	time	they	become	commonplace,	they	will	have	changed
not	just	the	way	we	work	together	but	also	distinctions	now	made	between	the
workplace	and	everywhere	else.
In	1994	in	the	United	States	there	were	more	than	7	million	"telecommuters"
who	didn't	travel	daily	to	offices	but	instead	"commuted"	via	fax	machines,
telephones,	and	e-mail.	Some	writers,	engineers,	attorneys,	and	others	whose
jobs	are	relatively	autonomous	already	stay	at	home	for	a	portion	of	their
work	hours.	Salespersons	are	judged	on	results;	so	as	long	as	a	professional
salesperson	is	productive,	it	doesn't	much	matter	whether	he	or	she	is	working
in	the	office,	at	home,	or	on	the	road	somewhere.	Many	people	who
telecommute	find	it	liberating	and	convenient,	but	some	find	it	claustrophobic
to	be	at	home	all	the	time.	Others	discover	they	don't	have	the	self-discipline
to	make	it	effective.	In	the	years	ahead,	millions	of	additional	people	will
telecommute	at	least	part-time,	using	the	information	highway.
Employees	who	do	most	of	their	work	on	the	telephone	are	strong	candidates
for	telecommuting	because	calls	can	be	routed	to	them.	Telemarketers,
customer-service	representatives,	reservation	agents,	and	product-support
specialists	will	have	access	to	as	much	information	on	a	screen	at	home	as
they	would	on	a	screen	at	an	office.	A	decade	from	now,	advertisements	for
many	jobs	will	list	how	many	hours	a	week	of	work	are	expected	and	how
many	of	those	hours,	if	any,	are	"inside"	hours	at	a	designated	location	such	as
an	office.	Some	jobs	will	require	that	the	employee	already	have	a	PC	so	he
can	work	at	home.	Customer-service	organizations	will	be	able	to	use	part-
time	labor	very	easily.
When	employees	and	supervisors	are	physically	apart,	management	will	have
to	adapt,	and	each	individual	will	have	to	learn	to	be	a	productive	employee
on	his	or	her	own.	New	feedback	mechanisms	will	have	to	evolve	too,	so	that
both	employer	and	employee	can	determine	the	quality	of	work	being	done.
An	employee	in	an	office	is	assumed	to	be	working	the	whole	time,	but	the

same	employee	working	at	home	might	be	credited	(perhaps	at	a	different
rate)	only	for	the	time	he	or	she	is	actually	performing	work.	If	the	baby	starts
crying,	Dad	or	Mom	would	click	"Not	Available,"	and	take	care	of	the	child
with	unpaid	minutes	away	from	the	job.	When	the	employee	was	ready	once
again	to	focus	on	the	job,	he	or	she	would	signal	availability,	and	the	network
would	start	delivering	work	that	needed	attention.	Part-time	work	and	job
sharing	will	take	on	new	meanings.
The	number	of	offices	a	company	needs	might	be	reduced.	A	single	office	or
cubicle	could	serve	several	people	whose	inside	hours	were	staggered	or
irregular.	Already,	the	major	accounting	firms	Arthur	Andersen	and	Ernst	&
Young	are	among	the	companies	that	have	replaced	large	numbers	of
expensive	private	offices	with	a	smaller	number	of	generic	offices,	which	can
be	reserved	by	accountants	who	are	in	from	the	field.	Tomorrow,	a	shared
office's	computers,	phones,	and	digital	white	boards	could	be	configured	for
that	day's	occupant.	For	part	of	a	day	an	office's	white-board	walls	would
display	one	employee's	calendar,	family	photos,	and	favorite	cartoons,	and
later	on	the	same	whiteboard	walls	would	feature	the	personal	photos	or
artwork	of	a	different	employee.	Wherever	a	worker	logged	on,	his	or	her
familiar	office	surroundings	could	follow,	courtesy	of	digital	white	boards	and
the	information	highway.
Information	technology	will	affect	much	more	than	the	physical	location	and
supervision	of	employees.	The	very	nature	of	almost	every	business
organization	will	have	to	be	reexamined.	This	should	include	its	structure	and
the	balance	between	inside,	full-time	staff	and	outside	consultants	and	firms.
The	corporate	reengineering	movement	starts	with	the	premise	that	there	are
better	ways	to	design	companies.	To	date,	most	reengineering	has	focused	on
moving	information	inside	the	company	in	new	ways.	The	next	movement
will	be	to	redefine	the	boundary	between	the	company	and	its	customers	and
suppliers.	Key	questions	to	reexamine	include:	How	will	customers	find	out
about	products?	How	will	customers	order?	What	new	competitors	will
emerge	as	geography	becomes	less	of	a	barrier?	How	can	the	company	do	the
best	job	of	keeping	customers	happy	after	the	sale?
Corporate	structures	will	evolve.	E-mail	is	a	powerful	force	for	flattening	the
hierarchies	common	to	large	companies.	If	communications	systems	are	good
enough,	companies	don't	need	as	many	levels	of	management.	Intermediaries
in	middle	management,	who	once	passed	information	up	and	down	the	chain
of	command,	already	aren't	as	important	today	as	they	once	were.	Microsoft
was	born	an	Information	Age	company,	and	its	hierarchy	has	always	been

relatively	flat.	Our	goal	is	to	have	no	more	than	six	levels	of	management
between	me	and	anyone	in	the	company.	In	a	sense,	because	of	e-mail,	there
are	no	levels	between	me	and	anyone	in	the	company.
As	technology	makes	it	easier	for	a	business	to	find	and	collaborate	with
outside	expertise,	a	huge	and	competitive	market	for	consultants	will	arise.	If
you	want	someone	to	help	design	a	piece	of	direct-response	advertising,	you'll
ask	a	software	application	running	on	the	information	highway	to	list
consultants	with	certain	qualifications	who	are	willing	to	work	for	no	more
than	a	certain	rate	and	have	an	appropriate	time	period	free.	Software	will
check	references	for	you	preliminarily	and	help	you	filter	out	people	who
aren't	qualified.	You'll	be	able	to	ask,	"Have	any	of	these	candidates	worked
for	us	before	and	gotten	a	rating	above	eight?"	This	system	will	become	so
inexpensive	to	use	that	you'll	eventually	rely	on	it	to	find	baby-sitters	and
people	to	cut	your	lawn.	If	you're	looking	for	work	as	an	employee	or
contractor,	the	system	will	match	you	with	potential	employers	and	be	able	to
send	your	résumé	electronically	with	the	click	of	a	button.
Companies	will	reevaluate	such	employment	issues	as	how	extensive	a	legal
or	finance	department	they	should	keep,	based	on	the	relative	benefits	of
having	expertise	inside	an	organization	versus	outside	it.	For	particularly	busy
periods	a	company	will	be	able	to	get	more	help	easily	without	adding	more
employees	and	the	associated	office	space.	Businesses	that	successfully	draw
on	the	resources	available	across	the	network	will	be	more	efficient,	which
will	challenge	others	to	do	the	same.
Lots	of	companies	will	eventually	be	far	smaller	because	using	the
information	highway	will	make	it	easy	to	find	and	work	with	outside
resources.	Big	is	not	necessarily	good	when	it	comes	to	business.	Hollywood
studios	are	surprisingly	small	in	terms	of	permanent	employees,	because	they
contract	for	services—including	actors	and	often	facilities—on	a	movie-by-
movie	basis.	Some	software	companies	follow	a	similar	model,	hiring
programmers	as	needed.	Of	course,	companies	will	still	reserve	many
functions	for	full-time	employees.	It	would	be	immensely	inefficient	to	have
to	bid	for	the	time	of	an	outside	professional	whenever	a	company	needed
something	done,	especially	if	the	outside	consultant	had	to	come	up	to	speed.
But	a	number	of	functions	will	be	dispersed,	both	structurally	and
geographically.
Geographic	dispersion	will	affect	much	more	than	corporate	structure.	Many
of	today's	major	social	problems	have	arisen	because	the	population	has	been
crowded	into	urban	areas.	The	drawbacks	of	city	life	are	obvious	and

substantial—traffic,	cost	of	living,	crime,	and	limited	access	to	the	outdoors,
among	others.	The	advantages	of	city	life	include	access	to	work,	services,
education,	entertainment,	and	friends.	Over	the	past	hundred	years	most	of	the
population	of	the	industrialized	world	has	chosen	to	live	in	urban	areas,	after
consciously	or	unconsciously	balancing	the	pluses	and	minuses.
The	information	highway	changes	that	balance.	For	those	who	have	a
connection	to	it,	the	highway	will	substantially	reduce	the	drawbacks	of	living
outside	a	big	city.	As	a	consultant	or	employee	involved	in	a	service-related
field,	you	will	be	able	to	collaborate	easily	from	virtually	anywhere.	As	a
consumer,	you	will	be	able	to	get	advice—financial,	legal,	even	some	medical
—withou======================================================== o	ballet
slippers.	Of	course	you	will	still	ask	people	you	know	for	recommendations,
but	efficiently,	by	electronic	mail.
If	you're	thinking	of	doing	business	with	a	company	or	buying	a	product,
you'll	be	able	to	check	what	others	say	about	it.	If	you	want	to	buy	a
refrigerator,	you	will	look	for	the	electronic	bulletin	boards	containing	formal
and	informal	reviews	of	refrigerators	and	their	manufacturers	and	retailers.
You'll	get	into	the	habit	of	checking	these	bulletin	boards	before	you	make
any	significant	purchase.	When	you	have	a	compliment	or	complaint	about	a
record	club,	a	doctor,	or	even	a	computer	chip,	it	will	be	easy	to	find	the	place
on	the	network	where	that	company	or	product	is	discussed	and	add	your
opinion.	Ultimately,	companies	that	don't	serve	their	customers	well	will	see
their	reputations	and	their	sales	decline,	while	those	that	do	a	great	job	will

attract	sizable	followings	through	this	new	form	of	word	of	"mouth."
But	the	various	endorsements	and	especially	the	negative	comments	will	have
to	be	examined	carefully.	They	may	be	motivated	more	by	fanaticism	than	a
genuine	desire	to	share	pertinent	information.
Let's	say	a	company	is	selling	an	air	conditioner	that	99.9	percent	of	its
customers	are	very	happy	with.	One	angry	consumer	in	the	remaining	0.1
percent	can	post	horrible	insults	about	a	brand	of	air	conditioner,	the	company
that	manufactures	it,	and	individuals	in	the	company,	and	keep	sending	the
messages	over	and	over	and	over.	The	effect	could	be	compared	to	sitting	in	a
meeting	where	everyone	has	a	volume	control	that	could	be	set	from	0	to
1,000,	and	the	normal	level	of	conversation	is,	say,	3.	Then	a	few	people
decide	to	crank	their	volume	up	to	1,000	and	start	shouting.	This	means	that	if
I	happen	to	look	in	on	the	bulletin	board	because	I'm	buying	an	air
conditioner,	my	visit	may	be	a	waste	of	time	because	all	I	find	there	is	the
shouting.	It	is	unfair	to	me	and	to	the	company	selling	the	air	conditioners.
Already,	a	network	etiquette,	or	"netiquette,"	is	evolving.	As	the	information
highway	becomes	society's	town	square,	we	will	come	to	expect	it	to	conform
to	our	culture's	mores.	There	are	vast	cultural	differences	around	the	world,	so
the	highway	will	be	divided	into	different	parts,	some	dedicated	to	various
cultures,	and	some	specified	for	global	usage.	So	far,	a	frontier	mentality	has
prevailed,	and	participants	in	electronic	forums	have	been	known	to	lapse	into
behavior	that	is	antisocial	and	even	illegal.	Illegal	copies	of	copyrighted
intellectual	property,	including	articles,	books,	and	software	applications,	are
distributed	freely.	Get-rich-quick	scams	pop	up	here	and	there.	Pornography
flourishes	within	the	easy	reach	of	children.	Single-minded	voices	rant,
sometimes	almost	incessantly,	about	products,	companies,	and	people	they
have	come	to	dislike.	Forum	participants	get	horrible	insults	hurled	at	them
because	of	some	comment	they	have	made.	The	ease	with	which	an
individual,	any	individual,	can	share	his	opinions	with	the	members	of	a	huge
electronic	community	is	unprecedented.	And	the	ones	who	are	yelling	are
able,	because	the	electronic	community	is	so	efficient,	to	take	a	piece	of	hate
mail	and	post	it	on	twenty	bulletin	boards.	I've	seen	bulletin	boards	collapse
into	foolishness	after	people	start	getting	shrill.	Other	participants	in	the
discussion	don't	know	what	to	do.	Some	people	yell	back;	a	few	try	to	say
rational	things.	But	the	shrill	comments	continue,	and	that	destroys	the	sense
of	community.
The	Internet,	true	to	its	roots	as	an	academic	cooperative,	has	relied	on	peer
pressure	for	regulation.	For	example,	if	someone	in	a	discussion	group	posts

an	extraneous	comment	or,	worse,	tries	to	sell	something	in	an	electronic
forum	that	is	seen	by	others	as	a	noncommercial	setting,	the	would-be
diverger	or	merchant	may	get	a	withering	barrage	of	insults.	The	enforcement
so	far	has	been	mostly	by	self-appointed	censors
who	"flame"	those	they	believe	have	crossed	the	line	into	antisocial	behavior.
The	commercial	on-line	services	employ	volunteers	and	professional
moderators	to	monitor	conduct	on	their	bulletin	boards.	Forums	that	have
moderators	can	filter	out	some	antisocial	behavior	by	refusing	to	allow	insults
or	copyrighted	information	to	remain	on	a	system's	servers.	Most	Internet
forums	remain	unmoderated,	however.	Anything	goes,	and	because	people
can	post	messages	and	information	anonymously,	little	accountability	exists.
We	need	a	more	sophisticated	process	to	gather	consensus	opinions	without
depending	on	the	Attorney	General's	Consumer	Complaints	Division	to	act	as
a	filter.	We	will	have	to	find	some	way	to	force	people	to	turn	their	volume
down	so	the	highway	doesn't	become	an	amplifier	for	libel	or	slander	or	an
outlet	for	venting	irritation.
Many	providers	of	Internet	access	are	beginning	to	restrict	entry	to	forums
containing	sexually	explicit	material,	and	there	has	been	a	crackdown	on	the
illegal	traffic	of	copyrighted	materials.	Some	universities	are	getting	students
and	staff	to	remove	objectionable	postings.	This	rubs	some	the	wrong	way,
because	they	see	cyberspace	as	a	place	where	anything	goes.	The	commercial
services	have	had	similar	problems.	There	have	been	complaints	about
restriction	of	free	speech.	And	parents	were	outraged	when	their	family
account	was	closed	after	their	eleven-year-old	made	an	objectionable
comment	to	a	moderator.	Companies	will	create	special	communities	on	the
Internet	and	will	"compete"	by	having	rules	about	how	they	are	going	to	deal
with	these	issues.
Politicians	are	already	wrestling	with	the	question	of	when	an	on-line	service
should	be	treated	as	a	common	carrier	and	when	it	should	be	treated	as	a
publisher.	Telephone	companies	are	legally	considered	common	carriers.
They	transport	messages	without	assuming	any	responsibility	for	them.	If	an
obscene	caller	bothers	you,	the	telephone	company	will	cooperate	with	the
police,	but	nobody	thinks	it	is	the	phone	company's	fault	that	some	creep	is
calling	you	and	talking	dirty.	Magazines	and	newspapers,	on	the	other	hand,
are	publishers.	They	are	legally	responsible	for	their	content	and	can	be	sued
for	libel.	They	also	have	a	strong	interest	in	maintaining	their	reputation	and
editorial	integrity	because	that	is	an	important	part	of	their	business.	Any
responsible	newspaper	checks	very	carefully	before	making	a	previously

unpublished	allegation	about	someone—in	part	because	it	doesn't	want	a	libel
suit,	but	also	because	inaccuracy	would	hurt	its	reputation.
On-line	services	function	simultaneously	as	common	carriers	and	publishers,
which	is	where	the	problem	lies.	When	they	act	as	publishers,	and	offer
content	they	have	acquired,	authored,	or	edited,	it	makes	sense	that	the	rules
of	libel	and	the	self-governing	incentive	of	editorial	reputation	would	apply.
But	we	also	expect	them	to	deliver	our	e-mail	like	a	common	carrier	without
examining	or	taking	responsibility	for	its	contents.	Likewise,	chat	lines,
bulletin	boards,	and	forums	that	encourage	users	to	interact	without	editorial
supervision	are	a	new	means	of	communication,	and	shouldn't	be	treated	the
same	way	as	material	published	on	the	service.	A	New	York	judge,	however,
recently	cleared	the	way	for	a	libel	lawsuit	by	ruling	that	the	on-line	service
involved	was	a	publisher	of	information,	not	just	a	distributor.	Perhaps	by	the
time	you	read	this	things	will	have	been	clarified.	The	stakes	in	the	resolution
of	this	issue	are	high.	If	network	providers	are	treated	entirely	as	publishers,
they	will	have	to	monitor	and	preapprove	the	content	of	all	information	they
transmit.	This	could	create	an	unwelcome	atmosphere	of	censorship	and
curtail	spontaneous	exchange,	so	important	in	the	electronic	world.
Ideally,	the	industry	will	develop	some	standards	so	that	when	you	go	into	a
bulletin	board	or	article,	you	get	an	indication	of	whether	or	not	some
"publisher"	has	looked	it	over,	edited	it,	and	stands	behind	its	content.	The
question	will	be	what	standards	and	who	will	oversee	them?	A	bulletin	board
for	lesbians	should	not	be	forced	to	accept	antilesbian	comments,	nor	should	a
bulletin	board	about	some	product	be	overwhelmed	by	messages	from	a
competitor.	It	would	be	a	shame	to	have	to	keep	children	away	from	all
bulletin	boards,	but	it	would	also	be	unrealistic,	and	possibly	an	abridgment
of	free	expression,	to	force	all	bulletin	boards	to	undergo	review	by	someone
willing	to	accept	liability	for	everything	they	contain.	What	we	will	most
likely	end	up	with	is	a	series	of	categories,	like	the	ratings	given	movies,	that
will	indicate	whether	shrill	voices	have	been	controlled	and	whether	an
"editor"	has	deleted	messages	he	thought	were	out	of	line	with	the	policies	of
the	group	involved.
The	bulletin	boards	I've	been	discussing	are	the	free,	public	ones,	but	there
will	also	be	places	where	professional	information	and	advice	will	be	offered
for	a	fee.	You	might	wonder	why	you	would	need	an	expert	when	so	much
information	will	be	available.	For	the	same	reasons	you	might	need	one	now.
All	sorts	of	consumer	data	can	be	had	now.	Consumer	Reports	offers
objective	evaluations	of	a	lot	of	products,	but	the	reviews	are	aimed	at	a	broad
audience—they	don't	necessarily	discuss	your	particular	requirements.	If	you

can't	find	exactly	the	advice	you	need	on	the	highway,	you	will	be	able	to	hire
a	knowledgeable	sales	consultant,	for	five	minutes	or	an	afternoon,	via
videoconference.	She	will	help	you	choose	products,	which	your	computer
will	then	buy	for	you	from	the	cheapest	reliable	source.
I	expect	the	traditional	binding	together	of	advice	and	sales	to	be	much	less
prevalent,	because	although	the	advice	appears	free	to	the	customer,	it	is	paid
for	by	the	stores	and	services	that	offer	it.	This	cost	then	gets	added	on	to	the
price	of	the	goods.	Stores	that	are	charging	more	because	they	offer	advice
will	have	increasing	difficulty	competing	with	the	discounters	who	will
operate	on	the	information	highway.	The======================================================== bout	another	lifestyle	to	contrast	it	with	their	own.
Within	individual	societies,	the	balance	of	traditional	versus	modern
experiences	will	shift	as	people	use	the	information	highway	to	expose
themselves	to	a	greater	range	of	possibilities.	Some	cultures	may	feel	under
assault,	as	people	pay	greater	attention	to	global	issues	or	cultures,	and	less	to
traditional	local	ones.
"The	fact	that	the	same	ad	can	appeal	to	someone	in	a	New	York	apartment
and	an	Iowa	farm	and	an	African	village	does	not	prove	these	situations	are

alike,"	commented	Bill	McKibben,	a	critic	of	what	he	sees	as	television's
tendency	to	override	local	diversity	with	homogenized	common	experiences.
"It	is	merely	evidence	that	the	people	living	in	them	have	a	few	feelings	in
common,	and	it	is	these	barest,	most	minimal	commonalties	that	are	the
content	of	the	global	village."
Yet	if	people	choose	to	watch	the	ad,	or	the	program	the	ad	supports,	should
they	be	denied	that	privilege?	This	is	a	political	question	for	every	country	to
answer	individually.	It	will	not,	however,	be	easy	to	filter	a	highway
connection	so	that	it	selects	and	takes	in	only	some	elements.
American	popular	culture	is	so	potent	that	outside	the	United	States	some
countries	now	attempt	to	ration	it.	They	hope	to	guarantee	the	viability	of
domestic-content	producers	by	permitting	only	a	certain	number	of	hours	of
foreign	television	to	be	aired	each	week.	In	Europe	the	availability	of	satellite
and	cable-delivered	programming	reduced	the	potential	for	government
control.	The	information	highway	is	going	to	break	down	boundaries	and	may
promote	a	world	culture,	or	at	least	a	sharing	of	cultural	activities	and	values.
The	highway	will	also	make	it	easy	for	patriots,	even	expatriates,	deeply
involved	in	their	own	ethnic	communities	to	reach	out	to	others	with	similar
interests	no	matter	where	they	may	be	located.	This	may	strengthen	cultural
diversity	and	counter	the	tendency	toward	a	single	world	culture.
If	people	do	gravitate	to	their	own	interests	and	withdraw	from	the	broader
world—if	weight	lifters	communicate	only	with	other	weight	lifters,	and
Latvians	choose	to	read	only	Latvian	newspapers—there	is	a	risk	that
common	experiences	and	values	will	fall	away.	Such	xenophobia	would	have
the	effect	of	fragmenting	societies.	I	doubt	this	will	happen,	because	I	think
people	want	a	sense	of	belonging	to	many	communities,	including	a	world
community.	When	we	Americans	share	national	experiences,	it	is	usually
because	we're	witnessing	events	all	at	the	same	time	on	television—whether	it
is	the	Challenger	blowing	up	after	liftoff,	the	Super	Bowl,	an	inauguration,
coverage	of	the	Gulf	War,	or	the	O.	J.	Simpson	car	chase.	We	are	"together"	at
those	moments.
Another	worry	people	have	is	that	multi-media	entertainment	will	be	so	easy
to	get	and	so	compelling,	some	of	us	will	use	the	system	too	much	for	our
own	good.	This	could	become	a	serious	problem	when	virtual-reality
experiences	are	commonplace.
One	day	a	virtual-reality	game	will	let	you	enter	into	a	virtual	bar	and	make
eye	contact	with	"someone	special,"	who	will	note	your	interest	and	come

over	to	engage	you	in	conversation.	You'll	talk,	impressing	this	new	friend
with	your	charm	and	wit.	Perhaps	the	two	of	you	will	decide,	then	and	there,
to	go	to	Paris.	Whoosh!	You'll	be	in	Paris,	gazing	together	at	the	stained	glass
of	Notre	Dame.	"Have	you	ever	ridden	the	Star	Ferry	in	Hong	Kong?"	you
might	ask	your	friend,	invitingly.	Whoosh!	VR	will	certainly	be	more
engrossing	than	video	games	have	ever	been,	and	more	addictive.
If	you	were	to	find	yourself	escaping	into	these	attractive	worlds	too	often,	or
for	too	long,	and	began	to	be	worried	about	it,	you	could	try	to	deny	yourself
entertainment	by	telling	the	system,	"No	matter	what	password	I	give,	don't
let	me	play	any	more	than	half	an	hour	of	games	a	day."	This	would	be	a	little
speed	bump,	a	warning	to	slow	your	involvement	with	something	you	found
too	appealing.	It	would	serve	the	same	purpose	as	a	photo	of	some	very
overweight	people	you	might	post	on	your	refrigerator	to	discourage
snacking.
Speed	bumps	help	a	lot	with	behavior	that	tends	to	generate	day-after	regrets.
If	someone	elects	to	spend	his	or	her	free	hours	examining	the	stained	glass	in
a	simulation	of	Notre	Dame,	or	chatting	in	a	make-believe	bar	with	a
synthetic	friend,	that	person	is	exercising	his	or	her	freedom.	Today	a	lot	of
people	spend	several	hours	a	day	with	a	television	on.	To	the	extent	we	can
replace	some	of	that	passive	entertainment	with	interactive	entertainment,
viewers	may	be	better	off.	Frankly,	I'm	not	too	concerned	about	the	world
whiling	away	its	hours	on	the	information	highway.	At	worst,	I	expect,	it	will
be	like	playing	video	games	or	gambling.	Support	groups	will	convene	to	help
abusers	who	want	to	modify	their	behavior.
A	more	serious	concern	than	individual	overindulgence	is	the	vulnerability
that	could	result	from	society's	heavy	reliance	on	the	highway.
This	network,	and	the	computer-based	machines	connected	to	it,	will	form
society's	new	playground,	new	workplace,	and	new	classroom.	It	will	replace
physical	tender.	It	will	subsume	most	existing	forms	of	communication.	It	will
be	our	photo	album,	our	diary,	our	boom	box.	This	versatility	will	be	the
strength	of	the	network,	but	it	will	also	mean	we	will	become	reliant	on	it.
Reliance	can	be	dangerous.	During	the	New	York	City	blackouts	in	1965	and
1977,	millions	of	people	were	in	trouble—at	least	for	a	few	hours—because
of	their	dependence	on	electricity.	They	counted	on	electric	power	for	light,
heat,	transport,	and	security.	When	electricity	failed,	people	were	trapped	in
elevators,	traffic	lights	stopped	working,	and	electric	water	pumps	quit.
Anything	really	useful	is	missed	when	you	lose	it.

A	complete	failure	of	the	information	highway	is	worth	worrying	about.
Because	the	system	will	be	thoroughly	decentralized,	any	single	outage	is
unlikely	to	have	a	widespread	effect.	If	an	individual	server	fails,	it	will	be
replaced	and	its	data	restored.	But	the	system	could	be	susceptible	to	assault.
As	the	system	becomes	more	important,	we	will	have	to	design	in	more
redundancy.	One	area	of	vulnerability	is	the	system's	reliance	on	cryptography
—the	mathematical	locks	that	keep	information	safe.
None	of	the	protection	systems	that	exist	today,	whether	steering-wheel	locks
or	steel	vaults,	are	completely	fail-safe.	The	best	we	can	do	is	make	it	as
difficult	as	possible	for	somebody	to	break	in.	Despite	popular	opinions	to	the
contrary,	computer	security	has	a	very	good	record.	Computers	are	capable	of
protecting	information	in	such	a	way	that	even	the	smartest	hackers	can't	get
at	it	readily	unless	someone	entrusted	with	information	makes	a	mistake.
Sloppiness	is	the	main	reason	computer	security	gets	breached.	On	the
information	highway	there	will	be	mistakes,	and	too	much	information	will
get	passed	along.	Someone	will	issue	digital	concert	tickets	that	prove	to	be
forgeable,	and	too	many	people	will	show	up.	Whenever	this	sort	of	thing
happens,	the	system	will	have	to	be	reworked	and	laws	may	have	to	be
revised.
Because	both	the	system's	privacy	and	the	security	of	digital	money	depend
on	encryption,	a	breakthrough	in	mathematics	or	computer	science	that
defeats	the	cryptographic	system	could	be	a	disaster.	The	obvious
mathematical	breakthrough	would	be	development	of	an	easy	way	to	factor
large	prime	numbers.	Any	person	or	organization	possessing	this	power	could
counterfeit	money,	penetrate	any	personal,	corporate,
or	governmental	file,	and	possibly	even	undermine	the	security	of	nations,
which	is	why	we	have	to	be	so	careful	in	designing	the	system.	We	have	to
ensure	that	if	any	particular	encryption	technique	proves	fallible,	there	is	a
way	to	make	an	immediate	transition	to	an	alternate	technique.	There's	a	little
bit	of	inventing	still	to	be	done	before	we	have	that	perfected.	It	is	particularly
hard	to	guarantee	security	for	information	you	want	kept	private	for	a	decade
or	more.
Loss	of	privacy	is	another	major	concern	about	the	highway.	A	great	deal	of
information	is	already	being	gathered	about	each	of	us,	by	private	companies
as	well	as	by	government	agencies,	and	we	often	have	no	idea	how	it	is	used
or	whether	it	is	accurate.	Census	Bureau	statistics	contain	great	amounts	of
detail.	Medical	records,	driving	records,	library	records,	school	records,	court
records,	credit	histories,	tax	records,	financial	records,	employment	reviews,

and	charge-card	bills	all	profile	you.	The	fact	that	you	call	a	lot	of	motorcycle
shops,	and	might	be	susceptible	to	motorcycle	advertising,	is	commercial
information	that	a	telephone	company	theoretically	could	sell.	Information
about	us	is	routinely	compiled	into	direct-marketing	mailing	lists	and	credit
reports.	Errors	and	abuses	have	already	fostered	legislation	regulating	the	use
of	these	databases.	In	the	United	States,	you	are	entitled	to	see	certain	kinds
of	information	stored	about	you,	and	you	may	have	the	right	to	be	notified
when	someone	looks	at	it.	The	scattered	nature	of	information	protects	your
privacy	in	an	informal	way,	but	when	the	repositories	are	all	connected
together	on	the	highway,	it	will	be	possible	to	use	computers	to	correlate	it.
Credit	data	could	be	linked	with	employment	records	and	sales	transaction
records	to	construct	an	intrusively	accurate	picture	of	your	personal	activities.
As	more	business	is	transacted	using	the	highway	and	the	amount	of
information	stored	there	accrues,	governments	will	consciously	set	policies
regarding	privacy	and	access	to	information.	The	network	itself	will	then
administer	those	policies,	ensuring	that	a	doctor	does	not	get	access	to	a
patient's	tax	records,	a	government	auditor	is	not	able	to	look	at	a	taxpayer's
scholastic	record,	and	a	teacher	is	not	permitted	to	browse	a	student's	medical
record.	The	potential	problem	is	abuse,	not	the	mere	existence	of	information.
We	now	allow	a	life	insurance	company	to	examine	our	med======================================================== t	leaving	your	house.	Flexibility	is	going	to	be	increasingly
important	as	everyone	tries	to	balance	family	life	with	work	life.	You	won't
always	have	to	travel	to	see	friends	and	family	or	to	play	games.	Cultural
attractions	will	be	available	via	the	information	highway,	although	I'm	not
suggesting	that	a	Broadway	or	West	End	musical	will	be	the	same	experience
in	your	living	room	as	it	is	in	a	New	York	or	London	theater.	However,
improvements	in	screen	sizes	and	resolutions	will	enhance	all	video,
including	movies,	in	the	home.	Educational	programming	will	be	extensive.
All	of	this	will	liberate	those	who	would	like	to	abandon	city	living.
The	opening	of	the	interstate	highway	system	had	a	substantial	effect	on
where	in	the	United	States	people	chose	to	settle.	It	made	new	suburbs
accessible	and	contributed	to	the	culture	of	the	automobile.	There	will	be
significant	implications	for	city	planners,	real	estate	developers,	and	school
districts	if	the	opening	of	the	information	highway	also	encourages	people	to
move	away	from	city	centers.	If	large	pools	of	talent	disperse,	companies	will
feel	even	more	pressure	to	be	creative	about	how	to	work	with	consultants
and	employees	not	located	near	their	operations.	This	could	set	off	a	positive-
feedback	cycle,	encouraging	rural	living.
If	the	population	of	a	city	were	reduced	by	even	10	percent,	the	result	would
be	a	major	difference	in	property	values	and	wear	and	tear	on	transportation
and	other	urban	systems.	If	the	average	office	worker	in	any	major	city	stayed
home	one	or	two	days	a	week,	the	decreases	in	gasoline	consumption,	air
pollution,	and	traffic	congestion	would	be	significant.	The	net	effect,
however,	is	hard	to	foresee.	If	those	who	moved	out	of	cities	were	mostly	the
affluent	knowledge	workers,	the	urban	tax	base	would	be	reduced.	This	would
aggravate	the	inner	city's	woes	and	encourage	other	affluent	people	to	leave.
But	at	the	same	time,	the	urban	infrastructure	might	be	less	heavily	loaded.
Rents	would	fall,	creating	opportunities	for	a	better	standard	of	living	for
some	of	those	remaining	in	the	cities.

It	will	take	decades	to	implement	all	the	major	changes,	because	most	people
remain	comfortable	with	whatever	they	learn	early	and	are	reluctant	to	alter
familiar	patterns.	However,	new	generations	will	bring	new	perspectives.	Our
children	will	grow	up	comfortable	with	the	idea	of	working	with	information
tools	across	distances.	These	tools	will	be	as	natural	to	them	as	a	telephone	or
a	ballpoint	pen	is	to	us.	But	technology	isn't	going	to	wait	until	people	are
ready	for	it.	Within	the	next	ten	years	we	will	start	to	see	substantial	shifts	in
how	and	where	we	work,	the	companies	we	work	for,	and	the	places	we
choose	to	live.	My	advice	is	to	try	to	find	out	as	much	as	possible	about	the
technology	that	will	touch	you.	The	more	you	know	about	it,	the	less
disconcerting	it	will	seem.	Technology's	role	is	to	provide	more	flexibility	and
efficiency.	Forward-looking	business	managers	will	have	lots	of	opportunities
to	perform	better	in	the	years	ahead.

8
FRICTION-FREE
CAPITALISM
When	Adam	Smith	described	the	concept	of	markets	in	The	Wealth	of	Nations
in	1776,	he	theorized	that	if	every	buyer	knew	every	seller's	price,	and	every
seller	knew	what	every	buyer	was	willing	to	pay,	everyone	in	the	"market"
would	be	able	to	make	fully	informed	decisions	and	society's	resources	would
be	distributed	efficiently.	To	date	we	haven't	achieved	Smith's	ideal	because
would-be	buyers	and	would-be	sellers	seldom	have	complete	information
about	one	another.
Not	many	consumers	looking	to	buy	a	car	stereo	have	the	time	or	patience	to
canvass	every	dealer	and	thus	are	acting	on	imperfect	and	limited
information.	If	you've	bought	a	product	for	$500	and	see	it	advertised	in	the
paper	for	$300	a	week	or	two	later,	you	feel	foolish	for	overpaying.	But	you
feel	a	lot	worse	if	you	end	up	in	the	wrong	job	because	you	haven't	done
thorough	enough	research.
A	few	markets	are	already	working	fairly	close	to	Smith's	ideal.	Investors
buying	and	selling	currency	and	certain	other	commodities	participate	in
efficient	electronic	markets	that	provide	nearly	complete	instantaneous
information	about	worldwide	supply,	demand,	and	prices.	Everyone	gets
pretty	much	the	same	deal	because	news	about	all	offers,	bids,	and
transactions	speeds	across	wires	to	trading	desks	everywhere.	However,	most
marketplaces	are	very	inefficient.	For	instance,	if	you	are	trying	to	find	a
doctor,	lawyer,	accountant,	or	similar	professional,	or	are	buying	a	house,
information	is	incomplete	and	comparisons	are	difficult	to	make.
The	information	highway	will	extend	the	electronic	marketplace	and	make	it
the	ultimate	go-between,	the	universal	middleman.	Often	the	only	humans
involved	in	a	transaction	will	be	the	actual	buyer	and	seller.	All	the	goods	for
sale	in	the	world	will	be	available	for	you	to	examine,	compare,	and,	often,
customize.	When	you	want	to	buy	something	you'll	be	able	to	tell	your
computer	to	find	it	for	you	at	the	best	price	offered	by	any	acceptable	source
or	ask	your	computer	to	"haggle"	with	the	computers	of	various	sellers.
Information	about	vendors	and	their	products	and	services	will	be	available	to
any	computer	connected	to	the	highway.	Servers	distributed	worldwide	will

accept	bids,	resolve	offers	into	completed	transactions,	control	authentication
and	security,	and	handle	all	other	aspects	of	the	marketplace,	including	the
transfer	of	funds.	This	will	carry	us	into	a	new	world	of	low-friction,	low-
overhead	capitalism,	in	which	market	information	will	be	plentiful	and
transaction	costs	low.	It	will	be	a	shopper's	heaven.
Every	market,	from	a	bazaar	to	the	highway,	facilitates	competitive	pricing
and	allows	goods	to	move	from	seller	to	buyer	efficiently	with	modest
friction.	This	is	thanks	to	the	market	makers—those	whose	job	it	is	to	bring
buyers	and	sellers	together.	As	the	information	highway	assumes	the	role	of
market	maker	in	realm	after	realm,	traditional	middlemen	will	have	to
contribute	real	value	to	a	transaction	to	justify	a	commission.	For	example,
stores	and	services	that	until	now	have	profited	just	because	they	are
"there"—in	a	particular	geographic	location	may	find	they	have	lost	that
advantage.	But	those	who	provide	added	value	will	not	only	survive,	they	will
thrive,	because	the	information	highway	will	let	them	make	their	services
available	to	customers	everywhere.
This	idea	will	scare	a	lot	of	people.	Most	change	feels	a	bit	threatening,	and	I
expect	dramatic	changes	in	the	business	of	retailing	as	commerce	flows	across
the	highway.	But,	as	with	so	many	changes,	I	think	once	we	get	used	to	it
we'll	wonder	how	we	did	without	it.	The	consumer	will	get	not	only
competitive	cost	savings,	but	also	a	much	wider	variety	of	products	and
services	to	choose	from.	Although	there	may	be	fewer	stores,	if	people
continue	to	enjoy	shopping	in	today's	outlets,	as	many	stores	as	their	demand
justifies	will	remain	available.	And	because	the	highway	will	simplify	and
standardize	shopping,	it	will	also	save	time.	If	you	are	buying	a	gift	for	a
loved	one,	you	will	be	able	to	consider	more	choices	and	often	you	will	find
something	more	imaginative.	You	could	use	the	time	saved	from	shopping	to
think	up	a	fun	clue	to	put	on	the	package,	or	create	a	personalized	card.	Or
you	could	spend	the	time	you	save	with	the	recipient.
We	all	recognize	the	value	of	a	knowledgeable	salesperson	when	we	are
shopping	for	insurance,	clothes,	investments,	jewelry,	a	camera,	a	home
appliance,	or	a	home.	We	also	know	the	salesperson's	advice	is	sometimes
biased	because	he	or	she	is	ultimately	hoping	to	make	a	sale	from	a	particular
inventory.
On	the	information	highway	lots	of	product	information	will	be	available
directly	from	manufacturers.	As	they	do	today,	vendors	will	use	a	variety	of
entertaining	and	provocative	techniques	to	attract	us.	Advertising	will	evolve
into	a	hybrid,	combining	today's	television	commercials,	magazine	ads,	and	a

detailed	sales	brochure.	If	an	ad	catches	your	attention,	you'll	be	able	to
request	additional	information	directly	and	very	easily.	Links	will	let	you
navigate	through	whatever	information	the	advertiser	has	made	available,
which	might	be	product	manuals	consisting	of	video,	audio,	and	text.	Vendors
will	make	getting	information	about	their	products	as	simple	as	possible.
At	Microsoft,	we're	looking	forward	to	using	the	highway	to	get	information
out	about	our	products.	Today	we	print	millions	of	pages	of	product	brochures
and	data	sheets,	and	mail	them	out	to	people	who	ask	for	them.	But	we	never
know	how	much	information	to	put	onto	a	data	sheet;	we	don't	want	to
intimidate	casual	inquirers,	and	yet	there	are	people	out	there	who	want	to
know	all	the	detailed	product	specifications.	Also,	since	the	information
changes	fairly	rapidly,	we	are	often	in	the	position	of	having	just	printed	tens
of	thousands	of	copies	of	some	brochure,	and	then	having	to	throw	them	out
because	they	describe	a	version	of	a	product	we're	replacing.	We	expect	a
high	percentage	of	our	information	dissemination	will	shift	to	electronic
inquiry,	particularly	because	we	serve	computer	users.	We	have	already
eliminated	the	printing	of	millions	of	pages	of	paper	by	sending	quarterly	CD-
ROMs	and	using	on-line	services	to	reach	professional	software	developers,
some	of	Microsoft's	most	sophisticated	customers.
But	you	won't	have	to	depend	only	on	what	we	or	any	other	manufacturer
tells	you.	You'll	be	able	to	examine	product	reviews	in	search	of	less	biased
information.	After	you've	seen	the	advertising,	reviews,	and	multi-media
manuals,	you	might	ask	for	relevant	government	regulatory	data.	You'll	check
to	see	if	the	vendor	has	surveyed	owners.	Then	you	might	dig	deeper	into	one
area	of	particular	interest	to	you—for	instance,	durability.	Or	you	could	seek
the	advice	of	sales	consultants,	human	or	electronic,	who	will	create	and
publish	specialized	reviews	for	all	kinds	of	products,	from	drill	bits	t======================================================== we	will
see	electronic,	on-line	banks	that	have	no	branches—no	bricks,	no	mortar,	and
low	fees.	These	low-overhead	electronic	banks	will	be	extremely	competitive
and	transactions	will	be	made	through	computer	appliances.	There	will	be	less
need	for	cash	because	most	purchases	will	be	handled	with	a	wallet	PC	or	an
electronic	"smart	card"	that	will	combine	the	features	of	a	credit	card,
automatic	teller	machine	card,	and	checkbook.	This	is	all	coming	at	a	time
when	the	U.S.	banking	industry	is	already	consolidating	and	becoming	more
efficient.
A	lot	of	the	interest-rate	differential	between	large	and	small	deposits	will
disappear.	With	the	communications	available	on	the	highway,	a	new	kind	of
middleman	will	be	able	to	aggregate	small	customers	efficiently	and	get	them
a	rate	very	close	to	what	large	depositors	are	offered.	Financial	institutions
will	be	able	to	specialize;	one	bank	may	choose	only	to	make	automobile
loans,	whereas	another	concentrates	on	boat	loans.	Fees	will	be	generated	for
all	of	these	services,	but	the	fee	structure	will	be	based	on	broad,	efficient
competition.
It	wasn't	so	long	ago	that	a	small	investor	who	wanted	to	put	his	money	in
anything	beyond	a	passbook	savings	account	was	stymied.	The	world	of
stocks	and	beyond—mutual	funds,	penny	stocks,	commercial	paper,
debentures,	and	other	arcane	instruments—was	simply	off-limits	to	anyone
who	wasn't	a	Wall	Street	insider.
But	that	was	before	computers	changed	things.	Today,	"discount"	stockbroker
listings	are	plentiful	in	the	Yellow	Pages,	and	quite	a	few	investors	make	their
stock	purchases	from	a	machine	at	a	local	bank	or	over	the	telephone.	As	the
information	highway	gains	in	efficiency,	investment	choices	will	proliferate.
Stockbrokers,	like	other	middlemen	whose	job	has	been	merely	to	chaperon	a
transaction,	will	probably	have	to	offer	something	beyond	just	purchasing
securities.	They'll	add	value	by	being	knowledgeable.	Financial	services
companies	will	still	thrive.	The	basic	economics	of	the	industry	will	change,
but	the	volume	of	transactions	will	skyrocket	as	the	information	highway
gives	the	average	consumer	direct	access	to	financial	markets.	Investors	with
relatively	small	amounts	of	money	to	commit	will	get	better	advice	and	have
opportunities	to	make	profits	from	the	sorts	of	investments	now	available	only
to	institutions.
When	I	prognosticate	about	the	future	changes	in	an	industry,	people	often
wonder	if	Microsoft	plans	to	go	into	that	field.	Microsoft's	competence	is	in
building	great	software	products	and	the	information	services	that	go	with

them.	We	will	not	become	a	bank	or	a	store.
Once,	when	I	referred	to	a	bank's	back-end	databases	as	"dinosaurs,"	a
reporter	wrote	an	article	saying	I	thought	banks	themselves	were	dinosaurs
and	we	wanted	to	compete	with	them.	I	have	now	spent	more	than	a	year
going	around	the	world	telling	banks	I	was	misquoted.	Microsoft	faces	plenty
of	challenges	and	opportunities	in	the	business	we	know—whether	it's
enterprise	support,	making	computer	software,	groupware	for	the	Internet
servers,	or	any	other	part	of	our	business.
Our	success	in	the	PC	world	has	come	from	working	in	partnership	with	such
great	companies	as	Intel,	Compaq,	Hewlett	Packard,	DEC,	NEC,	and	dozens
of	others.	Even	IBM	and	Apple,	with	whom	we	have	occasionally	been	in
competition,	have	had	an	immense	amount	of	our	cooperation	and	support.
We	created	a	company	that	was	dependent	on	partners.	We	bet	that	somebody
other	than	us	would	do	great	chips,	somebody	other	than	us	would	build	great
PCs,	somebody	other	than	us	would	do	great	distribution	and	integration.	We
took	a	narrow	slice	and	focused	on	that.	In	this	new	world,	we	want	to	work
with	companies	from	every	industry	to	help	them	make	the	most	of	the
opportunities	the	information	revolution	will	bring.
Industry	after	industry	will	be	changed,	and	change	is	unsettling.	Some
middlemen	who	handle	information	or	product	distribution	will	find	they	no
longer	add	value	and	change	fields,	whereas	others	will	rise	to	the	competitive
challenge.	There	is	a	nearly	infinite	number	of	tasks	left	undone	in	services,
education,	and	urban	affairs,	to	say	nothing	of	the	workforce	the	highway
itself	will	require.	So	this	new	efficiency	will	create	all	sorts	of	exciting
employment	opportunities.	And	the	highway,	which	will	put	an	immense
amount	of	information	at	anyone's	fingertips,	will	be	an	invaluable	training
tool.	Someone	who	decides	to	change	careers	and	go	into	computer
consulting	will	have	access	to	the	best	texts,	the	greatest	lectures,	and
information	about	course	requirements,	exams,	and	accreditation.	There	will
be	dislocations.	However,	overall,	society	will	benefit	from	these	changes.
Capitalism,	demonstrably	the	greatest	of	the	constructed	economic	systems,
has	in	the	past	decade	clearly	proved	its	advantages	over	the	alternative
systems.	The	information	highway	will	magnify	those	advantages.	It	will
allow	those	who	produce	goods	to	see,	a	lot	more	efficiently	than	ever	before,
what	buyers	want,	and	will	allow	potential	consumers	to	buy	those	goods
more	efficiently.	Adam	Smith	would	be	pleased.	More	important,	consumers
everywhere	will	enjoy	the	benefits.

9
EDUCATION:
THE	BEST	INVESTMENT
Great	educators	have	always	known	that	learning	is	not	something	you	do
only	in	classrooms,	or	only	under	the	supervision	of	teachers.	Today	it	is
sometimes	difficult	for	someone	who	wants	to	satisfy	his	curiosity	or	end	his
confusion	to	find	the	appropriate	information.	The	highway	is	going	to	give
us	all	access	to	seemingly	unlimited	information,	anytime	and	anyplace	we
care	to	use	it.	It's	an	exhilarating	prospect,	because	putting	this	technology	to
use	to	improve	education	will	lead	to	downstream	benefits	in	every	area	of
society.
Some	fear	that	technology	will	dehumanize	formal	education.	But	anyone
who	has	seen	kids	working	together	around	a	computer,	the	way	my	friends
and	I	first	did	in	1968,	or	watched	exchanges	between	students	in	classrooms
separated	by	oceans,	knows	that	technology	can	humanize	the	educational
environment.	The	same	technological	forces	that	will	make	learning	so
necessary	will	also	make	it	practical	and	enjoyable.	Corporations	are
reinventing	themselves	around	the	flexible	opportunities	afforded	by
information	technology;	classrooms	will	have	to	change	as	well.
Howard	Gardner,	a	professor	at	the	Harvard	Graduate	School	of	Education,
argues	that	different	children	must	be	taught	differently,	because	individuals
understand	the	world	in	different	ways.	Massproduced	education	can't	take
into	account	children's	various	approaches	to	the	world.	Gardner	recommends
that	schools	be	"filled	with	apprenticeships,	projects,	and	technologies"	so
that	every	kind	of	learner	can	be	accommodated.	We	will	discover	all	sorts	of
different	approaches	to	teaching	because	the	highway's	tools	will	make	it	easy
to	try	various	methods	and	to	measure	their	effectiveness.
Just	as	information	technology	now	allows	Levi	Strauss	&	Co.	to	offer	jeans
that	are	both	mass-produced	and	custom	fitted,	information	technology	will
bring	mass	customization	to	learning.	Multi-media	documents	and	easy-to-use
authoring	tools	will	enable	teachers	to	"mass-customize"	a	curriculum.	As
with	blue	jeans,	the	mass	customization	of	learning	will	be	possible	because
computers	will	fine-tune	the	product—educational	material,	in	this	case—to
allow	students	to	follow	somewhat	divergent	paths	and	learn	at	their	own

rates.	This	won't	happen	only	in	classrooms.	Any	student	will	be	able	to	enjoy
the	custom	fit	of	a	tailor-made	education	at	mass-production	prices.	Workers
will	be	able	to	keep	up-to-date	on	techniques	in	their	fields.
Every	member	of	society,	including	every	child,	will	have	more	information
easily	at	hand	than	anyone	has	today.	I	believe	that	just	the	availability	of
information	will	spark	the	curiosity	and	imagination	of	many.	Education	will
become	a	very	individual	matter.
There	is	an	often-expressed	fear	that	technology	will	replace	teachers.	I	can
say	emphatically	and	unequivocally,	IT	WON'T.	The	information	highway
won't	replace	or	devalue	any	of	the	human	educational	talent	needed	for	the
challenges	ahead:	committed	teachers,	administrators,	involved	parents,	and,
of	course,	diligent	students.	However,	technology	will	be	pivotal	in	the	future
role	of	teachers.
The	highway	will	bring	together	the	best	work	of	countless	teachers	and
authors	for	everyone	to	share.	Teachers	will	be	able	to	draw	on	this	material,
and	students	will	have	the	opportunity	to	explore	it	interactively.	In	time,	this
access	will	help	spread	educational	and	personal	opportunities	even	to
students	who	aren't	fortunate	enough	to	enjoy	the	best	schools	or	the	greatest
family	support.	It	will	encourage	a	child	to	make	the	most	of	his	or	her	native
talents.
Before	the	benefits	of	these	advances	can	be	realized,	though,	the	way
computers	in	the	classroom	are	thought	about	will	have	to	change.	A	lot	of
people	are	cynical	about	educational	technology	because	it	has	been
overhyped	and	has	failed	to	deliver	on	its	promises.	Many	of	the	PCs	in
schools	today	are	not	powerful	enough	to	be	easy	to	use,	and	they	don't	have
the	storage	capacity	or	network	connections	to	permit	them	to	respond	to	a
child's	curiosity	with	much	information.	So	far,	education	remains	largely
unchanged	by	computers.
The	slowness	of	schools	to	embrace	technology	partly	reflects	conservatism
in	many	corners	of	the	educational	establishment.	It	reflects	discomfort	or
even	apprehension	on	the	part	of	teachers	and	administrators,	who	as	a	group
are	older	than	the	average	worker.	It	also	reflects	the	minuscule	amounts	city
school	budgets	have	allotted	for	educational	technology.
The	average	primary	or	secondary	school	in	the	United	States	lags
considerably	behind	the	average	American	business	in	the	availability	of	new
information	technology.	Preschoolers	familiar	with	cellular	telephones,
pagers,	and	personal	computers	enter	kindergartens	where	chalkboards	and

o======================================================== the	costs
of	switching	equipment	and	fiber	are	coming	down	every	year.
This	means	the	companies	are	faced	with	the	sort	of	decision	that	has
confronted	almost	everyone	who	has	contemplated	buying	a	PC.	Do	you	wait
for	prices	to	come	down	and	performance	to	improve,	or	do	you	bite	the
bullet	and	start	getting	use	out	of	the	equipment	sooner?	The	dilemma	will	be
acute	for	some	network	companies.	They	will	have	to	move	very	fast	and
upgrade	constantly.	A	company	will	get	bargain	prices	if	it	waits	long	enough
before	making	investments	in	cabling	and	switches,	but	it	may	never	recover
the	market	share	it	will	have	lost	to	less	cautious	competitors.

Phone	companies,	despite	their	enviable	revenues,	could	be	strapped	for	the
cash	required	to	fund	the	expensive	upgrade	of	the	new	network,	because
regulatory	rate	commissions	may	not	permit	them	to	raise	telephone	rates	or
even	to	use	profits	from	current	service	to	cross-subsidize	this	new	kind	of
business.	Shareholders,	accustomed	to	attractive	dividends	from	the	RBOCs,
might	balk	at	a	diversion	of	profits	to	build	the	information	highway.	For
more	than	a	hundred	years	telephony	has	been	quietly	making	its	profits	as	a
regulated	monopoly.	Suddenly	the	RBOCs	must	become	growth	companies,
which	is	about	as	radical	as	turning	a	tractor	into	a	sports	car.	It	can	be	done
(just	ask	the	folks	at	the	Lamborghini	Company,	which	makes	both),	but	it's
hard	to	do.
The	opportunity	to	provide	ISDN	to	PC	users	will	provide	new	revenues	to
phone	companies	that	want	to	bring	the	price	levels	down	to	establish	a	mass
market.	I	expect	ISDN	adoption	to	get	off	to	a	faster	start	than	PC	cable
modes.	Phone	companies	are	doing	some	clever	work	to	find	out	how	to	use
their	twisted-pair	connections	for	at	least	the	last	few	hundred	feet	to	the
home	and	still	deliver	broadband	data	rates.	Phone	and	cable	companies	can
both	succeed	as	demand	for	new	services	increases	their	revenue
opportunities.
The	ambitions	of	cable	and	phone	companies	go	well	beyond	simply
providing	a	pipe	for	bits.	Imagine	you	are	running	a	bit-delivery	company.
Once	you	own	a	network	in	a	given	area	and	have	hooked	up	most	of	the
homes,	how	can	you	make	more	money?	By	getting	customers	to	consume
more	bits,	but	there	are	only	twenty-four	hours	in	a	day	for	people	to	watch
TV	or	sit	at	their	PCs.	If	you	can't	ship	more	bits,	an	alternative	is	to	have	a
financial	interest	in	the	bits	being	shipped.	Many	see	the	highway	as	a	sort	of
economic	food	chain,	with	the	delivery	and	distribution	of	bits	at	the	bottom,
and	various	types	of	applications,	services,	and	content	layered	on	top.
Companies	in	the	bit-distribution	business	are	attracted	to	the	idea	of	moving
themselves	up	the	food	chain—profiting	from	owning	the	bits	rather	than
from	just	delivering	them.	This	is	why	cable	companies,	regional	telephone
companies,	and	consumer-electronics	manufacturers	are	rushing	to	work	with
Hollywood	studios,	television	and	cable	broadcasters,	and	other	content
businesses.
Some	companies	are	investing	because	they	are	afraid	not	to.	For	a	long	time
distribution	has	been	pretty	lucrative,	largely	because	of	the	monopolies
granted	by	the	government.	As	these	monopolies	disappear	and	competition
begins,	bit	distribution	might	become	less	profitable.	Companies	that	hope	to
participate	in	the	creation	of	the	applications	and	services	and	enter	the

content	business	through	investment	and/or	influence	want	to	move	now,
while	the	opportunities	are	open.	Some	of	these	companies	may	choose	to
give	away	or	subsidize	the	set-top	box	that	connects	up	the	television	set.	Part
of	their	strategy	could	be	to	offer,	for	a	single	monthly	fee,	the	connectivity	to
the	highway,	the	set-top	box,	and	a	package	of	programming,	applications,
and	services	to	go	with	it.	Cable	TV	systems	work	this	way,	and	telephone
companies	in	the	United	States	used	to,	before	deregulation.
Network	operators	that	include	the	set-top	box	as	part	of	the	standard	service
fee	will	attract	customers	who	might	hesitate	to	spend	several	hundred	dollars
to	buy	one.	As	I	explained,	in	the	early	years	there	is	a	real	danger	that	the
box	will	quickly	become	obsolete,	so	why	buy	one?	Although	supplying	the
boxes	will	increase	the	up-front	capital	required	by	the	network	operator,	the
outlay	will	be	worth	it	if	it	helps	create	a	critical	mass	of	users.	But
government	regulators	worry	that	allowing	the	network	operators	to	have
control	of	the	boxes	will	put	them	in	a	position	to	capitalize	on	their
privileged	position.	A	network	operator	that	owns	the	boxes	could	also	seek	to
exert	control	over	what	software,	applications,	and	services	run	on	those
boxes.	There	could	be	limited	choices	for	studios	that	wanted	to	sell	their
movies.	Whether	or	not	to	allow	various	services	equal	access	to	the	wires
and	boxes	is	one	of	the	tough	issues	deregulation	is	going	to	have	to	address.
One	argument	for	equal	access	is	that	if	multiple	services	can	use	the	same
wire,	the	government	can	avoid	setting	standards	for	those	services	and	their
interoperability.
Retailers	would	like	the	opportunity	to	sell	you	the	set-top	boxes.	After	all,
they	already	sell	the	TV	sets	and	PCs,	so	why	not	the	set-top	box	too?
Consumer-electronics	companies	want	to	compete	to	manufacture
the	boxes.	They	want	to	be	able	to	offer	many	models—fancy,	expensive	ones
for	gadget	buffs	and	simple	ones	for	other	folks.	If	the	network	company
supplies	the	boxes,	there	is	no	profit	for	the	retailers.	The	cellular	telephone
industry	solved	this	competition	with	a	partial	subsidy:	You	acquire	your
cellular	phone	from	any	retailer,	but	the	price	is	partially	underwritten	by	the
cellular	company	that	you	commit	to	buy	service	from.
Cable	and	phone	industries	will	be	the	primary,	but	not	the	only,	competitors
to	provide	the	network.	Railroad	companies	in	Japan,	for	example,	recognize
that	the	rights-of-way	they	have	for	their	tracks	would	be	ideal	for	long	fiber-
optic	cable	runs.	Electric,	gas,	and	water	utilities	in	many	countries	point	out
that	they,	too,	run	lines	into	homes	and	businesses.	Some	of	them	have	argued
that	the	energy	savings	from	computerized	management	of	home	heating

alone	might	defray	much	of	the	cost	of	stringing	fiber-optic	cables	because
energy	demand	would	be	lowered,	which	reduces	the	need	for	expensive	new
generating	plants.	In	France	most	of	the	cable	TV	connections	are	owned	by
two	big	water	companies.	But	outside	France,	at	least,	conventional	utility
companies	seem	less	obvious	candidates	for	building	highway	connections.
You	may	wonder	why	I	haven't	mentioned	direct-broadcast	satellites	and
other	technologies	as	mainstream	competitors	of	the	telephone	and	cable
companies.	As	I	said	earlier,	current	satellite	technology	is	a	good	interim
step.	It	delivers	a	great	broadcast	video	signal,	but	there	would	have	to	be	a
major	technological	breakthrough	before	it	could	provide	a	unique	video
bandwidth	feed	to	every	television	set	and	PC.	For	the	United	States	market	it
would	have	to	go	from	today's	300-channel-per-satellite	system	to	a	300,000-
channel	system,	even	assuming	fewer	than	1	percent	of	the	displays	needed	a
unique	feed	simultaneously.
Because	these	satellites	also	have	a	problem	delivering	data	from	the	home
back	into	the	network	(the	back	channel)	to	provide	true	interactivity,
applications	such	as	videoconferencing	aren't	possible.	A	partial	solution	is	to
use	the	phone	for	the	back	channel.	Direct-broadcast	satellites	such	as	the
Hughes	Electronics'	DIRECTV	system	use	your	regular	home	telephone	line
to	submit	back	to	their	billing	center	a	record	of	any	pay-per-view	programs
you	have	chosen.	With	a	special	add-in	circuit,	direct-broadcast	satellites	can
send	data	to	PCs	as	well	as	to	television	sets.	Data	broadcasting	is	a	valuable
interim	conduit	for	some	applications.
Teledesic,	a	company	that	my	friend,	cellular	telephone	pioneer	Craig
McCaw,	and	I	have	invested	in,	is	working	on	overcoming	the	limits	of
satellite	technology	by	using	a	large	number	of	low-orbit	satellites.	The	scope
of	the	proposed	system	is	quite	ambitious.	It	involves	nearly	1,000	satellites
orbiting	fifty	times	closer	to	Earth	than	traditional	geo-stationary	satellites.
Being	closer	to	Earth	means	these	satellites	require	2,500	times	less	power
and	have	increased	two-way	channel	resources.	This	solves	the	back-channel
problem.	Also,	the	significant	transmission	delay	associated	with	satellites	is
also	overcome.	Over	long	distances	these	low-orbit	satellites	can	provide
transmission	speeds	comparable	to	those	available	on	fiber.	Teledesic	has
regulatory,	technical,	and	financial	challenges	and	it	will	be	several	years
before	we'll	know	whether	the	company	can	overcome	them.	If	it	can,
Teledesic	or	other	systems	like	it	may	be	the	first,	the	cheapest,	or	indeed	the
only	way	to	bring	the	highway	to	many	parts	of	Earth.	Most	of	the	population
of	Asia	and	Africa,	for	example,	is	unlikely	to	have	local	access	to	fiber
connections	within	the	next	twenty	years.

Another	rapidly	advancing	technology	is	ground-based	wireless
communication.	Television	signals,	which	have	been	broadcast	over	the	air
using	wireless	VHF	and	UHF,	will	be	carried	primarily	on	fiber.	The	purpose
of	this	change	is	to	enable	everyone	to	have	a	personal	video	feed	and
interact.	Meanwhile,	voice	and	other	low-data-rate	connections	are	moving
from	the	wired	infrastructure	to	wireless	transmission	in	order	to	support
increased	mobility.	The	ideal	system	would	allow	for	the	sort	of	personalized
high-quality	video	and	mobility	I	talked	about	having	with	a	wallet	PC.	So
far,	that	combination	cannot	be	supported	by	any	of	today's	technologies,
because	wireless	systems	can't	provide	the	bandwidth	for	individual	video
feeds	that	a	fiber	network	can.
Early	on,	competitors	will	race	to	supply	the	first	interactive	services	to
communities,	but	once	all	of	the	attractive	territories	are	served	by	one
company	or	another,	rivals	will	begin	head-to-head	competition	by	entering
mar======================================================== unications
companies.	Federal	regulations	currently	prevent	cable	and	phone	companies
from	offering	a	general-purpose	network	that	would	put	them	in	competition
with	each	other.	The	first	thing	most	governments	have	to	do	to	help	the
highway	start	is	to	deregulate	communications.
The	old	approach	in	most	countries	was	to	create	monopolies	in	the	various
forms	of	telecommunication.	The	theory	behind	this	approach	was	that
companies	wouldn't	make	the	huge	investments	necessary	to	run	telephone
wires	out	to	everyone	unless	they	had	the	incentive	of	being	the	exclusive
supplier.	A	set	of	rules	drawn	up	by	the	government	binds	the	monopoly
holders	to	act	in	the	public	interest	with	restricted	but	essentially	guaranteed
profit.	The	outcome	has	been	a	very	reliable	network	with	broad	services	but
limited	innovation.	Later	regulations	extended	the	concept	to	cable	television
as	well	as	to	local	telephone	systems.	Both	federal	and	local	governments
granted	monopolies	and	curtailed	competition	in	exchange	for	regulatory
control.
A	highway	that	delivers	both	telephone	and	video	services	is	not	allowed
under	current	U.S.	laws.	Economists	and	historians	can	argue	the	pros	and
cons	of	whether	granting	regulated	monopolies	was	a	good	idea	back	in	1934,
but	today	there	is	a	general	agreement	that	the	rules	should	be	changed.	As	of
mid-1995,	however,	policy	makers	haven't	been	able	to	agree	on	exactly	when
or	in	what	ways.	Billions	of	dollars	are	at	stake	and	lawmakers	have	found	it

easy	to	get	lost	in	the	complicated	details	of	how	competition	should	start.
The	problem	is	to	figure	out	how	to	move	from	the	old	system	to	a	new	one
while	keeping	most	of	the	participants	happy.	This	dilemma	is	the	reason
telecommunications	reform	has	been	in	limbo	for	years.	Congress	was
embroiled	much	of	the	summer	of	1995	in	a	debate,	not	about	whether	the
telecommunications	industry	should	be	deregulated,	but	rather	about	how	it
should	be	deregulated.	I	hope	that	by	the	time	you	read	this,	the	information
highway	will	be	legal	in	the	United	States!
Outside	the	United	States,	matters	are	complicated	by	the	fact	that	in	many
countries	the	regulated	monopolies	have	been	agencies	owned	by	the
government	itself.	They	were	called	PTTs	because	they	managed	postal,
telephone,	and	telegraph	services.	In	some	countries	the	PTT	is	being	allowed
to	go	ahead	and	develop	the	highway,	but	when	government	organizations	are
involved,	things	often	move	slowly.	I	think	the	pace	of	investment	and
deregulation	worldwide	will	increase	in	the	next	ten	years	because	politicians
are	recognizing	that	this	issue	is	critical	if	their	countries	are	to	remain
competitive	in	the	long	term.	In	many	election	campaigns	candidates'
platform	planks	will	include	policies	that	will	allow	their	country	to	lead	in
the	creation	of	the	highway.	The	political	use	of	these	issues	will	make	them
more	visible,	which	will	help	clear	various	international	roadblocks.
Countries	like	the	United	States	and	Canada,	where	a	high	percentage	of
homes	have	cable	television,	are	at	an	advantage	because	the	competition
between	cable	companies	and	phone	companies	will	accelerate	the	pace	of
investment	in	the	highway	infrastructure.	Great	Britain,	however,	is	the
farthest	along	in	actually	using	a	single	network	to	provide	both	television
and	cable	services.	The	cable	companies	there	were	allowed	to	offer	phone
service	in	1990.	Foreign	companies,	primarily	U.S.	phone	and	cable
companies,	made	major	investments	in	fiber	infrastructure	in	the	United
Kingdom.	British	consumers	now	can	choose	to	get	telephone	service	from
their	cable	TV	company.	This	competition	has	forced	British	Telecom	to
improve	its	rates	and	services.
If	we	look	back	in	ten	years,	I	think	we'll	see	a	clear	correlation	between	the
amount	of	telecommunications	reform	in	each	country	and	the	state	of	its
information	economy.	Few	investors	will	want	to	put	money	into	places	that
don't	have	great	communications	infrastructures.	There	are	so	many
politicians	and	lobbyists	involved	in	creating	new	regulations	in	so	many
countries,	I'm	sure	the	entire	spectrum	of	different	regulatory	schemes	will	be
tried.	The	"right"	solution	will	vary	somewhat	in	different	countries.

One	area	it's	clear	government	should	stay	out	of	is	compatibility.	Some	have
suggested	that	governments	set	standards	for	networks,	to	guarantee	that	they
interoperate.	In	1994,	legislation	was	put	before	a	subcommittee	in	the	U.S.
House	of	Representatives	calling	for	all	set-top	boxes	to	be	made	so	they
would	be	compatible.	This	sounded	like	a	great	idea	to	those	who	drafted	the
legislation.	It	would	ensure	that	if	Aunt	Bessie	invested	in	a	set-top	box,	she
could	be	confident	it	would	work	if	she	moved	to	another	part	of	the	country.
Compatibility	is	important.	It	makes	the	consumer-electronics	and	personal-
computer	businesses	thrive.	When	the	PC	industry	was	new,	many	machines
came	and	went.	The	Altair	8800	was	superseded	by	the	Apple	I.	Then	came
the	Apple	II,	the	original	IBM	PC,	the	Apple	Macintosh,	IBM	PC	AT,	386
and	486	PCs,	Power	Macintoshes,	and	Pentium	PCs.	Each	of	these	machines
was	somewhat	compatible	with	the	others.	For	instance,	all	were	able	to	share
plain-text	files.	But	there	was	also	a	lot	of	incompatibility	because	each
successive	computer	generation	showcased	fundamental	breakthroughs	the
older	systems	didn't	support.
Compatibility	with	prior	machines	is	a	great	virtue	in	some	cases.	Both	PC-
compatibles	and	the	Apple	Macintosh	provide	some	backwards	compatibility.
However,	they	are	incompatible	with	each	other.	And	at	the	time	the	PC	was
introduced,	it	was	not	compatible	with	IBM's	prior	machines.	Likewise,	the
Mac	was	incompatible	with	Apple's	earlier	machines.	In	the	world	of
computing,	technology	is	so	dynamic	that	any	company	should	be	able	to
come	out	with	whatever	new	product	it	wants	and	let	the	market	decide	if	it
has	made	the	right	set	of	trade-offs.	Because	the	set-top	box	is	in	every	sense
a	computer,	it	stands	to	reason	it	will	follow	the	same	pattern	of	rapid
innovation	that	has	driven	the	PC	industry.	In	fact,	the	set-top	box	will	be	sold
to	a	far	more	uncertain	market	than	the	PC	was,	so	the	case	for	letting	it	be
market	driven	is	even	stronger.	It	would	be	foolish	to	impose	the	constraint	of
government-dictated	design	on	an	unfinished	invention.
The	original	set-top	box	compatibility	legislation	in	the	United	States
ultimately	died	in	Congress	in	1994,	but	related	issues	arose	in	1995,	and	I
expect	that	similar	efforts	will	be	made	in	other	countries.	It	seems	easy	to
legislate	reasonable-sounding	constraints,	but	if	we	don't	watch	out,	those
constraints	could	strangle	the	market.
The	highway	will	develop	at	a	different	pace	in	different	communities	and	in
different	countries.	When	I	travel	abroad,	the	foreign	press	often	asks	how
many	years	behind	the	developments	in	the	United	States	their	country	is.	It's
a	difficult	question.	The	advantages	that	the	United	States	has	are	the	size	of

the	market,	the	popularity	of	the	personal	computer	in	American	homes,	and
the	way	the	phone	and	cable	companies	will	compete	with	each	other	for
current	and	future	revenues.	Of	the	various	technologies	that	will	be	part	of
building	the	highway,	U.S.-based	companies	are	leaders	in	almost	every	one:
microprocessors,	software,	entertainment,	personal	computers,	set-top	boxes,
and	network-switching	equipment.	The	only	significant	exceptions	are	display
technology	and	memory	chips.
Other	countries	have	advantages	of	their	own.	In	Singapore,	the	population
density	and	political	focus	on	infrastructure	makes	it	certain	that	this	nation
will	be	a	leader.	A	decision	by	the	Singaporean	government	to	make
something	happen	means	quite	a	bit	in	this	unique	country.	The	highway
infrastructure	is	already	under	construction.	Every	developer	will	soon	be
required	to	provide	every	new	house	or	apartment	with	a	broadband	cable	in
the	same	way	he	is	required	by	law	to	provide	lines	for	water,	gas,	electricity,
and	telephone.	When	I	visited	with	Lee	Kuan	Yew,	the	seventy-two-year-old
senior	minister	who	was	the	political	head	of	Singapore	from	1959	to	1990,	I
was	extremely	impressed	with	his	understanding	of	the	opportunity	and	his
belief	that	it	is	a	top	priority	to	move	ahead	at	full	speed.	He	views	it	as
imperative	that	his	small	country	continue	to	be	a	premier	location	in	Asia	for
high-value	jobs.	I	was	quite	blunt	in	asking	Mr.	Lee	if	he	understood	that	the
Singaporean	government	would	be	giving	up	the	tight	control	over
information	it	exercises	today	as	a	way	of	ensuring	shared	values	that	tend	to
keep	societal	problems	in	check.	He	said	Singapore	recognizes	that	in	the
future	it	will	have	to	rely	on	methods	other	than	censorship	to	maintain	a
culture	that	sacrifices	some	Western-style	freedom	in	exchange	for	a	strong
sense	of	community.
In	China,	however,	the	government	seems	to	believe	it	can	have	it	both	ways.
Post	and	Telecommunications	Minster	Wu	Jichuan	told	reporters	at	a	news
briefing,	"By	linking	with	the	Internet	we	don't	mean	absolute	freedom	of
information.	I	think	there	is	general	understanding	about	this.	If	you	go
through	customs,	you	have	to	show	your	passport.	It's	the	same	with
management	of	information."	Wu	said	Beijing	will	adopt	unspecified
"management	measures"	to	control	inflows	of	data	on	all	telecommunications
services	as	they	evolve	in	China.	"There	is	no	contradiction	at	all	between	the
development	of	telecoms	infrastructure	and	the	exercise	of	state	sovereignty.
The	International	Telecommunications	Union	states	that	any	country	has
sovereignty	over	its	own	telecoms."	He	may	not	understand	that	to	implement
full	Internet	access	and	maintain	censorship,	you	would	almost	have	to	have
someone	looking	over	the	shoulder	of	every	user.

In	France,	the	pioneering	on-line	service,	Minitel,	has	fostered	a	community
of	information	publishers	and	stimulated	broad	familiarity	with	on-line
systems	generally.	Even	though	both	terminals	and	bandwidth	a======================================================== gy	worked.	Virtually	every	personal-computer	manufacturer
licensed	a	programming	language	from	us.	Even	though	the	hardware	of	two
companies'	computers	was	different,	the	fact	that	both	ran	Microsoft	BASIC
meant	they	were	somewhat	compatible.	That	compatibility	became	an
important	part	of	what	people	purchased	with	their	computers.	Manufacturers
frequently	advertised	that	Microsoft	programming	languages,	including
BASIC,	were	available	for	their	computers.
Along	the	way,	Microsoft	BASIC	became	an	industry	software	standard.
Some	technologies	do	not	depend	upon	widespread	acceptance	for	their	value.
A	wonderful	nonstick	frying	pan	is	useful	even	if	you're	the	only	person	who
ever	buys	one.	But	for	communications	and	other	products	that	involve
collaboration,	much	of	the	product's	value	comes	from	its	widespread
deployment.	Given	a	choice	between	a	beautiful,	handcrafted	mailbox	with	an
opening	that	would	accommodate	only	one	size	envelope,	and	an	old	carton
that	everyone	routinely	dropped	all	mail	and	messages	for	you	into,	you'd
choose	the	one	with	broader	access.	You	would	choose	compatibility.
Sometimes	governments	or	committees	set	standards	intended	to	promote
compatibility.	These	are	called	"de	jure"	standards	and	have	the	force	of	law.
Many	of	the	most	successful	standards,	however,	are	"de	facto":	ones	the
market	discovers.	Most	analog	timepieces	operate	clockwise.	English-
language	typewriter	and	computer	keyboards	use	a	layout	in	which	the	keys

across	the	top	letter	row,	left	to	right,	spell	QWERTY.	No	law	says	they	must.
They	work,	and	most	customers	will	stick	with	those	standards	unless
something	dramatically	better	comes	along.
But	because	de	facto	standards	are	supported	by	the	marketplace	rather	than
by	law,	they	are	chosen	for	the	right	reasons	and	replaced	when	something
truly	better	shows	up—the	way	the	compact	disc	has	almost	replaced	the
vinyl	record.
De	facto	standards	often	evolve	in	the	marketplace	through	an	economic
mechanism	very	similar	to	the	concept	of	the	positive	spiral	that	drives
successful	businesses,	in	which	success	reinforces	success.	This	concept,
called	positive	feedback,	explains	why	de	facto	standards	often	emerge	as
people	search	for	compatibility.
A	positive-feedback	cycle	begins	when,	in	a	growing	market,	one	way	of
doing	something	gets	a	slight	advantage	over	its	competitors.	It	is	most	likely
to	happen	with	high-technology	products	that	can	be	made	in	great	volume
for	very	little	increase	in	cost	and	derive	some	of	their	value	from
compatibility.	A	home	video-game	system	is	one	example.	It	is	a	special-
purpose	computer,	equipped	with	a	special-purpose	operating	system	that
forms	a	platform	for	the	game's	software.	Compatibility	is	important	because
the	more	applications—in	this	case,	games—that	are	available,	the	more
valuable	the	machine	becomes	to	a	consumer.	At	the	same	time,	the	more
machines	consumers	buy,	the	more	applications	software	developers	create
for	it.	A	positive-feedback	cycle	sets	in	once	a	machine	reaches	a	high	level	of
popularity	and	sales	grow	further.
Perhaps	the	most	famous	industry	demonstration	of	the	power	of	positive
feedback	was	the	videocassette-recorder	format	battle	of	the	late	1970s	and
early	1980s.	The	persistent	myth	has	been	that	positive	feedback	alone	caused
the	VHS	format	to	win	out	over	Beta,	even	though	Beta	was	technically
better.	Actually,	early	Beta	tapes	only	recorded	for	an	hour—compared	to
three	hours	for	VHS—not	enough	for	a	whole	movie	or	football	game.
Customers	care	more	about	a	tape's	capacity	than	some	engineer's	specs.	The
VHS	format	got	off	to	a	small	lead	over	the	Beta	format	used	by	Sony	in	its
Betamax	player.	JVC,	which	developed	the	VHS	standard,	allowed	other
VCR	manufacturers	to	use	the	VHS	standard	for	a	very	low	royalty.	As	VHS-
compatible	players	proliferated,	video-rental	stores	tended	to	stock	more	VHS
than	Beta	tapes.	This	made	the	owner	of	a	VHS	player	more	likely	than	a
Beta	owner	to	find	the	movie	she	wanted	at	the	video	store,	which	made	VHS
fundamentally	more	useful	to	its	owners	and	caused	even	more	people	to	buy

VHS	players.	This,	in	turn,	further	motivated	video	stores	to	stock	VHS.	Beta
lost	out	as	people	chose	VHS	in	the	belief	that	it	represented	a	durable
standard.	VHS	was	the	beneficiary	of	a	positive-feedback	cycle.	Success	bred
success.	But	not	at	the	expense	of	quality.
While	the	duel	between	the	Betamax	and	VHS	formats	was	going	on,	sales	of
prerecorded	videocassettes	to	U.S.	tape-rental	dealers	were	almost	flat,	just	a
few	million	copies	a	year.	Once	VHS	emerged	as	the	apparent	standard,	in
about	1983,	an	acceptance	threshold	was	crossed	and	the	use	of	the	machines,
as	measured	by	tape	sales,	turned	abruptly	upward.	That	year,	over	9.5	million
tapes	were	sold,	a	more	than	50	percent	increase	over	the	year	before.	In
1984,	tapes	sales	reached	22	million.	Then,	in	successive	years:	52	million,	84
million,	and	110	million	units	in	1987,	by	which	time	renting	movies	had
became	one	of	the	most	popular	forms	of	home	entertainment,	and	the	VHS
machine	had	become	ubiquitous.
This	is	an	example	of	how	a	quantitative	change	in	the	acceptance	level	of	a
new	technology	can	lead	to	a	qualitative	change	in	the	role	the	technology
plays.	Television	is	another.	In	1946,	10,000	television	sets	were	sold	in	the
United	States	and	only	16,000	in	the	next	year.	But	then	a	threshold	was
crossed,	and	in	1948	the	number	was	190,000.	In	successive	years	it	was	1
million	units,	followed	by	4	million,	10	million,	and	steadily	up	to	32	million
sold	in	1955.	As	more	television	sets	were	sold,	more	was	invested	in	creating
programming,	which	in	turn	further	enticed	people	to	buy	television	sets.
For	the	first	few	years	after	they	were	introduced,	audio	compact	disc	(CD)
players	and	discs	didn't	sell	well,	in	part	because	it	was	difficult	to	find	music
stores	that	carried	many	titles.	Then,	seemingly	overnight,	enough	players
were	sold	and	titles	were	available,	and	an	acceptance	threshold	was	crossed.
More	people	bought	players	because	more	titles	were	available,	and	record
companies	made	more	titles	available	on	CDs.	Music	lovers	preferred	the
new,	high-quality	sound	and	convenience	of	compact	discs,	and	they	became
the	de	facto	standard	and	drove	LPs	out	of	the	record	stores.
One	of	the	most	important	lessons	the	computer	industry	learned	is	that	a
great	deal	of	a	computer's	value	to	its	user	depends	on	the	quality	and	variety
of	the	application	software	available	for	it.	All	of	us	in	the	industry	learned
that	lesson—some	happily,	some	unhappily.
In	the	summer	of	1980,	two	IBM	emissaries	came	to	Microsoft	to	discuss	a
personal	computer	they	might	or	might	not	build.
At	the	time,	IBM's	position	was	unchallenged	in	the	realm	of	hardware,	with

a	more	than	80	percent	market	share	of	large	computers.	It	had	had	only
modest	success	with	small	computers.	IBM	was	used	to	selling	big,	expensive
machines	to	big	customers.	IBM's	management	suspected	that	IBM,	which
had	340,000	employees,	would	require	the	assistance	of	outsiders	if	it	was
going	to	sell	little,	inexpensive	machines	to	individuals	as	well	as	companies
anytime	soon.
IBM	wanted	to	bring	its	personal	computer	to	market	in	less	than	a	year.	In
order	to	meet	this	schedule	it	had	to	abandon	its	traditional	course	of	doing	all
the	hardware	and	software	itself.	So	IBM	had	elected	to	build	its	PC	mainly
from	off-the-shelf	components	available	to	anyone.	This	made	a	platform	that
was	fundamentally	open,	which	made	it	easy	to	copy.
Although	it	generally	built	the	microprocessors	used	in	its	products,	IBM
decided	to	buy	microprocessors	for	its	PCs	from	Intel.	Most	important	for
Microsoft,	IBM	decided	to	license	the	operating	system	from	us,	rather	than
creating	software	itself.
Working	together	with	the	IBM	design	team,	we	promoted	a	plan	for	IBM	to
build	one	of	the	first	personal	computers	to	use	a	16-bit	microprocessor	chip,
the	8088.	The	move	from	8	to	16	bits	would	take	personal	computers	from
hobbyist	toys	to	high-volume	business	tools.	The	16-bit	generation	of
computers	could	support	up	to	one	full	megabyte	of	memory—256	times	as
much	as	an	8-bit	computer.	At	first	this	would	be	just	a	theoretical	advantage
because	IBM	initially	intended	to	offer	only	16K	of	memory,	1/64	of	the	total
memory	possible.	The	benefit	of	going	16-bit	was	further	lessened	by	IBM's
decision	to	save	money	by	using	a	chip	that	employed	only	8-bit	connections
to	the	rest	of	the	computer.	Consequently,	the	chip	could	think	much	faster
than	it	could	communicate.	However,	the	decision	to	use	a	16-bit	processor
was	very	smart	because	it	allowed	the	IBM	PC	to	evolve	and	remain	the
standard	for	PCs	to	this	day.
IBM,	with	its	reputation	and	its	decision	to	employ	an	open	design	that	other
companies	could	copy,	had	a	real	chance	to	create	a	new,	broad	standard	in
personal	computing.	We	wanted	to	be	a	part	of	it.	So	we	took	on	the
operating-system	challenge.	We	bought	some	early	work	from	another	Seattle
company	and	hired	its	top	engineer,	Tim	Paterson.	With	lots	of	modifications
the	system	became	the	Microsoft	Disk	Operating	System,	or	MS-DOS.	Tim
became,	in	effect,	the	father	of	MS-DOS.
IBM,	our	first	licensee,	called	the	system	PC-DOS;	the	PC	was	for	personal
computer.	The	IBM	Personal	Computer	hit	the	market	in	August	1981	and

was	a	triumph.	The	company	marketed	it	well	and	popularized	the	term	"PC."
The	project	had	been	conceived	by	Bill	Lowe	and	shepherded	to	completion
by	Don	Estridge.	It	is	a	tribute	to	the	quality	of	the	IBM	people	involved	that
they	were	able	to	take	their	personal	computer	from	idea	to	market	in	less
than	a	year.
Few	remember	this	now,	but	the	original	IBM	PC	actually	shipped	with	a
choice	of	three	operating	systems—our	PC-DOS,	CP/M-86,	and	the	UCSD
Pascal	P-system.	We	knew	that	only	one	of	the	three	could	succeed	and
become	the	standard.	We	wanted	the	same	kinds	of	forces	that	were	putting
VHS	cassettes	into	every	video	store	to	push	MS-DOS	to	become	the
standard.======================================================== gy	worked.	Virtually	every	personal-computer	manufacturer
licensed	a	programming	language	from	us.	Even	though	the	hardware	of	two
companies'	computers	was	different,	the	fact	that	both	ran	Microsoft	BASIC
meant	they	were	somewhat	compatible.	That	compatibility	became	an
important	part	of	what	people	purchased	with	their	computers.	Manufacturers
frequently	advertised	that	Microsoft	programming	languages,	including
BASIC,	were	available	for	their	computers.
Along	the	way,	Microsoft	BASIC	became	an	industry	software	standard.
Some	technologies	do	not	depend	upon	widespread	acceptance	for	their	value.
A	wonderful	nonstick	frying	pan	is	useful	even	if	you're	the	only	person	who
ever	buys	one.	But	for	communications	and	other	products	that	involve
collaboration,	much	of	the	product's	value	comes	from	its	widespread
deployment.	Given	a	choice	between	a	beautiful,	handcrafted	mailbox	with	an
opening	that	would	accommodate	only	one	size	envelope,	and	an	old	carton
that	everyone	routinely	dropped	all	mail	and	messages	for	you	into,	you'd
choose	the	one	with	broader	access.	You	would	choose	compatibility.
Sometimes	governments	or	committees	set	standards	intended	to	promote
compatibility.	These	are	called	"de	jure"	standards	and	have	the	force	of	law.
Many	of	the	most	successful	standards,	however,	are	"de	facto":	ones	the
market	discovers.	Most	analog	timepieces	operate	clockwise.	English-
language	typewriter	and	computer	keyboards	use	a	layout	in	which	the	keys

across	the	top	letter	row,	left	to	right,	spell	QWERTY.	No	law	says	they	must.
They	work,	and	most	customers	will	stick	with	those	standards	unless
something	dramatically	better	comes	along.
But	because	de	facto	standards	are	supported	by	the	marketplace	rather	than
by	law,	they	are	chosen	for	the	right	reasons	and	replaced	when	something
truly	better	shows	up—the	way	the	compact	disc	has	almost	replaced	the
vinyl	record.
De	facto	standards	often	evolve	in	the	marketplace	through	an	economic
mechanism	very	similar	to	the	concept	of	the	positive	spiral	that	drives
successful	businesses,	in	which	success	reinforces	success.	This	concept,
called	positive	feedback,	explains	why	de	facto	standards	often	emerge	as
people	search	for	compatibility.
A	positive-feedback	cycle	begins	when,	in	a	growing	market,	one	way	of
doing	something	gets	a	slight	advantage	over	its	competitors.	It	is	most	likely
to	happen	with	high-technology	products	that	can	be	made	in	great	volume
for	very	little	increase	in	cost	and	derive	some	of	their	value	from
compatibility.	A	home	video-game	system	is	one	example.	It	is	a	special-
purpose	computer,	equipped	with	a	special-purpose	operating	system	that
forms	a	platform	for	the	game's	software.	Compatibility	is	important	because
the	more	applications—in	this	case,	games—that	are	available,	the	more
valuable	the	machine	becomes	to	a	consumer.	At	the	same	time,	the	more
machines	consumers	buy,	the	more	applications	software	developers	create
for	it.	A	positive-feedback	cycle	sets	in	once	a	machine	reaches	a	high	level	of
popularity	and	sales	grow	further.
Perhaps	the	most	famous	industry	demonstration	of	the	power	of	positive
feedback	was	the	videocassette-recorder	format	battle	of	the	late	1970s	and
early	1980s.	The	persistent	myth	has	been	that	positive	feedback	alone	caused
the	VHS	format	to	win	out	over	Beta,	even	though	Beta	was	technically
better.	Actually,	early	Beta	tapes	only	recorded	for	an	hour—compared	to
three	hours	for	VHS—not	enough	for	a	whole	movie	or	football	game.
Customers	care	more	about	a	tape's	capacity	than	some	engineer's	specs.	The
VHS	format	got	off	to	a	small	lead	over	the	Beta	format	used	by	Sony	in	its
Betamax	player.	JVC,	which	developed	the	VHS	standard,	allowed	other
VCR	manufacturers	to	use	the	VHS	standard	for	a	very	low	royalty.	As	VHS-
compatible	players	proliferated,	video-rental	stores	tended	to	stock	more	VHS
than	Beta	tapes.	This	made	the	owner	of	a	VHS	player	more	likely	than	a
Beta	owner	to	find	the	movie	she	wanted	at	the	video	store,	which	made	VHS
fundamentally	more	useful	to	its	owners	and	caused	even	more	people	to	buy

VHS	players.	This,	in	turn,	further	motivated	video	stores	to	stock	VHS.	Beta
lost	out	as	people	chose	VHS	in	the	belief	that	it	represented	a	durable
standard.	VHS	was	the	beneficiary	of	a	positive-feedback	cycle.	Success	bred
success.	But	not	at	the	expense	of	quality.
While	the	duel	between	the	Betamax	and	VHS	formats	was	going	on,	sales	of
prerecorded	videocassettes	to	U.S.	tape-rental	dealers	were	almost	flat,	just	a
few	million	copies	a	year.	Once	VHS	emerged	as	the	apparent	standard,	in
about	1983,	an	acceptance	threshold	was	crossed	and	the	use	of	the	machines,
as	measured	by	tape	sales,	turned	abruptly	upward.	That	year,	over	9.5	million
tapes	were	sold,	a	more	than	50	percent	increase	over	the	year	before.	In
1984,	tapes	sales	reached	22	million.	Then,	in	successive	years:	52	million,	84
million,	and	110	million	units	in	1987,	by	which	time	renting	movies	had
became	one	of	the	most	popular	forms	of	home	entertainment,	and	the	VHS
machine	had	become	ubiquitous.
This	is	an	example	of	how	a	quantitative	change	in	the	acceptance	level	of	a
new	technology	can	lead	to	a	qualitative	change	in	the	role	the	technology
plays.	Television	is	another.	In	1946,	10,000	television	sets	were	sold	in	the
United	States	and	only	16,000	in	the	next	year.	But	then	a	threshold	was
crossed,	and	in	1948	the	number	was	190,000.	In	successive	years	it	was	1
million	units,	followed	by	4	million,	10	million,	and	steadily	up	to	32	million
sold	in	1955.	As	more	television	sets	were	sold,	more	was	invested	in	creating
programming,	which	in	turn	further	enticed	people	to	buy	television	sets.
For	the	first	few	years	after	they	were	introduced,	audio	compact	disc	(CD)
players	and	discs	didn't	sell	well,	in	part	because	it	was	difficult	to	find	music
stores	that	carried	many	titles.	Then,	seemingly	overnight,	enough	players
were	sold	and	titles	were	available,	and	an	acceptance	threshold	was	crossed.
More	people	bought	players	because	more	titles	were	available,	and	record
companies	made	more	titles	available	on	CDs.	Music	lovers	preferred	the
new,	high-quality	sound	and	convenience	of	compact	discs,	and	they	became
the	de	facto	standard	and	drove	LPs	out	of	the	record	stores.
One	of	the	most	important	lessons	the	computer	industry	learned	is	that	a
great	deal	of	a	computer's	value	to	its	user	depends	on	the	quality	and	variety
of	the	application	software	available	for	it.	All	of	us	in	the	industry	learned
that	lesson—some	happily,	some	unhappily.
In	the	summer	of	1980,	two	IBM	emissaries	came	to	Microsoft	to	discuss	a
personal	computer	they	might	or	might	not	build.
At	the	time,	IBM's	position	was	unchallenged	in	the	realm	of	hardware,	with

a	more	than	80	percent	market	share	of	large	computers.	It	had	had	only
modest	success	with	small	computers.	IBM	was	used	to	selling	big,	expensive
machines	to	big	customers.	IBM's	management	suspected	that	IBM,	which
had	340,000	employees,	would	require	the	assistance	of	outsiders	if	it	was
going	to	sell	little,	inexpensive	machines	to	individuals	as	well	as	companies
anytime	soon.
IBM	wanted	to	bring	its	personal	computer	to	market	in	less	than	a	year.	In
order	to	meet	this	schedule	it	had	to	abandon	its	traditional	course	of	doing	all
the	hardware	and	software	itself.	So	IBM	had	elected	to	build	its	PC	mainly
from	off-the-shelf	components	available	to	anyone.	This	made	a	platform	that
was	fundamentally	open,	which	made	it	easy	to	copy.
Although	it	generally	built	the	microprocessors	used	in	its	products,	IBM
decided	to	buy	microprocessors	for	its	PCs	from	Intel.	Most	important	for
Microsoft,	IBM	decided	to	license	the	operating	system	from	us,	rather	than
creating	software	itself.
Working	together	with	the	IBM	design	team,	we	promoted	a	plan	for	IBM	to
build	one	of	the	first	personal	computers	to	use	a	16-bit	microprocessor	chip,
the	8088.	The	move	from	8	to	16	bits	would	take	personal	computers	from
hobbyist	toys	to	high-volume	business	tools.	The	16-bit	generation	of
computers	could	support	up	to	one	full	megabyte	of	memory—256	times	as
much	as	an	8-bit	computer.	At	first	this	would	be	just	a	theoretical	advantage
because	IBM	initially	intended	to	offer	only	16K	of	memory,	1/64	of	the	total
memory	possible.	The	benefit	of	going	16-bit	was	further	lessened	by	IBM's
decision	to	save	money	by	using	a	chip	that	employed	only	8-bit	connections
to	the	rest	of	the	computer.	Consequently,	the	chip	could	think	much	faster
than	it	could	communicate.	However,	the	decision	to	use	a	16-bit	processor
was	very	smart	because	it	allowed	the	IBM	PC	to	evolve	and	remain	the
standard	for	PCs	to	this	day.
IBM,	with	its	reputation	and	its	decision	to	employ	an	open	design	that	other
companies	could	copy,	had	a	real	chance	to	create	a	new,	broad	standard	in
personal	computing.	We	wanted	to	be	a	part	of	it.	So	we	took	on	the
operating-system	challenge.	We	bought	some	early	work	from	another	Seattle
company	and	hired	its	top	engineer,	Tim	Paterson.	With	lots	of	modifications
the	system	became	the	Microsoft	Disk	Operating	System,	or	MS-DOS.	Tim
became,	in	effect,	the	father	of	MS-DOS.
IBM,	our	first	licensee,	called	the	system	PC-DOS;	the	PC	was	for	personal
computer.	The	IBM	Personal	Computer	hit	the	market	in	August	1981	and

was	a	triumph.	The	company	marketed	it	well	and	popularized	the	term	"PC."
The	project	had	been	conceived	by	Bill	Lowe	and	shepherded	to	completion
by	Don	Estridge.	It	is	a	tribute	to	the	quality	of	the	IBM	people	involved	that
they	were	able	to	take	their	personal	computer	from	idea	to	market	in	less
than	a	year.
Few	remember	this	now,	but	the	original	IBM	PC	actually	shipped	with	a
choice	of	three	operating	systems—our	PC-DOS,	CP/M-86,	and	the	UCSD
Pascal	P-system.	We	knew	that	only	one	of	the	three	could	succeed	and
become	the	standard.	We	wanted	the	same	kinds	of	forces	that	were	putting
VHS	cassettes	into	every	video	store	to	push	MS-DOS	to	become	the
standard.======================================================== o	try	to	put	into
perspective	what's	going	on.
In	the	rush	to	build	the	information	highway,	no	one	has	seen	any	gold	yet,
and	there's	a	lot	of	investing	to	be	done	before	anyone	does.	The	investments
will	be	driven	by	faith	that	the	market	will	be	large.	Neither	the	full	highway
nor	the	market	will	exist	until	a	broadband	network	has	been	brought	to	most
homes	and	businesses.	Before	that	can	happen,	the	software	platforms,
applications,	networks,	servers,	and	information	appliances	that	will	make	up
the	highway	all	have	to	be	built	and	deployed.	Many	pieces	of	the	highway
won't	be	profitable	until	there	are	tens	of	millions	of	users.	Achieving	that

goal	will	require	hard	work,	technical	ingenuity,	and	money.	Today's	frenzy	is
helpful	in	this	regard,	because	it	encourages	investment	and	experimentation.
No	one	yet	knows	for	sure	what	the	public	wants	from	the	information
highway.	The	public	itself	can't	know,	because	it	hasn't	had	experience	with
video-capable	interactive	networks	and	applications.	Some	early	technology
has	been	tried,	but	there	have	been	only	a	few	such	trials.	They	have	offered
movies,	some	shopping,	and	a	lot	of	novelty,	which	soon	wears	off.	As	a
result,	all	that	has	really	been	learned	so	far	is	that	limited	interactive	systems
generate	limited	results.	It	will	be	impossible	to	get	much	of	a	sense	of	the
highway's	real	potential	until	dozens	of	new	applications	have	been	built.
However,	it's	tough	to	justify	building	applications	without	confidence	in	the
market.	Until	at	least	one	credible	trial	proves	that	the	revenue	generated	can
justify	the	fixed	costs	of	the	system,	everyone	who	insists	his	company	will
spend	billions	building	the	information	highway	to	connect	it	to	homes	is
posturing.	My	view	is	that	the	highway	won't	be	a	sudden,	revolutionary
creation	but	that	the	Internet,	along	with	evolution	in	the	PC	and	PC	software,
will	guide	us	step	by	step	to	the	full	system.
Some	posturing	is	unfairly	elevating	expectations	and	contributing	to	the
excesses	of	Information	Highway	Frenzy.	A	surprising	number	of	people	are
speculating	about	the	direction	technology	will	take.	Some	of	these
conjectures	ignore	practicality	or	preferences	the	public	has	already
demonstrated	or	are	unrealistic	about	how	soon	the	pieces	will	come	together.
Everyone	should	be	free	to	theorize,	but	speculation	suggesting	that	the	full
information	highway's	major	impact	on	consumers	will	come	before	the	turn
of	the	century	is	flat	wrong.
Companies	investing	now	in	the	information	highway	are,	at	best,	making
informed	guesses.	Skeptics	bring	up	good	reasons	why	they	think	it	won't	be
as	big	or	early	an	opportunity	as	I	think	it	will	be.	I	believe	in	this	business.
Microsoft	is	investing	more	than	$100	million	a	year	on	research	and
development	for	the	highway.	It	will	almost	certainly	take	five	years	or	more
of	this	kind	of	investing	before	the	results	of	the	R&D	bring	in	enough
revenue	to	make	the	money	back,	so	we're	making	a	$500	million	bet.	It	could
prove	to	be	a	half-billion-dollar	losing	bet.	Our	shareholders	are	allowing	us
to	make	it	on	the	basis	of	our	previous	successes,	but	that's	no	guarantee.
Naturally	we	expect	we'll	be	successful,	and	like	the	others	running	the	race,
we	have	a	rationale	for	why.	We	believe	our	software-development	skills	and
our	commitment	to	PC	evolution	will	allow	us	to	get	a	return	on	our
investment.

Comprehensive	trials	of	broadband	connections	to	PCs	and	television	sets
should	get	under	way	in	1996	in	North	America,	Europe,	and	Asia,	financed
by	companies	willing	to	take	a	risk	and	hoping	that	the	results	will	give	them
a	head	start.	Some	of	the	trials	will	be	"me	too"	efforts	aimed	at	showing	that
a	particular	network	operator	can	build	and	operate	a	high-bandwidth
network.	The	primary	goal	of	the	trials	should	be	to	make	available	a	platform
for	software	developers	to	build	and	explore	new	applications	on,	to	test	the
applications'	appeal	and	financial	viability.
When	Paul	Allen	and	I	saw	that	picture	of	the	first	Altair	computer,	we	could
only	guess	at	the	wealth	of	applications	it	would	inspire.	We	knew
applications	would	be	developed	but	we	didn't	know	what	they	would	be.
Some	were	predictable—for	example,	programs	that	would	let	a	PC	function
as	the	terminal	for	a	mainframe	computer—but	the	most	important
applications,	such	as	the	VisiCalc	spreadsheets,	were	unexpected.
These	forthcoming	trials	will	give	companies	the	opportunity	to	look	for	the
equivalents	of	the	spreadsheet—unexpected	killer	applications	and	services
that	will	capture	the	imagination	of	consumers—and	build	a	financial	case	for
rolling	out	the	highway.	It's	almost	impossible	to	guess	what	applications	will
or	won't	appeal	to	the	public.	Customers'	needs	and	desires	are	so	personal.
For	instance,	I	hope	to	be	able	to	use	the	highway	to	stay	up-to-date	on
medical	advances.	I'd	like	to	find	out	about	health	risks	for	someone	in	my
age	group,	and	ways	to	avoid	them.	So	I	want	fitness	and	medical	applications
as	well	as	ones	that	would	enable	me	to	continue	educating	myself	in	other
areas	I'm	interested	in.	But	that's	just	me.	Will	other	users	want	medical
advice?	New	kinds	of	games?	New	ways	of	meeting	people?	Home	shopping?
Or	just	a	few	more	movies?
The	trials	will	determine	which	are	the	most	popular	applications	and
services.	These	will	probably	include	simple	extensions	of	existing
communication	functions,	such	as	video-on-demand	and	high-speed
connections	between	personal	computers.	In	addition,	there	will	be	a	few	wild
new	services	that	catch	the	fancy	of	the	public	and	inspire	further	innovation,
investment,	and	entrepreneurship.	Those	are	what	I'm	looking	forward	to
seeing.	If	the	early	trials	don't	excite	consumers,	there	will	have	to	be	more
trials,	and	the	building	of	the	full	highway	will	be	delayed.	In	the	meantime,
the	Internet,	connected	PCs,	and	PC	software	will	continue	to	improve	and
become	an	even	better	foundation	to	build	on.	Hardware	and	software	prices
will	continue	to	come	down.
It's	interesting	to	watch	how	different	large	companies	respond	to	these

opportunities.	No	one	wants	to	admit	to	uncertainty.	Phone	and	cable
companies,	TV	stations	and	networks,	computer	hardware	and	software
companies,	newspapers,	magazines,	movie	studios,	and	even	individual
authors	are	all	formulating	strategies.	From	a	distance	their	plans	appear
similar,	but	the	details	are	really	quite	different.	It's	like	the	old	story	about
the	blind	men	and	the	elephant.	Each	one	has	a	hold	of	a	different	part	of	the
elephant	and	from	his	own	small	amount	of	information	is	drawing	sweeping
and	erroneous	conclusions	about	what	the	whole	animal	looks	like.	Here,
instead	of	trying	to	guess	the	appearance	of	a	large	beast,	we're	investing
billions	of	dollars	based	on	a	vague	understanding	of	the	true	shape	of	the
market.
Competition	is	a	boon	for	consumers,	but	it	can	be	tough	on	investors,
especially	those	who	invest	in	a	product	that	doesn't	exist	yet.	At	the	moment
there	is	a	nonexistent	business	being	called	the	"information	highway."	It	has
generated	zero	dollars	in	revenue.	The	building	of	the	highway	will	be	a
learning	process,	and	some	companies	will	lose	their	shirts.	What	seem	to	be
lucrative	niches	today	may	wind	up	as	highly	competitive	markets,	with	low
margins.	Or	they	may	prove	downright	unpopular.	Gold	rushes	tend	to
encourage	impetuous	investments.	A	few	will	pay	off,	but	when	the	frenzy	is
behind	us,	we	will	look	back	incredulously	at	the	wreckage	of	failed	ventures
and	wonder,	"Who	funded	those	companies?	What	was	going	on	in	their
minds?	Was	that	just	mania	at	work?"
Entrepreneurship	will	play	a	major	role	in	shaping	the	development	of	the
information	highway,	the	same	way	it	shaped	the	personal-computer	business.
Only	a	handful	of	companies	that	made	mainframe	software	managed	the
transition	to	personal	computers.	Most	successes	came	from	little	start-ups,
run	by	people	who	were	open	to	new	possibilities.	This	will	be	true	on	the
information	highway,	too.	For	every	large	existing	company	that	succeeds
with	a	new	application	or	service,	ten	start-ups	will	flourish	and	fifty	more
will	flash	into	existence	and	momentary	glory	before	slipping	into	obscurity.
This	is	a	hallmark	of	an	evolving	entrepreneurial	market;	rapid	innovation
occurs	on	many	fronts.	Most	of	it	will	be	unsuccessful,	regardless	of	whether
it's	attempted	by	a	large	or	a	small	company.	Large	companies	tend	to	take
fewer	risks,	but	when	they	crash	and	burn,	the	combination	of	their	sheer	ego
and	the	scale	of	their	resources	means	they	wind	up	digging	a	bigger	crater	in
the	ground.	By	comparison,	a	start-up	usually	fails	without	much	notice.	The
good	news	is	that	people	learn	from	both	the	successes	and	the	failures,	and
the	net	result	is	rapid	progress.

By	letting	the	marketplace	decide	which	companies	and	approaches	win	and
which	lose,	many	paths	are	explored	simultaneously.	Nowhere	is	the	benefit
of	a	market-driven	decision	more	apparent	than	in	an	unproven	market.	When
hundreds	of	companies	try	different	risk-taking	approaches	to	discover	the
level	of	demand,	society	gets	to	the	right	solution	a	lot	faster	than	it	would
with	any	form	of	central	planning.	The	range	of	uncertainties	about	the
information	highway	is	very	large,	but	the	marketplace	will	design	an
appropriate	system.
Governments	can	help	assure	a	strong	competitive	framework	and	should	be
willing,	though	not	overeager,	to	intercede	if	the	marketplace	fails	in	some
particular	area.	After	the	trials	have	yielded	sufficient	information,	they	can
determine	the	"rules	of	the	road"—the	basic	framework	guidelines	within
which	companies	can	compete.	But	they	should	not	attempt	to	design	or
dictate	the	nature	of	the	information	highway,	because	governments	cannot
outsmart	or	outmanage	the	competitive	marketplace,	particularly	while	there
are	still	questions	about	customer	preference	and	technological	development.
The	U.S.	government	is	deeply	involved	in	rule-making	for	comm======================================================== to	a	large	monitor	and	to	the	corporate	network	in	the	office.
Notebook	computers	will	continue	to	get	thinner	until	they	are	nearly	the	size
of	a	tablet	of	paper.	Notebooks	are	the	smallest	and	most	portable	real
computers	today,	but	soon	there	will	be	pocket-size	computers	with	snapshot-

size	color	screens.	When	you	whip	one	out,	no	one	will	say,	"Wow!	You've
got	a	computer!"
1995:	Multimedia	notebook	computer	by	Digital	Equipment	Corporation
What	do	you	carry	on	your	person	now?	Probably	at	least	keys,	identification,
money,	and	a	watch.	Quite	possibly	you	also	carry	credit	cards,	a	checkbook,
traveler's	checks,	an	address	book,	an	appointment	book,	a	notepad,	reading
material,	a	camera,	a	pocket	tape	recorder,	a	cellular	phone,	a	pager,	concert
tickets,	a	map,	a	compass,	a	calculator,	an	electronic	entry	card,	photographs,
and	perhaps	a	loud	whistle	to	summon	help.
You'll	be	able	to	keep	all	these	and	more	in	another	information	appliance	we
call	the	wallet	PC.	It	will	be	about	the	same	size	as	a	wallet,	which	means
you'll	be	able	to	carry	it	in	your	pocket	or	purse.	It	will	display	messages	and
schedules	and	also	let	you	read	or	send	electronic	mail	and	faxes,	monitor
weather	and	stock	reports,	and	play	both	simple	and	sophisticated	games.	At	a
meeting	you	might	take	notes,	check	your	appointments,	browse	information
if	you're	bored,	or	choose	from	among	thousands	of	easy-to-call-up	photos	of
your	kids.
Rather	than	holding	paper	currency,	the	new	wallet	will	store	unforgeable
digital	money.	Today	when	you	hand	someone	a	dollar	bill,	check,	gift
certificate,	or	other	negotiable	instrument,	the	transfer	of	paper	represents	a
transfer	of	funds.	But	money	does	not	have	to	be	expressed	on	paper.	Credit
card	charges	and	wired	funds	are	exchanges	of	digital	financial	information.
Tomorrow	the	wallet	PC	will	make	it	easy	for	anyone	to	spend	and	accept
digital	funds.	Your	wallet	will	link	into	a	store's	computer	to	allow	money	to
be	transferred	without	any	physical	exchange	at	a	cash	register.	Digital	cash
will	be	used	in	interpersonal	transactions,	too.	If	your	son	needs	money,	you
might	digitally	slip	five	bucks	from	your	wallet	PC	to	his.

Prototype	of	a	wallet	PC
When	wallet	PCs	are	ubiquitous,	we	can	eliminate	the	bottlenecks	that	now
plague	airport	terminals,	theaters,	and	other	locations	where	people	queue	to
show	identification	or	a	ticket.	As	you	pass	through	an	airport	gate,	for
example,	your	wallet	PC	will	connect	to	the	airport's	computers	and	verify
that	you	have	paid	for	a	ticket.	You	won't	need	a	key	or	magnetic	card	key	to
get	through	doors	either.	Your	wallet	PC	will	identify	you	to	the	computer
controlling	the	lock.
As	cash	and	credit	cards	begin	to	disappear,	criminals	may	target	the	wallet
PC,	so	there	will	have	to	be	safeguards	to	prevent	a	wallet	PC	from	being
used	in	the	same	manner	as	a	stolen	charge	card.	The	wallet	PC	will	store	the
"keys"	you'll	use	to	identify	yourself.	You	will	be	able	to	invalidate	your	keys
easily,	and	they	will	be	changed	regularly.	For	some	important	transactions,
just	having	the	key	in	your	wallet	PC	won't	be	enough.	One	solution	is	to
have	you	enter	a	password	at	the	time	of	the	transaction.	Automatic	teller
machines	ask	you	to	provide	a	personal	identification	number,	which	is	just	a
very	short	password.	Another	option,	which	would	eliminate	the	need	for	you
to	remember	a	password,	is	the	use	of	biometric	measurements.	Individual
biometric	measurements	are	more	secure	and	almost	certainly	will	be
included	eventually	in	some	wallet	PCs.
A	biometric	security	system	records	a	physical	trait,	such	as	a	voiceprint	or	a
fingerprint.	For	example,	your	wallet	PC	might	demand	that	you	read	aloud	a
random	word	that	it	flashes	on	its	screen	or	that	you	press	your	thumb	against
the	side	of	the	device	whenever	you	are	about	to	conduct	a	transaction	with
significant	financial	implications.	The	wallet	will	compare	what	it	"heard"	or
"felt"	with	its	digital	record	of	your	voice-	or	thumbprint.
Wallet	PCs	with	the	proper	equipment	will	be	able	to	tell	you	exactly	where
you	are	anyplace	on	the	face	of	Earth.	The	Global	Positioning	System	(GPS)
satellites	in	an	orbit	around	Earth	broadcast	signals	that	permit	jetliners,
oceangoing	boats,	and	cruise	missiles,	or	hikers	with	handheld	GPS	receivers,
to	know	their	exact	location	to	within	a	few	hundred	feet.	Such	devices	are

currently	available	for	a	few	hundred	dollars,	and	they	will	be	built	into	many
wallet	PCs.
The	wallet	PC	will	connect	you	to	the	information	highway	while	you	travel	a
real	highway,	and	tell	you	where	you	are.	Its	built-in	speaker	will	be	able	to
dictate	directions	to	let	you	know	that	a	freeway	exit	is	coming	up	or	that	the
next	intersection	has	frequent	accidents.	It	will	monitor	digital	traffic	reports
and	warn	you	that	you'd	better	leave	for	an	airport	early,	or	suggest	an
alternate	route.	The	wallet	PC's	color	maps	will	overlay	your	location	with
whatever	kinds	of	information	you	desire—road	and	weather	conditions,
campgrounds,	scenic	spots,	even	fast-food	outlets.	You	might	ask,	"Where's
the	nearest	Chinese	restaurant	that	is	still	open?"	and	the	information
requested	will	be	transmitted	to	the	wallet	by	wireless	network.	Off	the	roads,
on	a	hike	in	the	woods,	it	will	be	your	compass	and	as	useful	as	your	Swiss
Army	knife.
In	fact,	I	think	of	the	wallet	PC	as	the	new	Swiss	Army	knife.	I	had	one	of
those	knives	when	I	was	a	kid.	Mine	was	neither	the	most	basic	with	just	two
blades	nor	the	one	with	a	workshop's	worth	of	equipment.	It	had	the	classic
shiny	red	handle	with	the	white	cross	and	lots	of	blades	and	attachments,
including	a	screwdriver,	a	tiny	pair	of	scissors,	and	even	a	corkscrew
(although	at	the	time	I	had	no	use	for	that	particular	accessory).	Some	wallet
PCs	will	be	simple	and	elegant	and	offer	only	the	essentials,	such	as	a	small
screen,	a	microphone,	a	secure	way	to	transact	business	with	digital	money,
and	the	capability	to	read	or	otherwise	use	basic	information.	Others	will
bristle	with	all	kinds	of	gadgets,	including	cameras,	scanners	that	will	be	able
to	read	printed	text	or	handwriting,	and	receivers	with	the	global-positioning
capability.	Most	will	have	a	panic	button	for	you	to	press	if	you	need
emergency	help.	Some	models	will	include	thermometers,	barometers,
altimeters,	and	heart-rate	sensors.
Prices	will	vary	accordingly,	but	generally	wallet	PCs	will	be	priced	about	the
way	cameras	are	today.	Simple,	single-purpose	"smart	cards"	for	digital
currency	will	cost	about	what	a	disposable	camera	does	now,	whereas,	like	an
elaborate	camera,	a	really	sophisticated	wallet	PC	might	cost	$1,000	or	more,
but	it	will	outperform	the	most	exotic	computer	of	just	a	decade	ago.	Smart
cards,	the	most	basic	form	of	the	wallet	PC,	look	like	credit	cards	and	are
popular	now	in	Europe.	Their	microprocessors	are	embedded	within	the
plastic.	The	smart	card	of	the	future	will	identify	its	owner	and	store	digital
money,	tickets,	and	medical	information.	It	won't	have	a	screen,	audio
capabilities,	or	any	of	the	more	elaborate	options	of	the	more	expensive	wallet
PCs.	It	will	be	handy	for	travel	or	as	a	backup,	and	may	be	sufficient	by	itself

for	some	people's	uses.
If	you	aren't	carrying	a	wallet	PC,	you'll	still	have	access	to	the	highway	by
using	kiosks—some	free,	some	requiring	payment	of	a	fee—which	will	be
found	in	office	buildings,	shopping	malls,	and	airports	in	much	the	same	spirit
as	drinking	fountains,	rest	rooms,	and	pay	phones.	In	fact,	they	will	replace
not	only	pay	phones	but	also	banking	machines,	because	they	will	offer	their
capabilities	as	well	as	all	the	other	highway	applications,	from	sending	and
receiving	messages	to	scanning	maps	and	buying	tickets.	Access	to	kiosks
will	be	essential,	and	available	everywhere.	Some	kiosks	will	display
advertising	links	to	specific	services	when	you	first	log	on—a	bit	like	the
phones	in	airports	that	connect	right	to	hotel	and	rental-car	reservations.	Like
the	cash	machines	we	find	in	airports	today,	they	will	look	like	rugged
devices,	but	inside	they	will	also	be	PCs.
No	matter	what	form	the	PC	takes,	users	will	still	have	to	be	able	to	navigate
their	way	through	its	applications.	Think	of	the	way	you	use	your	television
remote	control	today	to	choose	what	you	want	to	watch.	Future	systems	with
more	choices	will	have	to	do	better.	They'll	have	to	avoid	making	you	go
step-by-step	through	all	the	options.	Instead	of	having	to	remember	which
channel	number	to	use	to	find	a	program,	you	will	be	shown	a	graphical	menu
and	be	able	to	select	what	you	want	by	pointing	to	an	easy-to-understand
image.
You	won't	necessarily	have	to	point	to	make	your	point.	Eventually	we'll	also
be	able	to	speak	to	our	televisions,	personal	computers,	or	other	information
appliances.	At	first	we'll	have	to	keep	to	a	limited	vocabulary,	but	eventually
our	exchanges	will	become	quite	conversational.	This	capability	requires
powerful	hardware	and	software,	because	conversation	that	a	human	can
understand	effortlessly	is	very	hard	for	a	computer	to	interpret.	Already,	voice
recognition	works	fine	for	a	small	set	of	predefined	commands,	such	as	"Call
my	sister."	It's	much	more	difficult	for	a	computer	to	decipher	an	arbitrary
sentence,	but	in	the	next	ten	years	this	too	will	become	possible.
Some	users	will	find	it	convenient	to	handwrite	instructions	to	a	computer,
rather	than	speaking	or	typing	them.	Many	companies,	including	Microsoft,
have	spent	some	years	working	on	what	we	call	"pen-based	computers"
capable	of	reading	handwriting.	I	was	overly	optimistic	about	how	quickly	we
would	be	able	to	create	software	that	would	recognize	the	handwriting	of	a
broad	range	of	people.	The	difficulties	turned	out	to	be	quite	subtle.	When	we
tested	the	system	ourselves	it	worked	well,	but	new	users	continued	to	have
trouble	with	it.	We	discovered	we	were	unconsciously	making	our

handwriting	neater	and	more	recognizable	than	usual.	We	were	adapting	to
the	machine	rather	than	the	other	way======================================================== their	vacations.	However,	to	edit
video	you	have	to	be	a	professional	with	expensive	equipment.	This	will
change.	Advances	in	PC	word	processors	and	desktop-publishing	software
have	already	made	professional-quality	tools	for	creating	simple	paper
documents	available	relatively	inexpensively	to	millions.	Desktop-publishing
software	has	progressed	to	the	point	that	many	magazines	and	newspapers	are
produced	with	the	same	sort	of	PC	and	software	package	you	can	buy	at	any
local	computer	store	and	use	to	design	an	invitation	to	your	daughter's
birthday	party.	PC	software	for	editing	film	and	creating	special	effects	will
become	as	commonplace	as	desktop-publishing	software.	Then	the	difference
between	professionals	and	amateurs	will	be	one	of	talent	rather	than	access	to
tools.
Georges	Méliès	created	one	of	the	first	special	effects	in	movies	when,	in
1899,	he	turned	a	woman	into	feathers	on	the	screen	in	The	Conjurer,	and
moviemakers	have	been	playing	cinematic	tricks	ever	since.	Recently,
special-effects	technology	has	improved	dramatically	through	the	use	of	the
digital	manipulation	of	images.	First	a	photograph	is	converted	into	binary
information,	which,	as	we	have	seen,	software	applications	are	able	to
manipulate	easily.	Then	the	digital	information	is	altered	and	finally	returned
to	photographic	form,	as	a	frame	in	a	movie.	The	alterations	are	nearly
undetectable	if	well	done,	and	the	results	can	be	spectacular.	Computer
software	gave	life	to	the	dinosaurs	in	Jurassic	Park,	the	thundering
wildebeest	herd	in	The	Lion	King,	and	the	crazy	cartoon	effects	in	The	Mask.
As	Moore's	Law	increases	hardware	speed,	and	software	becomes
increasingly	sophisticated,	there	is	virtually	no	limit	to	what	can	be	achieved.
Hollywood	will	continue	to	push	the	state	of	the	art	and	create	amazing	new
effects.
It	will	be	possible	for	a	software	program	to	fabricate	scenes	that	will	look	as
real	as	anything	created	with	a	camera.	Audiences	watching	Forrest	Gump
could	recognize	that	the	scenes	with	Presidents	Kennedy,	Johnson,	and	Nixon
were	fabricated.	Everyone	knew	Tom	Hanks	hadn't	really	been	there.	It	was	a
lot	harder	to	spot	the	digital	processing	that	removed	Gary	Sinise's	two	good
legs	for	his	role	as	an	amputee.	Synthesized	figures	and	digital	editing	are
being	used	to	make	movie	stunts	safer.	You'll	soon	be	able	to	use	a	standard
PC	to	make	the	software	to	create	the	effects.	The	ease	with	which	PCs	and
photo-editing	software	already	manipulate	complex	images	will	make	it	easy
to	counterfeit	photographic	documents	or	alter	photographs	undetectably.	And

as	synthesis	gets	cheaper	it	will	be	used	more	and	more;	if	we	can	bring
Tyrannosaurus	rex	back	to	life,	can	Elvis	be	far	behind?
Even	those	who	don't	aspire	to	becoming	the	next	C.	B.	DeMille	or	Lina
Wertmuller	will	routinely	include	multi-media	in	the	documents	they
construct	every	day.	Someone	might	start	by	typing,	handwriting,	or	speaking
an	electronic	mail	message:	"Lunch	in	the	park	may	not	be	such	a	great	idea.
Look	at	the	forecast."	To	make	the	message	more	informative,	he	could	then
point	his	cursor	at	an	icon	representing	a	local	television	weather	forecast	and
drag	it	across	his	screen	to	move	the	icon	inside	his	document.	When	his
friends	get	the	message,	they	will	be	able	to	look	at	the	forecast	right	on	their
screens—a	professional-looking	communication.
Kids	in	school	will	be	able	to	produce	their	own	albums	or	movies	and	make
them	available	to	friends	and	family	on	the	information	highway.	When	I
have	time,	I	enjoy	making	special	greeting	cards	and	invitations.	If	I'm
making	a	birthday	card	for	my	sister,	for	instance,	to	personalize	it	I
sometimes	add	pictures	reminding	her	of	fun	events	of	the	past	year.	In	the
future	I'll	be	able	to	include	movie	clips	that	I've
customized	with	only	a	few	minutes'	work.	It	will	be	simple	to	create	an
interactive	"album"	of	photographs,	videos,	or	conversations.	Businesses	of
all	types	and	sizes	will	communicate	using	multi-media.	Lovers	will	use
special	effects	to	blend	some	text,	a	video	clip	from	an	old	movie,	and	a
favorite	song	to	create	a	personal	valentine.
As	the	fidelity	of	visual	and	audio	elements	improves,	reality	in	all	its	aspects
will	be	more	closely	simulated.	This	"virtual	reality,"	or	VR,	will	allow	us	to
"go"	places	and	"do"	things	we	never	would	be	able	to	otherwise.
Vehicle	simulators	for	airplanes,	race	cars,	and	spacecraft	already	provide	a
taste	of	virtual	reality.	Some	of	the	most	popular	rides	at	Disneyland	are
simulated	voyages.	Software	vehicle	simulators,	such	as	Microsoft	Flight
Simulator,	are	among	the	most	popular	games	ever	created	for	PCs,	but	they
force	you	to	use	your	imagination.	Multimillion-dollar	flight	simulators	at
companies	such	as	Boeing	give	you	a	much	better	ride.	Viewed	from	the
outside,	they're	boxy,	stilt-legged	mechanical	creatures	that	would	look	at
home	in	a	Star	Wars	movie.	Inside,	the	cockpit	video	displays	offer
sophisticated	data.	Flight	and	maintenance	instruments	are	linked	to	a
computer	that	simulates	flight	characteristics—including	emergencies—with
an	accuracy	pilots	say	is	remarkable.
A	couple	of	friends	and	I	"flew"	a	747	simulator	a	couple	years	ago.	You	sit

down	to	a	control	panel	in	a	cockpit	identical	to	one	in	a	real	plane.	Outside
the	windows,	you	see	computer-generated	color	video	images.	When	you
"take	off"	in	the	simulator,	you	see	an	identifiable	airport	and	its
surroundings.	The	simulation	of	Boeing	Field,	for	instance,	might	show	a	fuel
truck	on	the	runway	and	Mount	Rainier	in	the	distance.	You	hear	the	rush	of
air	around	wings	that	aren't	there,	the	clunk	of	nonexistent	landing	gear
retracting.	Six	hydraulic	systems	under	the	simulator	tilt	and	shake	the
cockpit.	It's	pretty	convincing.
The	main	purpose	of	these	simulators	is	to	give	pilots	a	chance	to	gain
experience	in	handling	emergencies.	When	I	was	using	the	simulator	my
friends	decided	to	give	me	a	surprise	by	having	a	small	plane	fly	by.	While	I
sat	in	the	pilot's	seat	the	all-too-real-looking	image	of	a	Cessna	flashed	into
view.	I	wasn't	prepared	for	the	"emergency"	and	I	crashed	into	it.
A	number	of	companies,	from	entertainment	giants	to	small	start-ups,	are
planning	to	put	smaller-scale	simulator	rides	into	shopping	malls	and	urban
sites.	As	the	price	of	technology	comes	down,	entertainment	simulators	may
become	as	common	as	movie	theaters	are	today.	And	it	won't	be	too	many
years	until	you'll	be	able	to	have	a	high-quality	simulation	in	your	own	living
room.
Want	to	explore	the	surface	of	Mars?	It's	a	lot	safer	to	do	it	via	VR.	How
about	visiting	somewhere	humans	never	will	be	able	to	go?	A	cardiologist
might	be	able	to	swim	through	the	heart	of	a	patient	to	examine	it	in	a	way
she	never	would	have	been	able	to	with	conventional	instrumentation.	A
surgeon	could	practice	a	tricky	operation	many	times,	including	simulated
catastrophes,	before	she	ever	touches	a	scalpel	to	a	real	patient.	Or	you	could
use	VR	to	wander	through	a	fantasy	of	your	own	design.
In	order	to	work,	VR	needs	two	different	sets	of	technology—software	that
creates	the	scene	and	makes	it	respond	to	new	information,	and	devices	that
allow	the	computer	to	transmit	the	information	to	our	senses.	The	software
will	have	to	figure	out	how	to	describe	the	look,	sound,	and	feel	of	the
artificial	world	down	to	the	smallest	detail.	That	might	sound	overwhelmingly
difficult,	but	actually	it's	the	easy	part.	We	could	write	the	software	for	VR
today,	but	we	need	a	lot	more	computer	power	to	make	it	truly	believable.	At
the	pace	technology	is	moving,	though,	that	power	will	be	available	soon.	The
really	hard	part	about	VR	is	getting	the	information	to	convince	the	user's
senses.
Hearing	is	the	easiest	sense	to	fool;	all	you	have	to	do	is	wear	headphones.	In

real	life,	your	two	ears	hear	slightly	different	things	because	of	their	location
on	your	head	and	the	directions	they	point.	Subconsciously	you	use	those
differences	to	tell	where	a	sound	is	coming	from.	Software	can	re-create	this
by	calculating	for	a	given	sound	what	each	ear	would	be	hearing.	This	works
amazingly	well.	You	can	put	on	a	set	of	headphones	connected	to	a	computer
and	hear	a	whisper	in	your	left	ear	or	footsteps	walking	up	behind	you.
Your	eyes	are	harder	to	fool	than	your	ears,	but	vision	is	still	pretty
straightforward	to	simulate.	VR	equipment	almost	always	includes	a	special
set	of	goggles	with	lenses	that	focus	each	eye	on	its	own	small	computer
display.	A	head-tracking	sensor	allows	the	computer	to	figure	out	which
direction	your	head	is	facing,	so	the	computer	can	synthesize	what	you	would
be	seeing.	Turn	your	head	to	the	right,	and	the	scene	portrayed	by	the	goggles
is	farther	to	the	right.	Lift	your	face,	and	the	goggles	show	the	ceiling	or	sky.
Today's	VR	goggles	are	too	heavy,	too	expensive,	and	don't	have	enough
resolution.	The	computer	systems	that	drive	them	are	still	a	bit	too	slow.	If
you	turn	your	head	quickly,	the	scene	lags	somewhat	behind.	This	is	very
disorienting	and	after	a	short	period	of	time	causes	most	people	to	get
headaches.	The	good	news	is	that	size,	speed,	weight,	and	cost	are	precisely
the	kinds	of	things	that	technology	following	Moore's	Law	will	correct	soon.
Other	senses	are	much	more	difficult	to	fool,	because	there	are	no	good	ways
of	connecting	a	computer	to	your	nose	or	tongue,	or	to	the	surface	of	your
skin.	In	the	case	of	touch,	the	prevailing	idea	is	that	a	full	bodysuit	could	be
made	lined	with	tiny	sensor	and	force	feedback	devices	that	would	be	in
contact	with	the	whole	surface	of	your	skin.	I	don't	think	bodysuits	will	be
common,	but	they'll	be	feasible.
There	are	between	72	and	120	tiny	points	of	color	(called	pixels)	per	inch	on	a
typical	computer	monitor,	for	a	total	of	between	300,000	and	1	million.	A	full
bodysuit	would	presumably	be	lined	with	little	touch	sensor	points—each	of
which	could	poke	one	specific	tiny	spot.	Let's	call	these	little	touch	elements
"tactels."
If	the	suit	had	enough	of	these	tactel======================================================== We	saw	three	ways	to	get	MS-DOS	out	in	front.	First	was	to	make
MS-DOS	the	best	product.	Second	was	to	help	other	software	companies
write	MS-DOS-based	software.	Third	was	to	ensure	MS-DOS	was
inexpensive.
1981:	The	IBM	personal	computer
We	gave	IBM	a	fabulous	deal—a	low,	one-time	fee	that	granted	the	company
the	right	to	use	Microsoft's	operating	system	on	as	many	computers	as	it
could	sell.	This	offered	IBM	an	incentive	to	push	MS-DOS,	and	to	sell	it
inexpensively.	Our	strategy	worked.	IBM	sold	the	UCSD	Pascal	P-System	for
about	$450,	CP/M-86	for	about	$175,	and	MS-DOS	for	about	$60.
Our	goal	was	not	to	make	money	directly	from	IBM,	but	to	profit	from
licensing	MS-DOS	to	computer	companies	that	wanted	to	offer	machines
more	or	less	compatible	with	the	IBM	PC.	IBM	could	use	our	software	for
free,	but	it	did	not	have	an	exclusive	license	or	control	of	future
enhancements.	This	put	Microsoft	in	the	business	of	licensing	a	software
platform	to	the	personal-computer	industry.	Eventually	IBM	abandoned	the
UCSD	Pascal	P-system	and	CP/M-86	enhancements.
Consumers	bought	the	IBM	PC	with	confidence,	and	in	1982,	software

developers	began	turning	out	applications	to	run	on	it.	Each	new	customer,
and	each	new	application,	added	to	the	IBM	PC's	strength	as	a	potential	de
facto	standard	for	the	industry.	Soon	most	of	the	new	and	best	software,	such
as	Lotus	1-2-3,	was	being	written	for	it.	Mitch	Kapor,	with	Jonathan	Sachs,
created	1-2-3	and	revolutionized	spreadsheets.	The	original	inventors	of	the
electronic	spreadsheet,	Dan	Bricklin	and	Bob	Frankston,	deserve	immense
credit	for	their	product,	VisiCalc,	but	1-2-3	made	it	obsolete.	Mitch	is	a
fascinating	person	whose	eclectic	background—in	his	case	as	a	disc	jockey
and	transcendental	meditation	instructor—is	typical	of	that	of	the	best
software	designers.
A	positive-feedback	cycle	began	driving	the	PC	market.	Once	it	got	going,
thousands	of	software	applications	appeared,	and	untold	numbers	of
companies	began	making	add-in	or	"accessory"	cards,	which	extended	the
hardware	capabilities	of	the	PC.	The	availability	of	software	and	hardware
add-ons	sold	PCs	at	a	far	greater	rate	than	IBM	had	anticipated—by	a	factor
of	millions.	The	positive-feedback	cycle	spun	out	billions	of	dollars	for	IBM.
For	a	few	years,	more	than	half	of	all	personal	computers	used	in	business
were	IBMs	and	most	of	the	rest	were	compatible	with	its	machines.
The	IBM	standard	became	the	platform	everybody	imitated.	A	lot	of	the
reason	was	timing	and	its	use	of	a	16-bit	processor.	Both	timing	and
marketing	are	key	to	acceptance	with	technology	products.	The	PC	happened
to	be	a	good	machine,	but	another	company	could	have	set	the	standard	by
getting	enough	desirable	applications	and	selling	enough	machines.
IBM's	early	business	decisions,	caused	by	its	rush	to	get	the	PCs	out,	made	it
very	easy	for	other	companies	to	build	compatible	machines.	The	architecture
was	for	sale.	The	microprocessor	chips	from	Intel	and	Microsoft's	operating
system	were	available.	This	openness	was	a	powerful	incentive	for
component	builders,	software	developers,	and	everyone	else	in	the	business	to
try	to	copy.
Within	three	years	almost	all	the	competing	standards	for	personal	computers
disappeared.	The	only	exceptions	were	Apple's	Apple	II	and	Macintosh.
Hewlett	Packard,	DEC,	Texas	Instruments,	and	Xerox,	despite	their
technologies,	reputations,	and	customer	bases,	failed	in	the	personal-computer
market	in	the	early	1980s	because	their	machines	weren't	compatible	and
didn't	offer	significant	enough	improvements	over	the	IBM	architecture.	A
host	of	start-ups,	such	as	Eagle	and	Northstar,	thought	people	would	buy	their
hardware	because	it	offered	something	different	and	slightly	better	than	the
IBM	PC.	All	of	the	start-ups	either	changed	to	building	compatible	hardware

or	failed.	The	IBM	PC	became	the	hardware	standard.	By	the	mid-1980s,
there	were	dozens	of	IBM-compatible	PCs.	Although	buyers	of	a	PC	might
not	have	articulated	it	this	way,	what	they	were	looking	for	was	the	hardware
that	ran	the	most	software,	and	they	wanted	the	same	system	the	people	they
knew	and	worked	with	had.
It	has	become	popular	for	certain	revisionist	historians	to	conclude	that	IBM
made	a	mistake	working	with	Intel	and	Microsoft	to	create	its	PC.	They	argue
that	IBM	should	have	kept	the	PC	architecture	proprietary,	and	that	Intel	and
Microsoft	somehow	got	the	better	of	IBM.	But	the	revisionists	are	missing	the
point.	IBM	became	the	central	force	in	the	PC	industry	precisely	because	it
was	able	to	harness	an	incredible	amount	of	innovative	talent	and
entrepreneurial	energy	and	use	it	to	promote	its	open	architecture.	IBM	set	the
standards.
In	the	mainframe	business	IBM	was	king	of	the	hill,	and	competitors	found	it
hard	to	match	the	IBM	sales	force	and	high	R&D.	If	a	competitor	tried
climbing	the	hill,	IBM	could	focus	its	assets	to	make	the	ascent	nearly
impossible.	But	in	the	volatile	world	of	the	personal	computer,	IBM's	position
was	more	like	that	of	the	leading	runner	in	a	marathon.	As	long	as	the	leader
keeps	running	as	fast	or	faster	than	the	others,	he	stays	in	the	lead	and
competitors	will	have	to	keep	trying	to	catch	up.	If,	however,	he	slacks	off	or
stops	pushing	himself,	the	rest	will	pass	him	by.	There	weren't	many
deterrents	to	the	other	racers,	as	would	soon	become	clear.
By	1983,	I	thought	our	next	step	should	be	to	develop	a	graphical	operating
system.	I	didn't	believe	we	would	be	able	to	retain	our	position	at	the
forefront	of	the	software	industry	if	we	stuck	with	MS-DOS,	because	MS-
DOS	was	character-based.	A	user	had	to	type	in	often-obscure	commands,
which	then	appeared	on	the	screen.	MS-DOS	didn't	provide	pictures	and	other
graphics	to	help	users	with	applications.	The	interface	is	the	way	the
computer	and	the	user	communicate.	I	believed	that	in	the	future	interfaces
would	be	graphical	and	that	it	was	essential	for	Microsoft	to	move	beyond
MS-DOS	and	set	a	new	standard	in	which	pictures	and	fonts	(typefaces)
would	be	part	of	an	easier-to-use	interface.	In	order	to	realize	our	vision,	PCs
had	to	be	made	easier	to	use	not	only	to	help	existing	customers,	but	also	to
attract	new	ones	who	wouldn't	take	the	time	to	learn	to	work	with	a
complicated	interface.
To	illustrate	the	huge	difference	between	a	character-based	computer	program
and	a	graphical	one,	imagine	playing	a	board	game	such	as	chess,	checkers,
Go,	or	Monopoly	on	a	computer	screen.	With	a	character-based	system,	you

type	in	your	moves	using	characters.	You	write	"Move	the	piece	on	square	11
to	square	19"	or	something	slightly	more	cryptic	like	"Pawn	to	QB3."	But	in	a
graphical	computer	system,	you	see	the	board	game	on	your	screen.	You
move	pieces	by	pointing	at	them	and	actually	dragging	them	to	their	new
locations.
Researchers	at	Xerox's	now-famous	Palo	Alto	Research	Center	in	California
explored	new	paradigms	for	human-computer	interaction.	They	showed	that	it
was	easier	to	instruct	a	computer	if	you	could	point	at	things	on	the	screen
and	see	pictures.	They	used	a	device	called	a	"mouse,"	which	could	be	rolled
on	a	tabletop	to	move	a	pointer	around	on	the	screen.	Xerox	did	a	poor	job	of
taking	commercial	advantage	of	this	groundbreaking	idea,	because	its
machines	were	expensive	and	didn't	use	standard	microprocessors.	Getting
great	research	to	translate	into	products	that	sell	is	still	a	big	problem	for
many	companies.
1984:	Character	user	interface	in	an	early	version	of	Microsoft	Word	for	DOS
In	1983,	Microsoft	announced	that	we	planned	to	bring	graphical	computing
to	the	IBM	PC,	with	a	product	called	Windows.	Our	goal	was	to	create
software	that	would	extend	MS-DOS	and	let	people	use	a	mouse,	employ
graphical	images	on	the	computer	screen,	and	make	available	on	the	screen	a
number	of	"windows,"	each	running	a	different	computer	program.	At	that
time	two	of	the	personal	computers	on	the	market	had	graphical	capabilities:
the	Xerox	Star	and	the	Apple	Lisa.	Both	were	expensive,	limited	in	capability,
and	built	on	proprietary	hardware	architectures.	Other	hardware	companies
couldn't	license	the	operating	systems	to	build	compatible	systems,	and
neither	computer	attracted	many	software	companies	to	develop	applications.
Microsoft	wanted	to	create	an	open	standard	and	bring	graphical	capabilities
to	any	computer	that	was	running	MS-DOS.

1995:	Graphical	user	interface	in	Microsoft	Word	for	Windows
The	first	popular	graphical	platform	came	to	market	in	1984,	when	Apple
released	its	Macintosh.	Everything	about	the	Macintosh's	proprietary
operating	system	was	graphical,	and	it	was	an	enormous	success.	The	initial
hardware	and	operating-system	software	Apple	released	were	quite	limited
but	vividly	demonstrated	the	potential	of	the	graphical	interface.	As	the
hardware	and	software	improved,	the	potential	was	realized.
We	worked	closely	with	Apple	throughout	the	development	of	the	Macintosh.
Steve	Jobs	led	the	Macintosh	team.	Working	with	him	was	really	fun.	Steve
has	an	amazing	intuition	for	engineering	and	design	as	well	as	an	ability	to
motivate	people	that	is	world	class.
It	took	a	lot	of	imagination	to	develop	graphical	computer	programs.	What
should	one	look	like?	How	should	it	behave?	Some	ideas	were	inherited	from
the	work	done	at	Xerox	and	some	were	original.	At	first	we	went	to	excess
with	the	possibilities.	We	used	nearly	every	one	of	the	fonts	and	icons	we
could.	Then	we	figured	out	all	that	made	it	hard	to	look	at	and	changed	to
more	sober	menus.	We	created	a	word	processor,	Microsoft	Word,	and	a
spreadsheet,	Microsoft	Excel,	for	the	Macintosh.	These	were	Microsoft's	first
graphical	products.
The	Macintosh	had	great	system	software,	but	Apple	refused	(until	1995)	to
let	anyone	else	make	computer	hardware	that	would	run	it.	This	was
traditional	hardware-company	thinking:	If	you	wanted	the	software,	you	had
to	buy	Apple	computers.	Microsoft	wanted	the	Macintosh	to	sell	well	and	be
widely	accepted,	not	only	because	we	had	invested	a	lot	in	creating
applications======================================================== rted	by	posts	of	Douglas	fir.	The	house	has	lots	of	exposed
horizontal	beams	and	vertical	supports.	You'll	have	a	great	view	of	the	lake.
My	hope	is	that	the	view	and	the	Douglas	fir,	rather	than	the	electronic	pin,

will	be	what	interest	you	most	as	you	descend	toward	the	ground	floor.	Most
of	the	wood	came	from	an	eighty-year-old	Weyerhaeuser	lumber	mill	that	was
being	torn	down	out	on	the	Columbia	River.	This	wood,	harvested	nearly	a
hundred	years	ago,	came	from	trees	that	were	as	much	as	350	feet	tall,
between	8	and	15	feet	in	diameter.	Douglas	fir	is	one	of	the	strongest	woods
in	the	world	for	its	weight.	Unfortunately,	new-growth	Douglas	fir	tends	to
split	if	you	try	to	mill	it	into	beams,	because	the	grain	is	not	as	tight	in	a
seventy-year-old	tree	as	it	is	in	a	five-hundred-year-old	one.	Almost	all	of	the
old-growth	Douglas	fir	has	been	harvested	now,	and	any	that	remains	should
be	preserved.	I	was	lucky	to	find	old-growth	timbers	that	could	be	reused.
The	fir	beams	support	the	two	floors	of	private	living	spaces	you'll	be
descending	past.	Privacy	is	important.	I	want	a	house	that	will	still	feel	like
home	even	when	guests	are	enjoying	other	parts	of	it.
At	the	bottom	of	the	stairs,	the	theater	will	be	on	the	right,	and	to	the	left,	on
the	south	side,	will	be	the	reception	hall.	As	you	step	into	the	reception	hall,
on	your	right	will	be	a	series	of	sliding	glass	doors	that	open	onto	a	terrace
leading	to	the	lake.	Recessed	into	the	east	wall	will	be	twenty-four	video
monitors,	each	with	a	40-inch	picture	tube,	stacked	four	high	and	six	across.
These	monitors	will	work	cooperatively	to	display	large	images	for	artistic,
entertainment,	or	business	purposes.	I	had	hoped	that	when	the	monitors
weren't	in	use	they	could	literally	disappear	into	the	woodwork.	I	wanted	the
screens	to	display	woodgrain	patterns	that	matched	their	surroundings.
Unfortunately	I	could	never	achieve	anything	convincing	with	current
technology,	because	a	monitor	emits	light	while	real	wood	reflects	it.	So	I
settled	for	having	the	monitors	disappear	behind	wood	panels	when	they're
not	in	use.
The	electronic	pin	you	wear	will	tell	the	house	who	and	where	you	are,	and
the	house	will	use	this	information	to	try	to	meet	and	even	anticipate	your
needs—all	as	unobtrusively	as	possible.	Someday,	instead	of	needing	the	pin,
it	might	be	possible	to	have	a	camera	system	with	visual-recognition
capabilities,	but	that's	beyond	current	technology.	When	it's	dark	outside,	the
pin	will	cause	a	moving	zone	of	light	to	accompany	you	through	the	house.
Unoccupied	rooms	will	be	unlit.	As	you	walk	down	a	hallway,	you	might	not
notice	the	lights	ahead	of	you	gradually	coming	up	to	full	brightness	and	the
lights	behind	you	fading.	Music	will	move	with	you,	too.	It	will	seem	to	be
everywhere,	although,	in	fact,	other	people	in	the	house	will	be	hearing
entirely	different	music	or	nothing	at	all.	A	movie	or	the	news	will	be	able	to
follow	you	around	the	house,	too.	If	you	get	a	phone	call,	only	the	handset

nearest	you	will	ring.
Computer	rendering	of	the	Gateses'	future	home,	showing	the	staircase	and
formal	dining	room
You	won't	be	confronted	by	the	technology,	but	it	will	be	readily	and	easily
available.	Handheld	remote	controls	will	put	you	in	charge	of	your	immediate
environment	and	of	the	house's	entertainment	system.	The	remote	will	extend
the	capabilities	of	the	pin.	It	will	not	only	let	the	house	identify	and	locate
you,	it	will	also	allow	you	to	give	instructions.	You'll	use	the	controls	to	tell
the	monitors	in	a	room	to	become	visible	and	what	to	display.	You'll	be	able
to	choose	from	among	thousands	of	pictures,	recordings,	movies,	and
television	programs,	and	you'll	have	all	sorts	of	options	available	for	selecting
information.
A	console,	which	will	be	the	equivalent	of	a	keyboard	that	lets	you	give	very
specific	instructions,	will	be	discreetly	visible	in	each	room.	I	want	consoles
that	are	noticeable	to	those	who	need	them,	but	that	don't	invite	attention.	A
characteristic,	easy-to-identify	feature	will	alert	the	user	to	the	identity	and
whereabouts	of	the	consoles.	The	telephone	has	already	made	this	transition.
It	doesn't	attract	particular	attention	to	itself;	most	of	us	are	comfortable
putting	a	nondescript	phone	on	an	end	table.
Every	computerized	system	should	be	made	so	simple	and	natural	to	use	that
people	don't	give	it	a	second	thought.	But	simple	is	difficult.	Still,	computers
get	easier	to	use	every	year,	and	trial-and-error	in	my	house	will	help	us	learn
how	to	create	a	really	simple	system.	You	will	be	able	to	be	indirect	about
your	instructions	and	requests.	For	example,	you	won't	have	to	ask	for	a	song
by	name.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	the	house	to	play	the	latest	hits,	or	songs	by
a	particular	artist,	or	songs	that	were	performed	at	Woodstock,	or	music
composed	in	eighteenth-century	Vienna,	or	songs	with	the	word	"yellow"	in
their	titles.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	for	songs	that	you	have	categorized	with	a
certain	adjective,	or	songs	that	haven't	been	played	before	when	a	particular

person	was	visiting	the	house.	I	might	program	classical	music	as	background
for	contemplating	and	something	more	modern	and	energetic	to	play	while
I'm	exercising.	If	you	want	to	watch	the	movie	that	won	the	1957	Academy
Award	for	best	picture,	you	can	ask	for	it	that	way—and	see	The	Bridge	on
the	River	Kwai.	You	could	find	the	same	movie	by	asking	for	films	starring
Alec	Guinness	or	William	Holden	or	ones	about	prison	camps.
Prototype	of	a	home	control	console
If	you're	planning	to	visit	Hong	Kong	soon,	you	might	ask	the	screen	in	your
room	to	show	you	pictures	of	the	city.	It	will	seem	to	you	as	if	the
photographs	are	displayed	everywhere,	although	actually	the	images	will
materialize	on	the	walls	of	rooms	just	before	you	walk	in	and	vanish	after	you
leave.	If	you	and	I	are	enjoying	different	things	and	one	of	us	walks	into	a
room	where	the	other	is	sitting,	the	house	will	follow	predetermined	rules
about	what	to	do.	For	example,	the	house	might	continue	the	audio	and	visual
imagery	for	the	person	who	was	in	the	room	first,	or	it	might	change
programming	to	something	it	knows	both	of	us	like.
A	house	that	tracks	its	occupants	in	order	to	meet	their	particular	needs
combines	two	traditions.	The	first	is	the	tradition	of	unobtrusive	service,	and
the	other	is	that	an	object	we	carry	entitles	us	to	be	treated	in	a	certain	way.
You're	already	used	to	the	idea	that	an	object	can	authenticate	you.	It	can
inform	people	or	machinery	that	you	have	permission	to	do	something	such	as
open	a	locked	door,	get	on	an	airplane,	or	use	a	specific	line	of	credit—yours
—to	make	a	purchase.	Keys,	electronic	entry	cards,	driver's	licenses,
passports,	name	badges,	credit	cards,	and	tickets	are	all	forms	of
authentication.	If	I	give	you	the	key	to	my	car,	the	car	allows	you	to	get	in,
start	the	engine,	and	drive	away.	You	might	say	that	the	car	trusts	you	because
you	carry	its	keys.	If	I	give	a	parking	attendant	a	key	that	fits	my	automobile's
ignition	but	not	its	trunk,	the	car	lets	him	drive	but	not	open	the	trunk.	It's	no
different	with	my	house,	which	will	make	various	amenities	available	to	you
based	on	the	electronic	key	you	carry.

None	of	this	is	really	so	radical.	Some	visionaries	are	predicting	that	within
the	next	ten	years	there	will	be	lots	of	robots	wandering	around	helping	us	out
with	various	household	chores.	I	am	certainly	not	preparing	for	that,	because	I
think	it	will	be	many	decades	before	robots	are	practical.	The	only	ones	I
expect	to	see	in	widespread	use	soon	are	intelligent	toys.	Kids	will	be	able	to
program	them	to	respond	to	different	situations	and	even	to	speak	in	the
voices	of	favorite	characters.	These	toy	robots	will	be	able	to	be	programmed
in	a	limited	number	of	ways.	They	will	have	limited	vision,	know	the	distance
to	the	wall	in	each	direction,	the	time,	the	lighting	conditions,	and	accept
limited	speech	input.	I	think	it	would	have	been	cool	to	have	had	a	toy-size
car	I	could	have	talked	to	and	programmed	to	respond	to	my	instructions.
Other	than	toys,	the	other	major	uses	for	robotic	devices	I	see	are	for	military
applications.	The	reason	I	doubt	intelligent	robots	will	provide	much	help	in
actual	housework	in	the	foreseeable	future	is	that	it	takes	a	great	deal	of	visual
intelligence	and	dexterity	to	prepare	food	or	change	diapers.	Pool	cleaning,
lawn	mowing,	and	perhaps	even	vacuum	cleaning	can	be	done	with	a
relatively	dumb	system,	but	once	we	get	beyond	tasks	where	you	just	push
something	around,	it	is	very	hard	to	design	a	machine	that	would	be	able	to
recognize	and	respond	to	all	of	the	contingencies	that	come	along.
The	systems	I	am	building	into	the	house	are	designed	to	make	it	easier	to	live
in,	but	I	won't	know	for	sure	if	they	are	worthwhile	until	I	move	in.	I'm
experimenting	and	learning	all	the	time.	The	design	team	used	my	guest
cottage,	which	was	built	before	the	house,	as	a	sort	of	test	laboratory	for	home
instrumentation.	Because	some	people	like	the	temperature	warmer	than
others	do,	the	cottage's	software	sets	its	temperature	in	reaction	to	who	is
inside,	and	the	time	of	day.	The	cottage	knows	to	make	the	temperature	toasty
on	a	cold	morning	before	a	guest	is	out	of	bed.	In	the	evening,	when	it's	dark
outside,	the	cottage's	lights	dim	if	a	television	is	on.	If	someone	is	in	the
cottage	during	the	day,	the	cottage	matches	its	inside	brightness	to	that	of	the
outdoors.	Of	course	the	occupant	can	always	give	explicit	directions	to
overrule	the	settings.
This	sort	of	instrumentation	can	provide	significant	energy	savings.	A	number
of	electric	utilities	are	testing	a	network	to	monitor	the	use	of	energy	in
individual	homes.	This	would	end	the	expensive	practice	of	having	meter
readers	come	to	each	home	every	month	or	two,	but	more	important,
computers	in	the	home	and	at	the	utility	company	will	be	able	to	manage	the
minute-by-minute	demand	for	power	at	various	times	of	the	day.	Energy-
demand	management	can	save	a	lot======================================================== itches	to	handle	ISDN
with	very	little	idea	of	how	it	would	be	used.	The	good	news	is	that	the	PC
will	drive	explosive	demand.	An	add-in	card	for	a	PC	to	support	ISDN	costs
$500	in	1995,	but	the	price	should	drop	to	less	than	$200	over	the	next	few
years.	The	line	costs	vary	by	location	but	are	generally	about	$50	per	month
in	the	United	States.	I	expect	this	will	drop	to	less	than	$20,	not	much	more
than	a	regular	phone	connection.	We	are	among	companies	working	to
convince	phone	companies	all	over	the	world	to	lower	these	charges	in	order
to	encourage	PC	owners	to	connect,	using	ISDN.
Cable	companies	have	interim	technologies	and	strategies	of	their	own.	They
want	to	use	their	existing	coaxial	cable	networks	to	compete	with	the	phone
companies	to	provide	local	telephone	service.	They	have	also	already
demonstrated	that	special	cable	modems	can	connect	personal	computers	to
cable	networks.	This	allows	cable	companies	to	offer	bandwidth	somewhat
greater	than	ISDN's.
For	cable	companies	another	interim	step	will	be	to	increase	the	number	of
broadcast	channels	they	carry	five-	to	tenfold.	They'll	do	it	by	using	digital-
compression	technology	to	squeeze	more	channels	onto	existing	cables.

This	so-called	500-channel	approach—which	often	will	really	only	have	150
channels—makes	possible	near-video-on-demand,	although	only	for	a	limited
number	of	television	shows	and	movies.	You	would	choose	from	a	list	on-
screen	rather	than	selecting	a	numbered	channel.	A	popular	movie	might	run
on	twenty	of	the	channels,	with	the	starting	time	staggered	at	five-minute
intervals	so	that	you	could	begin	watching	it	within	five	minutes	of	whenever
you	wanted.	You	would	choose	from	among	the	available	starting	times	for
movies	and	television	programs,	and	the	set-top	box	would	switch	to	the
appropriate	channel.	The	half-hour-long	CNN	Headline	News	might	be
offered	on	six	channels	instead	of	one,	with	the	6:00	P.M.	broadcast	shown
again	at	6:05,	6:10,	6:15,	6:20,	and	6:25.	There	would	be	a	new,	live
broadcast	every	half	hour,	just	as	there	is	now.	Five	hundred	channels	will	get
used	up	pretty	fast	this	way.
The	cable	companies	are	under	pressure	to	add	channels	partly	as	a	reaction	to
competition.	Direct-broadcast	satellites	such	as	Hughes	Electronics'
DIRECTV	are	already	beaming	hundreds	of	channels	directly	into	homes.
Cable	companies	want	to	increase	their	channel	lineup	rapidly	to	avoid	losing
customers.	If	the	only	reason	for	the	information	highway	were	to	deliver	a
limited	number	of	movies,	then	a	500-channel	system	would	be	adequate.
A	500-channel	system	will	still	be	mostly	synchronous,	will	limit	your
choices,	and	will	provide	only	a	low-bandwidth	back	channel,	at	best.	A
"back	channel"	is	an	information	path	dedicated	to	carrying	instructions	and
other	information	from	a	consumer's	information	appliance	back	up	the	cable
to	the	network.	A	back	channel	on	a	500-channel	system	might	let	you	use
your	television	set-top	box	to	order	products	or	programs,	respond	to	polls	or
game-show	questions,	and	participate	in	certain	kinds	of	multiplayer	games.
But	a	low-bandwidth	back	channel	can't	offer	the	full	flexibility	and
interactivity	the	most	interesting	applications	will	require.	It	won't	let	you
send	a	video	of	your	children	to	their	grandparents,	or	play	truly	interactive
games.
Cable	and	phone	companies	around	the	world	will	progress	along	four
parallel	paths.	First,	each	will	be	going	after	the	others'	business.	Cable
companies	will	offer	telephone	service,	and	phone	companies	will	offer	video
services,	including	television.	Second,	both	systems	will	be	providing	better
ways	to	connect	PCs	with	either	ISDN	or	cable	modems.	Third,	both	will	be
converting	to	digital	technology	in	order	to	provide	more	television	channels
and	higher-quality	signals.	Fourth,	both	will	be	conducting	trials	of	broadband
systems	connected	to	television	sets	and	PCs.	Each	of	the	four	strategies	will
motivate	investment	in	digital	network	capacity.	There	will	be	intense

competition	between	the	telephone	companies	and	cable	television	networks
to	be	the	first	network	provider	in	a	neighborhood.
Eventually,	the	Internet	and	the	other	transitional	technologies	will	be
subsumed	within	the	real	information	highway.	The	highway	will	combine	the
best	qualities	of	both	the	telephone	and	the	cable	network	systems:	Like	the
telephone	network,	it	will	offer	private	connections	so	that	everyone	using	the
network	can	pursue	his	or	her	own	interests,	on	his	or	her	own	schedule.	It
will	also	be	fully	two-way	like	the	telephone	network,	so	that	rich	forms	of
interaction	are	possible.	Like	the	cable	television	network,	it	will	be	high
capacity,	so	there	will	be	sufficient	bandwidth	to	allow	multiple	televisions	or
personal	computers	in	a	single	household	to	connect	simultaneously	to
different	video	programs	or	sources	of	information.
Most	of	the	wires	connecting	servers	with	one	another,	and	with	the
neighborhoods	of	the	world,	will	be	made	of	incredibly	clear	fiber-optic
cable,	the	"asphalt"	of	the	information	highway.	All	of	the	major	long-
distance	trunk	lines	that	carry	telephone	calls	within	the	United	States	today
use	fiber,	but	the	lines	that	connect	our	homes	to	these	data	thoroughfares	are
still	copper	wire.	Telephone	companies	will	replace	the	copper-wire,
microwave,	and	satellite	links	in	their	networks	with	fiber-optic	cable	so	they
will	have	the	bandwidth	to	carry	enough	bits	to	deliver	high-quality	video.
Cable	television	companies	will	increase	the	amount	of	fiber	they	use.	At	the
same	time	fiber	is	being	deployed,	telephone	and	cable	companies	will	be
incorporating	new	switches	into	their	networks	so	that	digital	video	signals
and	other	information	can	be	routed	from	any	point	to	any	other	point.	The
costs	of	upgrading	the	existing	networks	to	prepare	for	the	highway	will	be
less	than	a	quarter	of	what	they	would	be	to	run	new	wires	into	every	home.
You	can	think	of	a	fiber	trunk	as	being	like	the	foot-wide	water	main	that
carries	water	up	your	street.	It	doesn't	come	directly	to	your	house;	instead,	a
smaller	pipe	at	the	curb	connects	the	main	to	your	home.	At	first,	the	fiber
will	probably	run	only	to	neighborhood	distribution	points	and	the	signals	will
be	carried	from	the	neighborhood	fiber	on	either	the	coaxial	cable	that	brings
you	cable	television	or	on	the	"twisted-pair"	copper-wire	connections	that
provide	telephone	service.	Eventually,	though,	fiber	connections	may	run
directly	into	your	home	if	you	use	lots	of	data.
Switches	are	the	sophisticated	computers	that	shunt	streams	of	data	from	one
track	to	another,	like	boxcars	in	a	train	yard.	Millions	of	simultaneous	streams
of	communications	will	flow	on	large	networks,	and	no	matter	how	many
intermediate	waypoints	are	required,	all	the	different	bits	of	information	will

have	to	be	guided	to	their	destinations,	with	an	assurance	they	will	arrive	in
the	right	places	and	on	time.	To	grasp	how	big	the	task	will	be	in	the	era	of
the	information	highway,	imagine	billions	of	boxcars	that	have	to	be	routed
along	railroad	tracks	through	vast	systems	of	switches	and	arrive	at	their
destinations	on	schedule.	Because	the	cars	are	attached	to	one	another,
switchyards	get	clogged	waiting	for	long,	multicar	trains	to	pass	through.
There	would	be	fewer	tie-ups	if	each	boxcar	could	travel	independently	and
find	its	own	way	through	the	switches,	then	reassemble	as	a	train	at	the
destination.
Information	traversing	the	information	highway	will	be	broken	up	into	tiny
packets,	and	each	packet	will	be	routed	independently	through	the	network,
the	way	individual	automobiles	navigate	roads.	When	you	order	a	movie,	it
will	be	broken	into	millions	of	tiny	pieces,	each	one	of	which	will	find	its	way
through	the	network	to	your	television.
This	routing	of	packets	will	be	accomplished	through	the	use	of	a
communications	protocol	known	as	asynchronous	transfer	mode,	or	ATM
(not	to	be	confused	with	"automatic	teller	machine").	It	will	be	one	of	the
building	blocks	of	the	information	highway.	Phone	companies	around	the
world	are	already	beginning	to	rely	on	ATM,	because	it	takes	great	advantage
of	fiber's	amazing	bandwidth.	One	strength	of	ATM	is	its	ability	to	guarantee
timely	delivery	of	information.	ATM	breaks	each	digital	stream	into	uniform
packets,	each	of	which	contains	48	bytes	of	the	information	to	be	transported
and	5	bytes	of	control	information	that	allow	the	highway's	switches	to	route
the	packets	very	quickly	to	their	destinations.	At	their	destinations	the	packets
are	recombined	into	a	stream.
ATM	delivers	streams	of	information	at	very	high	speeds—up	to	155	million
bits	per	second	at	first,	later	jumping	to	622	million	bits	per	second	and
eventually	to	2	billion	bits	per	second.	This	technology	will	make	it	possible
to	send	video	as	easily	as	voice	calls,	and	at	very	low	cost.	Just	as	advances	in
chip	technology	have	driven	down	the	cost	of	computing,	ATM,	because	it
will	also	be	able	to	carry	enormous	numbers	of	old-fashioned	voice	calls,	will
drive	down	the	cost	of	long-distance	phone	calls.
High-bandwidth	cable	connections	will	link	most	information	appliances	to
the	highway,	but	some	devices	will	connect	wirelessly.	We	already	use	a
number	of	wireless	communication	devices—cellular	telephones,	pagers,	and
consumer-electronics	remote	controls.	They	send	radio	signals	and	allow	us
mobility,	but	the	bandwidth	is	limited.	The	wireless	networks	of	the	future
will	be	faster,	but	unless	there	is	a	major	breakthrough,	wired	networks	will

have	far	greater	bandwidth.	Mobile	devices	will	be	able	to	send	and	receive
messages,	but	it	will	be	expensive	and	unusual	to	use	them	to	receive	an
individual	video	stream.
The	wireless	networks	that	will	allow	us	to	communicate	when	we	are	mobile
will	grow	out	of	today's	cellular-telephone	systems	and	the	new	alternative
wireless	phone	service,	called	PCS.	When	you	are	on	the	road	and	want
information	from	your	home	or	office	computer,	your	portable	information
appliance