======================================================== beliefs—is  
bound  to  exasperate  many  readers,  since  it  ignores  most  of  what  
commentators  on the Middle  East have  said about the  roots  of Mus-
lim  violence.  It  ignores  the  painful  history  of the  Israeli  occupation  
of the West  Bank and Gaza.  It ignores the collusion  of Western pow-
ers  with  corrupt  dictatorships.  It  ignores  the  endemic  poverty  and  
lack of economic opportunity that now plague the Arab world.  But  I  
will argue that we  can ignore  all  of these things—or treat them only 
to  place  them  safely  on  the  shelf—because  the  world  is  filled  with  
poor,  uneducated,  and  exploited  peoples  who  do  not  commit  acts  of  
terrorism,  indeed  who  would  never  commit  terrorism  of  the  sort  
that  has  become  so  commonplace  among  Muslims;  and the  Muslim  
world has  no  shortage  of educated  and  prosperous  men  and women, 
suffering  little  more  than  their  infatuation  with  Koranic  eschatol-
ogy, who  are  eager  to murder  infidels  for  God's  sake.
2  
We are  at war with Islam. It may not serve our immediate  foreign  
policy  objectives  for  our  political  leaders  to  openly acknowledge this 
fact, but  it  is  unambiguously  so.  It  is  not merely  that  we  are  at war 
with  an  otherwise  peaceful  religion  that  has  been  "hijacked"  by  
extremists. We are at war with precisely the vision of life that is pre-
scribed to all Muslims  in the Koran, and further elaborated in the lit-

110  THE        END        OF       FAITH       
erature  of the  hadith, which  recounts  the  sayings  and  actions  of the 
Prophet.  A  future  in  which  Islam  and  the  West  do  not  stand  on  the  
brink  of  mutual  annihilation  is  a  future  in  which  most  Muslims  
have  learned  to  ignore  most  of  their  canon, just  as  most  Christians  
have  learned  to  do.  Such  a  transformation  is  by  no  means  guaran-
teed  to  occur,  however,  given  the  tenets  of Islam. 
A   Fringe   without   a   Center   
Many authors have pointed out that it is problematic to speak of Mus-
lim  "fundamentalism"  because  it  suggests  that  there  are  large  doctri-
nal  differences between  fundamentalist  Muslims  and  the mainstream. 
The truth, however, is that most Muslims  appear to be "fundamental-
ist"  in  the  Western  sense  of  the  word—in  that  even  "moderate"  
approaches to  Islam generally consider the  Koran to be  the literal  and  
inerrant  word  of  the  one  true  God.  The  difference  between  funda-
mentalists  and  moderates—and  certainly  the  difference  between  all  
"extremists" and moderates—is the degree to which they see  political  
and military  action  to  be  intrinsic to the  practice of their  faith.  In any 
case,  people  who  believe  that  Islam  must  inform  every  dimension  of  
human  existence,  including  politics  and  law,  are  now  generally  called  
not "fundamentalists"  or "extremists" but,  rather,  "Islamists."  
The  world,  from  the  point  of  view  of  Islam,  is  divided  into  the  
"House  of  Islam"  and  the  "House  of War,"  and  this  latter  designa-
tion  should  indicate  how  many  Muslims  believe  their  differences  
with  those  who  do  not  share  their  faith  will  be  ultimately  resolved.  
While  there  are  undoubtedly  some  "moderate"  Muslims  who  have  
decided  to  overlook  the  irrescindable  militancy  of  their  religion,  
Islam  is  undeniably  a  religion  of  conquest.  The  only  future  devout  
Muslims  can  envisage—as  Muslims—is  one  in  which  all  infidels  
have  been  converted  to  Islam,  subjugated,  or  killed.  The  tenets  of  
Islam  simply  do  not  admit  of anything  but  a  temporary  sharing  of  
power with  the  "enemies  of  God."  

THE     PROBLEM     WITH     ISLAM               111               
Like most other religions,  Islam  has  suffered a variety  of schisms. 
Since the seventh  century,  the  Sunni  (the majority)  have  considered  
the  Shia  to  be  heterodox,  and  the  Shia  have  returned  the  compli-
ment. Divisions have emerged within each of these sects as well, and 
even  within  the  ranks  of  those  who  are  unmistakably  Islamist.  We  
need not  go  into  the  sectarian  algebra  in  any  detail,  apart  from  not-
ing  that  these  schisms  have  had  the  salutary  effect  of  dividing  the  
House  of  Islam  against  itself.  While  this  mitigates  the  threat  that  
Islam  currently  poses  to  the  West,  Islam  and  Western  liberalism  
remain  irreconcilable.  Moderate  Islam—really  moderate,  really  crit-
ical  of Muslim  irrationality—scarcely  seems  to  exist.  If  it  does,  it  is  
doing  as  good  a  job  at  hiding  as  moderate  Christianity  did  in  the  
fourteenth  century  (and  for  similar  reasons).  
The  feature  of  Islam  that  is  most  troubling  to  non-Muslims,  and  
which  apologists  for  Islam  do  much  to  obfuscate,  is  the  principle  of  
jihad.  Literally,  the  term  can  be  translated  as  "struggle"  or  "striv-
ing,"  but  it  is  generally  rendered  in  English  as  "holy war,"  and this 
is  no  accident. While  Muslims  are  quick  to  observe  that  there  is  an  
inner  (or  "greater")  jihad,  which  involves  waging  war  against  one's  
own  sinfulness,  no amount  of casuistry  can  disguise the  fact that the 
outer  (or  "lesser")  jihad—war  against  infidels  and  apostates—is  a  
central  feature  of the  faith.  Armed  conflict  in  "defense  of  Islam"  is  
a  religious  obligation  for  every  Muslim  man.  We  are  misled  if  we  
believe  that  the  phrase  "in  defense  of Islam"  suggests  that  all  Mus-
lim  fighting  must  be  done  in  "self-defense."  On  the  contrary,  the  
duty  of jihad is  an  unambiguous  call  to world conquest. As  Bernard  
Lewis  writes,  "the  presumption  is  that  the  duty  of jihad  will  con-
tinue,  interrupted  only  by  truces,  until  all  the  world  either  adopts  
the  Muslim  faith  or  submits  to  Muslim  rule."
3
  There  is  just  no  
denying that Muslims  expect victory in  this world,  as  well as  in  the  
next. As  Malise  Ruthven points out,  "The  Prophet had been his  own  
Caesar.  ...  If  imitatio  Christi  meant  renouncing  worldly  ambition  
and  seeking  salvation  by  deeds  of  private  virtue,  imitatio  Muham-
madi  meant  sooner  or  later  taking  up  arms  against  those  forces  

112            THE     END     OF     FAITH     
which  seemed  to  threaten  Islam  from  within  or  without."
4
  While  
the  Koran  is  more  than  sufficient  to  establish  these  themes,  the  lit-
erature  of the  hadith  elaborates:  
Jihad  is your duty under any  ruler,  be  he  godly  or  wicked.  
A  single  endeavor  (of  fighting)  in  Allah's  Cause  in  the  forenoon  
or in the  afternoon  is better than  the world  and whatever is  in  it.  
A  day  and  a  night  fighting  on  the  frontier  is  better than  a  month  
of  fasting  and  prayer.  
Nobody  who  dies  and  finds  good  from  Allah  (in  the  Hereafter)  
would  wish  to  come  back  to  this  world  even  if he  were  given  the  
whole world and whatever is in  it,  except the martyr who, on see-
ing the  superiority of martyrdom, would  like to  come  back to  the  
world  and  get  killed  again  (in Allah's  Cause).  
He  who  dies  without  having  taken  part  in  a  campaign  dies  in  a  
kind  of  unbelief.  
Paradise  is  in  the  shadow  of swords.
5  
Many  hadiths  of  this  sort  can  be  found,  and  Islamists  regularly  
invoke them  as  a justification  for attacks  upon  infidels and apostates. 
Those  looking  for ways  to  leaven  the  intrinsic  militancy  of  Islam  
have  observed  that  there  are  a  few  lines  in  the  Koran  that  seem  to  
speak directly against indiscriminate violence. Those who wage jihad 
are  enjoined  not  to  attack  first  (Koran  2:190),  since  "God  does  not  
love  aggressors."  But  this  injunction  restrains  no  one.  Given  the  
long history  of  conflict  between  Islam  and  the  West,  almost  any  act  
of  violence  against  infidels  can  now  be  plausibly  construed  as  an  
action  in  defense  of the  faith. Our  recent  adventures  in  Iraq  provide  
all  the  rationale an  aspiring martyr  needs  to  wage jihad  against  "the  
friends  of  Satan"  for  decades  to  come.  Lewis  notes  that  one  who  
would  fight  for  God  is  also  enjoined  not  to  kill  women,  children,  or  

THE        PROBLEM       WITH        ISLAM  113  
the  aged,  unless  in  self-defense,  but  a  little  casuistry  on  the  notion  
of  self-defense  allows  Muslim  militants  to  elude  this  stricture  as  
well.  The  bottom  line  is  that  devout  Muslims  can  have  no  doubt  
about  the  reality  of  paradise  or  about  the  efficacy  of  martyrdom  as  
a means of getting there. Nor can they question the wisdom and rea-
sonableness   of   killing   people   for   what   amount   to   theological   
grievances.  In  Islam,  it  is  the  "moderate"  who  is  left  to  split  hairs,  
because  the  basic thrust  of the  doctrine  is  undeniable:  convert,  sub-
jugate,  or  kill  unbelievers;  kill  apostates;  and conquer the world. 
The imperative of world conquest is an interesting one, given that 
"imperialism"  is  one  of the  chief sins  that  Muslims  attribute  to  the  
West: 
Imperialism is  a particularly important theme in the Middle East-
ern  and  more  especially  the  Islamic  case  against  the  West.  For  
them,  the  word  imperialism  has  a  special  meaning.  This  word  is,  
for   example,   never   used   by   Muslims   of   the   great   Muslim   
empires—the  first  one  founded  by  the  Arabs,  the  later  ones  by  
the  Turks,  who  conquered  vast  territories  and  populations  and  
incorporated  them  in  the  House  of  Islam.  It  was======================================================== Druyan.   Shadows  of  Forgotten  Ancestors.  New  York:  Random  
House, 1992. 
Said,  E. W. "The  Clash  of Ignorance."  Nation, Oct. 4,  2001.  
——.      "Suicidal Ignorance."  CounterPunch,  Nov.  18,  2001.  
——.       "An  Unacceptable  Helplessness."  Al-Ahram,  Jan.  16-22,  2003.  
——.      "A Monumental  Hypocricy."  CounterPunch,  Feb.  15,  2003.  
Santayana,  G.  Skepticism  and  Animal  Faith:  Introduction  to  a  System  of  Philosophy.  
New York: Dover, 1923. 
——.      Persons  and Places.  Cambridge: MIT Press,  1963.  
Sartre,  J.  P.  The  Transcendence  of  the  Ego: An  Existentialist  Theory  of  Consciousness.  
Translated by  F. Williams and  R. Kirkpatrick. New York:  Hill and Wang, 1937. 
——.      Being and Nothingness.  Translated by H.  E. Barnes.  1956;  reprint, New York: 
Gramercy  Books,  1994.  
Saxe,  R., and N. Kanwisher. "People Thinking about Thinking People: The Role of the 
Temporo-parietal  Junction  in Theory  of  Mind.'"  Neuolmage  19  (2003):  1835-42.  
Scalia, A. "God's Justice and Ours."  First Things, May  2002, pp. 17-21. 
Schell,  J.  The  Fate  of the  Earth.  New York: Alfred A.  Knopf,  1982.  
——.       The  Unfinished  Twentieth  Century.  London:  Verso,  2001.  
Schilpp,  P.  A.,  ed.  The  Philosophy  of  Bertrand  Russell.  La  Salle,  Ill.:  Open  Court,  
1944. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY          327          
——,       ed.  Albert  Einstein:  Philosopher-Scientist.  London:  Cambridge  Univ.  Press,  
1949. 
Schlosser,  E.  Reefer  Madness:  Sex,  Drugs,  and  Cheap  Labor  in  the  American  Black  
Market.  Boston:  Houghton  Mifflin,  2003.  
Schneewind, J. B. "What Has Moral Philosophy Done for Us ... Lately?'' Undated MS. 
Scholem,  G. Kabbalah. New York: Dorsette  Press,  1974.  
Schooler,  J.  W.,  and  J.  Melcher.  "The  Ineffability  of Insight."  In  The  Creative  Cogni-
tion Approach, ed. S. M. Smith, T. B. Ward, and R. A. Finke. Cambridge: MIT Press, 
1995. 
Schopenhauer,  A.  Essays  and Aphorisms.  Edited  and  translated  by  R.  J.  Hollingdale.  
London: Penguin  Books,  1970.  
Schrödinger,  E.  My   View  of  the   World.  Translated  by  C.  Hastings.  Woodbridge,  
Conn.: Ox Bow Press, 1961. 
——.        What  Is  Life,  Mind  and  Matter  and  Autobiographical  Sketches.  Cambridge:  
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1967. 
Searle,  J.  R.  The  Rediscovery  of  the  Mind.  Cambridge:  MIT  Press,  1992.  
——.      The  Construction  of  Social  Reality.  New York:  Free  Press,  1995.  
——.      "Consciousness  and the  Philosophers."  New  York  Review  of Books,  March  6,  
1997, pp. 43-50. 
——.      The  Mystery  of  Consciousness.  New York:  New  York  Review  Books,  1997.  
——.       "Consciousness."  Annual  Review  of  Neuroscience  23  (2000):  557-78.  
——.      "Further  Reply  to  Libet."  Journal  of  Consciousness  Studies  8,  no.  8  (2001):  
63-65. 
——.     "Free Will  as  a  Problem in  Neurobiology."  2001  MS.  
Sereny,  G.  Into  That  Darkness:  An  Examination  of  Conscience.  New  York:  Vintage,  
1974. 
Shabkar,  Lama.  Flight of the  Garuda. Translated  E.  P. Kunsang. Katmandu: Rangjung 
Yeshe Publications, 1986. 
——.      The  Life  of Shabkar. Translated  by  Matthieu  Ricard. Albany:  State  Univ.  of  
New York Press,  1994.  
Shafir,  E.,  and A. Tversky  "Decision  Making."  In  An  Invitation  to  Cognitive  Science:  
Thinking, ed.  E. E. Smith and D.  N. Osherson. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995. 
Shankaracharya.  The  Crest-Jewel  of  Discrimination.  Translated  by  Swami  Prabha-
vananda and  C.  Isherwood.  Hollywood,  Calif.: Vedanta  Press,  1947.  
——.       Self-knowledge.  Translated  and  edited  by  Swami  Nikhilananda.  Mylapore,  
Madras:  Sri  Ramakrishna  Math,  1987.  
Shattuck,  R.  Forbidden  Knowledge: From  Prometheus  to  Pornography.  New York:  St.  
Martin's  Press, 1996. 
Sheldrake,  R.  Seven  Experiments  That  Could  Change  the  World.  New  York:  River-
head Books, 1995. 
——.        The  Sense  of  Being  Stared  At,  and  Other  Aspects  of  the  Extended  Mind.  
New York: Crown, 2003. 

328            BIBLIOGRAPHY            
Sheldrake,  R.,  T.  McKenna,  and  R. Abraham.  The  Evolutionary  Mind:  Trialogues  at  
the  Edge  of  the  Unthinkable.  Santa  Cruz,  Calif.:  Trialogue  Press,  1998.  
Shoemaker,  S.  "Self-reference  and  Self-awareness."  Journal  of Philosophy  65  (1968):  
——.       "Functionalism  and  Qualia."  In  The  Nature  of  Mind,  ed.  D.  Rosenthal.  
Oxford: Oxford Univ.  Press, 1991. 
Simon,  H.  A.  "What  Is  'Explanation'  of  Behavior?"  Psychological  Science  3  (1992):  
150-61. 
Simons, D. J., C. F. Chabris, T. Schnur, D. T. Levin. "Evidence for Preserved Represen-
tations  in  Change  Blindness."  Consciousness  and  Cognition  11  (2002):  78-97.  
Singer,  P.  Writings  on  an  Ethical  Life.  New York:  Ecco Press,  2000.  
Singer, W.  "Striving  for  Coherence."  Nature 397  (Feb. 4,1999): 391-93. 
Sluga,  H.  "'Whose  House  Is  That?':  Wittgenstein  on  the  Self."  In  The  Cambridge  
Companion  to  Wittgenstein,  ed.  H.  Sluga  and  D.  G.  Stern.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  
Univ. Press, 1996. 
Smith, D. W. "The Structure of  (Self-)  Consciousness."  Topoi 5  (1986): 149-56. 
Smith,  E.  E.  "Concepts  and  Categorization."  In  An  Invitation  to  Cognitive  Science:  
Thinking, ed. E.  E. Smith and D. N. Osherson. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995. 
Smith,  G.  H.  Atheism:  The  Case  against  God.  Buffalo:  Prometheus  Books,  1979.  
Spence,  S. A., and  C.  D.  Frith.  "Towards  a  Functional Anatomy  of Volition." Journal 
of  Consciousness  Studies  6,  no.  8-9  (1999):  11-29.  
Sperry,  R. W. "Cerebral Organization and Behavior."  Science  133  (1961): 1749-57. 
——.        "A   Powerful   Paradigm   Made   Stronger."   Neuropsychologia   36   (1998):   
1063-68. 
Sperry,  R. W., D. Zaidel, and D. Zaidel. "Self Recognition and Social Awareness in the 
Deconnected  Minor  Hemisphere."  Neuropsychologia  17  (1979):  153-66.  
Squire,  L.  R., and  E.  R.  Kandel.  Memory: From  Mind  to  Molecules.  New York:  Scien-
tific American  Library,  2000.  
Squires,  E.  J.  "Quantum Theory  and  the  Need  for  Consciousness."  Journal  of  Con-
sciousness  Studies  1, no.  2  (1994):  201-4.  
Stanovich,  K.  E., and R.  F. West.  "Individual Differences in Rational Thought." Jour-
nal  of  Experimental  Psychology:  General  127  (1998):  161-88.  
Stcherbatsky, T.  The  Buddhist  Conception  of Nirvana.  Delhi: Motilal  Banarsidas, 1968. 
Stevenson,  I.  Twenty  Cases  Suggestive  of Reincarnation.  Charlottesville:  Univ.  Press  
of Virginia,  1974.  
——.        Unlearned   Language:  New   Studies   in   Xenoglossy.  Charlottesville:  Univ.  
Press  of Virginia,  1984.  
——.       Where  Reincarnation  and  Biology  Intersect.  Westport,  Conn.:  Praeger,  1997.  
Storr,  A.  Feet  of  Clay:  Saints,  Sinners,  and  Madmen:  A  Study  of  Gurus.  New  York:  
Free Press, 1996. 
Stroud,  B.  The  Significance  of  Philosophical  Scepticism.  Oxford:  Clarendon  Press,  
1984. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY            329            
Swain,  J.  The  Pleasures  of  the  Torture  Chamber.  New York:  Dorset  Press,  1931.  
Swinburne,  R.  The  Existence  of God.  Oxford:  Clarendon  Press,  1979.  
Tarnas,  R.  The  Passion  of  the  Western  Mind.  New York: Harmony  Books,  1991.  
Taylor,  E.  William  fames  on  Consciousness  beyond  the  Margin.  Princeton:  Princeton  
Univ. Press, 1996. 
Teilhard de  Chardin,  P.  Toward  the  Future. Translated by  R.  Hague.  New York: Har-
court  Brace Jovanovich,  1973.  
Tenzin  Gyatzo  (Dalai  Lama).  The  Buddha  Nature:  Death  and  Eternal  Soul  in  Bud-
dhism.  Woodside,  Calif.:  Bluestar  Communications,  1996.  
——.        Sleeping,  Dreaming,  and  Dying:  An  Exploration  of  Consciousness  with  the  
Dalai Lama.  Edited by F. J. Varela. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1997. 
Thompson-Schill,  S.  L.,  G.  K.  Aguirre,  M.  D'Esposito,  and  M.  J.  Farah.  "A  Neural  
Basis  for  Category  and  Modality  Specificity  of  Semantic  Knowledge."  Neuropsy-
chologia  37  (1999):  671-76.  
Thorne,  K.  S.  Black  Holes  and Time  Warps:  Einstein's  Outrageous  Legacy.  New York: 
W. W. Norton, 1994. 
Tillich,  P.  Dynamics  of Faith.  New York:  Harper and  Row,  1957.  
——.      A  History  of  Christian  Thought.  New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1967.  
Tipler,  F.  The  Physics  of Immortality.  New  York:  Doubleday,  1994.  
Tononi, G., and G.  M.  Edelman. "Consciousness and Complexity." Science's  Compass  
282  (Dec. 4,1998): 1846-51. 
Trachtenberg,  J.  The  Devil  and  the Jews:  The  Medieval  Conception  of  the  Jew  and  Its  
Relation  to  Modern  Anti-Semitism.  Philadelphia:  Jewish  Publication  Society,  1943.  
Trevena, J. A., and J.  Miller.  "Cortical Movement Preparation before and after a Con-
scious  Decision  to  Move."  Consciousness  and  Cognition  11  (2002):  162-90.  
Tsele  Natsok  Rangdrol.  The  Lamp  of  Mahamudra.  Translated  by  E.  P.  Kunsang.  
Boston: Shambhala,  1989.  
——.       The  Mirror  of  Mindfulness:  The  Cycle  of  the  Four  Bardos.  Translated  by  E.  
P. Kunsang. Boston: Shambhala, 1989. 
——.      The  Circle  of  the  Sun.  Translated  by  E.  P.  Kunsang.  Hong  Kong:  Rangjung  
Yeshe Publications,  1990.  
——.       Empowerment  and  the  Path  of  Liberation.  Translated  by  E.  P.  Kunsang.  
Hong Kong: Rangjung Yeshe Publications, 1993. 
——.      The  Heart of the  Matter. Translated by E.  P. Kunsang. Hong Kong: Rangjung 
Yeshe Publications,  1996.  
Tuan,  Y.  Segmented  Worlds  and  Self:  Group  Life  and  Individual  Consciousness.  Min-
neapolis: Univ. of Minnesota  Press, 1982. 
Tversky, A.  "Features  of Similarity."  Psychological  Review  84  (1977): 327-52. 
Tye,  M.  Ten  Problems  of  Consciousness:  A  Representational  Theory  of  the  Phenom-
enal Mind.  Cambridge:  MIT  Press,  1995.  
U  Ba  Khin.  The======================================================== third the  tongue.  ..  .  
The town authorities reacted with  a series of stern measures to 
halt  the  spreading  panic.  They  ordered  the  tolling  of the  bells  to  
cease. They outlawed the wearing  of black clothing. They  forbade  
the gathering of more than two people  at a  funeral, or any display 
of grief in  public. And  to  placate  the  angry  God who  had brought 
this  affliction,  they  banned  all  work  after  noon  on  Saturdays,  all  

THE      NATURE      OF      BELIEF  71  
gambling  and  swearing,  and  they  demanded  that  everyone  living  
in  sin  get  married  immediately.  Li  Muisis  [an  abbot  of Tournai] 
recorded  happily  that  the  number  of marriages  increased  consid-
erably,  profanity  was  no  longer  heard,  and  gambling  declined  so  
much  that  the  makers  of  dice  turned  to  making  rosaries.  He  also  
recorded that in  this  newly virtuous  place  25,000  citizens  died of 
the  plague  and  were  buried  in  large  pits  on  the  outskirts  of  the  
town.
29 
Where  did  the  religious  beliefs  of  these  people  leave  off  and  their  
worldly  beliefs  begin?  Can  there  be  any  doubt  that  the  beleaguered  
Christians  of  the  fourteenth  century  were  longing  for  knowledge  
(that  is,  beliefs  that  are  both  true  and  valid)  about the  plague,  about  
its  cause  and  mode  of  transmission,  and  hoping,  thereby,  to  find  an  
effective  means  by  which  to  combat  it?  Was  their  reliance  upon  the  
tenets  of  faith  enforced  by anything but the  starkest  ignorance?  If it 
had  been  known,  for  instance,  that  this  pestilence  was  being  deliv-
ered  by  merchant  ships—that  rats  were  climbing  ashore  from  every  
hold and that upon  each  rat were  legions  of fleas  carrying the  plague  
bacillus—would  the  faithful  have  thought  their  energies  best  spent  
cutting  the  tongues  out  of  blasphemers,  silencing  bells,  dressing  in  
bright  colors,  and  making  liberal  use  of enemas?  A sure  way  to  win  
an argument with  these unhappy people would have been with peni-
cillin,  delivered  not  from  a  land where  other  "cultural  perspectives"  
hold  sway,  but  from  higher  up  on  the  slopes  of the  real.  
Faith    and    Madness    
We  have  seen  that our  beliefs  are tightly coupled to the structure  of  
language  and  to  the  apparent  structure  of the  world.  Our  "freedom  
of  belief,"  if  it  exists  at  all,  is  minimal.  Is  a  person  really  free  to  
believe  a  proposition  for  which  he  has  no  evidence?  No.  Evidence  
(whether  sensory  or  logical)  is  the  only  thing  that  suggests  that  a  

72        THE    END    OF    FAITH    
given  belief  is  really  about  the  world  in  the  first  place.  We  have  
names  for people who have many beliefs  for which  there  is  no ratio-
nal  justification. When  their  beliefs  are  extremely  common  we  call  
them  "religious";  otherwise,  they  are  likely  to  be  called  "mad,"  
"psychotic,"  or "delusional."  Most  people  of faith are  perfectly  sane,  
of  course,  even  those  who  commit  atrocities  on  account  of  their  
beliefs.  But what  is  the  difference  between  a  man  who  believes  that  
God  will  reward  him  with  seventy-two  virgins  if  he  kills  a  score  of  
Jewish  teenagers,  and  one  who  believes  that  creatures  from  Alpha  
Centauri  are beaming him  messages  of world  peace through  his  hair  
dryer? There  is  a  difference,  to  be  sure,  but  it  is  not  one  that  places  
religious  faith  in  a  flattering  light.  
It  takes  a  certain  kind  of  person  to  believe  what  no  one  else  
believes.  To  be  ruled  by  ideas  for  which  you  have  no  evidence  (and  
which   therefore   cannot   be  justified   in   conversation   with   other   
human beings)  is generally a  sign that something is seriously wrong 
with  your  mind.  Clearly,  there  is  sanity  in  numbers.  And  yet,  it  is  
merely  an  accident  of  history  that  it  is  considered  normal  in  our  
society  to  believe  that  the  Creator  of  the  universe  can  hear  your  
thoughts,  while  it  is  demonstrative  of mental  illness  to  believe  that  
he is  communicating with you by having the  rain tap in Morse  code  
on  your  bedroom  window.  And  so,  while  religious  people  are  not  
generally  mad,  their  core  beliefs  absolutely  are.  This  is  not  surpris-
ing,  since  most  religions  have  merely  canonized  a  few  products  of  
ancient  ignorance  and  derangement  and  passed  them  down  to  us  as  
though they were primordial truths. This  leaves billions of us believ-
ing what  no  sane  person  could believe  on  his  own.  In  fact,  it is  diffi-
cult to imagine a set of beliefs more suggestive of mental illness than 
those  that  lie  at  the  heart  of many  of our  religious  traditions.  Con-
sider  one  of the  cornerstones  of the  Catholic  faith:  
I  likewise  profess  that  in  the  Mass  a  true,  proper,  and  propitia-
tory  sacrifice  is  offered  to  God  on  behalf  of  the  living  and  the  
dead,  and  that  the  Body  and  the  Blood,  together  with  the  soul  

THE      NATURE      OF      BELIEF  73  
and the divinity, of our  Lord Jesus Christ is  truly, really, and sub-
stantially  present  in  the  most  holy  sacrament  of  the  Eucharist,  
and there is  a change of the whole substance of the bread into the 
Body, and of the whole substance of the wine into  Blood; and this 
change  the  Catholic  mass  calls  transubstantiation.  I  also  profess  
that the whole  and entire  Christ  and  a true sacrament is  received  
under  each  separate  species.
30  
Jesus  Christ—who,  as  it  turns  out,  was  born  of  a  virgin,  cheated  
death,  and  rose  bodily  into  the  heavens—can  now  be  eaten  in  the  
form  of a  cracker. A  few  Latin words  spoken  over your  favorite Bur-
gundy,  and  you  can  drink  his  blood  as  well.  Is  there  any  doubt  that  
a  lone  subscriber  to  these  beliefs  would  be  considered  mad?  Rather,  
is  there  any  doubt  that  he  would  be  mad?  The  danger  of  religious  
faith  is  that  it  allows  otherwise  normal  human  beings  to  reap  the  
fruits  of madness  and  consider  them  holy.  Because  each  new  gener-
ation  of  children  is  taught  that  religious  propositions  need  not  be  
justified in  the way  that  all  others  must,  civilization  is  still  besieged  
by  the  armies  of  the  preposterous.  We  are,  even  now,  killing  our-
selves  over  ancient  literature.  Who  would  have  thought  something  
so  tragically  absurd  could  be  possible?  
What    Should    We    Believe?    
We  believe  most  of what  we  believe  about the world  because  others  
have told us to.  Reliance upon the authority of experts, and upon the 
testimony  of  ordinary  people,  is  the  stuff  of  which  worldviews  are  
made.  In  fact,  the  more  educated  we  become,  the  more  our  beliefs  
come to us at  second hand. A person who believes  only those propo-
sitions  for which  he  can  provide  full  sensory  or  theoretical justifica-
tion  will  know  almost  nothing  about  the  world;  that  is,  if  he  is  not  
swiftly  killed  by  his  own  ignorance.  How  do  you  know  that  falling  
from  a  great  height  is  hazardous  to  your  health?  Unless  you  have  

74          THE     END     OF     FAITH     
witnessed  someone  die  in  this  way,  you  have  adopted  this  belief on 
the authority of others.
31
 This  is not a problem.  Life is too short, and 
the  world  too  complex,  for  any  of us  to  go  it  alone  in  epistemologi-
cal terms. We are ever  reliant on the  intelligence and  accuracy,  if not 
the  kindness,  of strangers. 
This  does  not  suggest,  however,  that  all  forms  of  authority  are  
valid;  nor  does  it  suggest  that  even  the  best  authorities  will  always  
prove  reliable.  There  are  good  arguments  and  bad  ones,  precise  
observations  and  imprecise  ones;  and  each  of  us  has  to  be  the  final  
judge  of whether or not  it  is  reasonable  to  adopt  a  given  belief about 
the  world.  
Consider  the  following  sources  of information: 
1. The  anchorman  on  the  evening  news  says  that  a  large  fire  is  
burning in  the  state  of  Colorado.  One  hundred  thousand  acres  
have  burned,  and  the  fire  is  still  completely  uncontained.  
2. Biologists  say that DNA is the molecular basis  for sexual  repro-
duction.  Each  of us  resembles  our parents  because  we  inherit  a  
complement   of  their  DNA.   Each   of  us   has  arms   and   legs   
because  our  DNA  coded  for  the  proteins  that  produced  them  
during  our  early  development.  
3. The  pope  says  that  Jesus  was  born  of  a  virgin  and  resurrected  
bodily  after  death.  He  is  the  Son  of  God,  who  created  the  uni-
verse  in six days.  If you believe  this, you will go to heaven  after  
death; if you don't, you will  go to hell, where you will  suffer  for  
eternity. 
What is the  difference  between  these  forms  of testimony? Why isn't 
every  "expert  opinion"  equally  worthy  of  our  respect?  Given  our  
analysis thus  far,  it should not be difficult to grant authority to 1  and  
2  while disregarding 3. 
Proposition  1: Why  do  we  find  the  news  story  about  the  fire  in  
Colorado  persuasive?  It  could  be  a  hoax.  But what  about those  tele-

THE    NATURE    OF    BELIEF         75         
vised  images  of  hillsides  engorged  by  flame  and  of  planes  dropping  
fire retardant?  Maybe there is  a  fire, but it is in  a different state. Per-
haps  it's  really  Texas  that  is  burning.  Is  it  reasonable  to  entertain  
such possibilities?  No. Why not? Here is where the phrase "common 
sense"  begins  to  earn======================================================== inapposite  
with  respect  to  Al  Qaeda.  To  attribute  "territorial"  and  "nationalistic"  
motives  to  Osama  bin  Laden  seems  almost  willfully  obscurantist,  since  
Osama's  only  apparent  concerns  are  the  spread  of Islam  and  the  sanctity  
of  Muslim  holy  sites.  Suicide  bombing,  in  the  Muslim  world  at  least,  is  
an  explicitly  religious  phenomenon  that  is  inextricable  from  notions  of  
martyrdom  and jihad,  predictable  on  their  basis,  and  sanctified  by  their  
logic.  It  is  no more  secular an  activity than prayer  is.  
3
  B.  Lewis,  The  Crisis  of  Islam:  Holy  War  and  Unholy  Terror  (New  York:  
Modern  Library,  2003), 32. 
4
  M.  Ruthven,  Islam  in  the  World,  2d  ed.  (Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  
2000),  7.  
5
  Some  of these  hadiths  are  cited  in  Lewis,  Crisis  of Islam,  32.  Others  are  
drawn    from   an   Internet   database:  www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/reference/  
searchhadith.html. 
6
  Lewis,  Crisis  of Islam,  55.  
7
  "Idolatry  is  worse  than  carnage"  (Koran  2:190).  The  rule  of the  Mogul  
emperor  Akbar  (1556-1605)  offers  an  exception  here,  but  it  is  merely  
that Akbar's  tolerance  of Hinduism  was  a  frank violation  of Islamic  law.  
8
  F.  Zakaria,  The  Future  of  Freedom:  Illiberal  Democracy  at  Home  and  
Abroad  (New York: W. W. Norton,  2003),  126.  
9
 See A. Dershowitz, The Case for Israel (Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley,  2003),  
61. 
10
 These  facts  and  dates  are  drawn  from  R.  S.  Wistrich,  Anti-Semitism:  The  
Longest  Hatred  (New  York:  Schocken  Books,  1991),  and  Dershowitz,  
Case  for  Israel.  
11
  L.   Binder,   Islamic   Liberalism:  A   Critique   of  Development   Ideologies   
(Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1988), 129. 
12
 A.  Cowell,  "Zeal  for  Suicide  Bombing  Reaches  British  Midland,"  New  
York  Times,  May  2,  2003.  Consider the  case  of  England:  British  Muslims  
have  been  found  fighting  with  the  Taliban,  plotting  terror  attacks  in  
Yemen,  attempting  to  blow  up  airplanes,  and  kidnapping  and  killing  
Western  journalists  in  Pakistan.  Recently,  two  British  citizens  volun-
teered  for  suicide  missions  in  Israel  (one  succeeded,  one  failed).  
Terrorist  Hunter  (New  York:  HarperCollins,  2003), whose anonymous 

262          NOTES    TO     PAGES    115-123    
author  has  gone  undercover  to  tape  the  proceedings  at  Muslim  confer-
ences  in  the  United  States,  depicts  a  shocking  level  of intolerance  among  
Muslims  living  in  the  West.  The  author  reports  that  at  one  conference,  
held at the  Ramada  Plaza hotel in  suburban  Chicago, Arab American chil-
dren  performed  skits  in  which  they  killed  Jews  and  became  martyrs.  
Sheikh   Ikrima   Sabri,   the   grand   mufti   of   Jerusalem   and   Palestine   
(appointed  by  Yasir  Arafat),  recently  announced,  "The  Jews  do  not  dare  
to  bother  me,  because  they  are  the  most  cowardly  creatures  Allah  has  
ever  created.  .  .  . We  tell  them:  In  as  much  as you  love  life,  the  Muslim  
loves  death  and  martyrdom"  (ibid.,  134).  Sabri,  who  regularly  calls  for  
the  destruction  of  America  and  all  infidel  nations,  and  encourages  child  
suicide  bombers  ("The  younger  the  martyr,  the  more  I  respect  him"—  
ibid.,  132),  spoke  these  words  not  in  a  mosque  on  the  West  Bank  but  at  
the  Twenty-sixth  Annual  Convention  of  the  Islamic  Circle  of  North  
America,  in  Cleveland,  Ohio.  
13
  Lewis,  Crisis  of Islam,  xxviii.  
14
 Ruthven,  Islam  in  the  World,  137.  
15
 Yosuf Islam,  in his wisdom, had this  to  say  in  a written  response to those 
who  were  shocked  by  his  apparent  endorsement  of  Khomeini's  fatwa:  
Under  Islamic  Law,  the  ruling  regarding  blasphemy  is  quite  clear;  the  
person  found guilty of it must be put  to  death. Only under certain  cir-
cumstances can repentance be accepted.... The  fact  is that as  far as the 
application  of Islamic  Law  and the  implementation  of  full  Islamic way 
of life  in  Britain  is  concerned,  Muslims  realize  that  there  is very  little  
chance  of that  happening  in  the  near  future.  But  that  shouldn't  stop  
us  from  trying  to  improve  the  situation  and  presenting  the  Islamic  
viewpoint  wherever  and whenever  possible. That  is  the  duty  of  every  
Muslim  and that  is what  I  did.  
(See   catstevens.com/articles/00013).   If  even   a  Western   educated  ex-
hippie  was  talking  this  way,  what  do  you  think  the  sentiments  were  on  
the  streets  of Tehran? 
16
 K.  H.  Pollack, "The  Crisis  of Islam':  Faith  and Terrorism  in  the  Muslim  
World,"  New  York  Times  Book  Review, April  6,  2003.  
17
 As Thomas Carlyle  (1795-1881) wrote, "I must  say, it is as toilsome read-
ing  as  I  ever  undertook.  A  wearisome  confused jumble,  crude,  incondite;  
endless  iterations,  longwindedness,  entanglement  .  .  .  insupportable stu-
pidity,  in  short!  Nothing  but  a  sense  of duty  could  carry  any  European  
through  the  Koran!"  Cited  in  Ruthven,  Islam  in  the  World,  81-82.  

NOTES   TO    PAGES       123-133       263       
Cited  in  P.  Berman,  Terror  and  Liberalism  (New  York:  W.  W.  Norton,  
2003), 68. 
www.people-press.org. 
Christopher  Luxenberg  (this  is   a  pseudonym),   a  scholar  of  ancient  
Semitic languages,  has  recently  argued  that  a  mistranslation  is  responsi-
ble   for   furnishing  the   Muslim  paradise   with   "virgins"   (Arabic   hur,   
transliterated as "houris"—literally "white ones"). It  seems that the pas-
sages  describing  paradise  in the  Koran  were  drawn  from  earlier Christian 
texts  that  make  frequent  use  of  the  Aramaic  word  hur,  meaning  "white  
raisins."  White  raisins,  it  seems,  were  a  great  delicacy  in  the  ancient  
world.  Imagine  the  look  on  a  young martyr's  face when,  finding  himself  
in  a  paradise  teeming with  his  fellow  thugs,  his  seventy  houris  arrive  as  
a  fistful  of  raisins.  See  A.  Stille,  "Scholars  Are  Quietly  Offering  New  
Theories  of the  Koran,"  New  York  Times,  March  2,  2002.  
S.  P.  Huntington,  The  Clash  of Civilizations  and  the  Remaking  of  World  
Order  (New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1996).  
E. W.  Said,  "The  Clash  of Ignorance,"  Nation, Oct.  4,  2001.  
E. W.  Said,  "Suicidal Ignorance,"  CounterPunch,  Nov. 18, 2001. 
For  an  alarming  look  at  the  rising  political  influence  of  Christianity  in  
the  developing  world,  see  P.  Jenkins,  "The  Next  Christianity,"  Atlantic  
Monthly,  Oct.  2002,  pp.  53-68.  
1
  From  the  United  Nations'  Arab  Human  Development  Report  2002,  cited  
in  Lewis,  Crisis  of Islam,  115-17.  
'  See  R.  D.  Kaplan,  "The   Lawless  Frontier,"  Atlantic  Monthly,  March  
2000,  pp. 66-80. 
' S. Atran, "Opinion: Who Wants  to  Be a Martyr?"  New  York Times,  May  
5,  2003.  Atran  also  reports  that  a  Pakistani  relief  worker  interviewed  
nearly  250  aspiring  Palestinian  suicide  bombers  and  their  recruiters  and  
concluded,  "None  were  uneducated,  desperately  poor,  simple-minded  or  
depressed.  .  .  . They  all  seemed  to  be  entirely  normal  members  of  their  
families."  He  also  cites  a  2001  poll  conducted  by  the  Palestinian  Center  
for  Policy  and  Survey  Research  indicating  "that  Palestinian  adults  with  
12 years  or more of education  are  far more likely to support bomb attacks 
than  those  who  cannot  read."  
1
  B.  Hoffman,  "The  Logic  of  Suicide  Terrorism,"  Atlantic  Monthly,  June  
2003, pp. 40-47. 
'  Indeed,  this  may be  happening  in  Iran.  Having truly  achieved  a  Muslim  
theocracy,  the  Iranian  people  now  have  few illusions that their problems 
are  the  result  of their  insufficient  conformity  to  Islam.  

264        NOTES    TO    PAGES    134-137    
30
  Zakaria,  future  of  Freedom,  cites  a  CNN  poll  (Feb.  2002)  conducted  
across  nine  Muslim  countries.  Some  61  percent  of those  polled  said  they  
do  not  believe  that  Arabs  were  responsible  for  the  Sept.  11  attacks.  No  
doubt the 39 percent who thought otherwise  represent millions who wish 
the Arab  world would  take  credit  for  a job  well  done.  
31
 It would be  impossible  to do justice  to  the  richness of the  Muslim  imag-
ination  in the  context  of this  book. To  take  only one  preposterous  exam-
ple:  it  seems  that  many  Iraqis  believe  that  the  widespread  looting  that  
occurred after the  fall  of Saddam's  regime was orchestrated  by Americans 
and  Israelis,  as  part  of a Zionist  plot. The attacks  upon American  soldiers  
were  carried  out  by  CIA  agents  "as  part  of  a  covert  operation  to  justify  
prolonging  the  U.S.  military  occupation."  Wow!   See  J.  L.  Anderson,  
"Iraq's  Bloody Summer,"  New  Yorker, Aug. 11,  2003,  pp. 43-55. 
32
 Berman,  Terror  and  Liberalism,  153.  
33
 Also  see  M.  B. Zuckerman,  "Graffiti  on  History's Walls,"  U.S.  News  and  
World Report,  Nov.  3,  2003,  for an  account  of anti-Semitism  in the main-
stream  European  press.  
34
 Dershowitz,  Case for  Israel,  2.  
35
 This  miraculous  ascension  (mi'raj)  is  fully  described  only  in  the  hadith,  
though  it  may  be  alluded  to  in  the  Koran  (17:1).  The  likening  of  the  
Israelis  to  the  Nazis  is  especially  egregious,  given  that  the  Palestinians  
distinguished  themselves  as  Nazi  collaborators  during  the  war  years.  
Their  calculated  attacks  upon  Jews  in  the  1930s  and  1940s  led  to  the  
deaths  of hundreds  of the thousands  of European  Jews  who  would other-
wise  have  been  permitted  to  immigrate  by  the  British.  This  result  does======================================================== the  Islamification of the earth. 
As  we  see  in  the  person  of Osama  bin  Laden,  a  murderous  reli-
gious  fervor  is  compatible  with  wealth  and  education.  Indeed,  the  
technical  proficiency of many  Muslim  terrorists  demonstrates  that  it  
is compatible with a scientific education. That is why there is no cog-

134         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
nitive  or cultural  substitute  for desacralizing  faith  itself. As  long  as  it  
is  acceptable  for  a  person  to  believe  that  he  knows  how  God  wants  
everyone on earth to live, we will continue to murder one another on 
account  of  our  myths.  In  our  dealings  with  the  Muslim  world,  we  
must  acknowledge  that  Muslims  have  not  found  anything  of  sub-
stance to  say against the  actions  of the  September  11  hijackers, apart 
from the ubiquitous  canard that they were  really Jews.
30
  Muslim  dis-
course  is  currently  a  tissue  of  myths,  conspiracy  theories,
31
  and  
exhortations  to  recapture the  glories  of the  seventh  century. There  is  
no reason to believe that economic and political improvements in the 
Muslim  world,  in  and  of themselves, would  remedy  this.  
The    Danger    of    Wishful    Thinking    
Paul  Berman  has  written  a  beautiful  primer  on  totalitarianism—of  
the  left  and  the  right,  East  and  West—and  observed  that  it  invari-
ably  contains  a  genocidal,  and  even  suicidal,  dimension.  He  notes  
that  the  twentieth  century  was  a  great  incubator  of  "pathological  
mass  movements"—political  movements  that  "get  drunk  on  the  
idea of slaughter."
32
  He also points out that  liberal thinkers  are  often  
unable  to  recognize  these  terrors  for  what  they  are. There  is  indeed  
a  great  tradition,  in  Berman's  phrase,  of  "liberalism  as  denial."  The  
French  Socialists in the  1930s  seem  to have had a peculiar genius  for  
this style  of self-deception,  for despite the billowing clouds of unrea-
son  wafting  over  from  the  East,  they  could  not  bring  themselves  to  
believe that the Nazis posed a problem worth taking seriously. In the 
face  of the  German  menace,  they  simply  blamed  their  own  govern-
ment  and  defense  industry  for warmongering.  As  Berman  suggests,  
the  same  forces  of wishful  thinking  and  self-doubt  have  been  gath-
ering  strength   in   the  West  in   the   aftermath   of  September  11.  
Because  they  assume  that  people  everywhere  are  animated  by  the  
same  desires  and  fears, many Western  liberals  now  blame  their  own  
governments  for  the  excesses  of  Muslim  terrorists.  Many  suspect  

THE      PROBLEM      WITH      ISLAM  135  
that  we   have   somehow   heaped   this   evil  upon   our   own   heads.   
Berman  observes,  for  instance,  that  much  of  the  world  now  blames  
Israel  for  the  suicidal  derangement  of  the  Palestinians.  Rather  than  
being  an  expression  of mere anti-Semitism  (though  it  is  surely  this  
as  well),  this  view  is  the  product  of a  quaint moral  logic:  people  are  
just  people,  so  the  thinking  goes,  and they do  not behave  that badly 
unless  they  have  some  very  good  reasons.  The  excesses  of  Pales-
tinian  suicide  bombers,  therefore,  must  attest  to  the  excesses  of the 
Israeli  occupation.  Berman  points  out  that  this  sort  of thinking  has  
led the  Israelis to be frequently likened to the Nazis in the European 
press.
33
 Needless to  say, the comparison is grotesque. The truth is, as 
Dershowitz  points  out,  that  "no  other  nation  in  history  faced  with  
comparable  challenges  has  ever  adhered  to  a  higher  standard  of  
human  rights,  been  more  sensitive  to  the  safety  of  innocent  civil-
ians,  tried harder to operate under  the  rule  of law, or been willing to 
take  more  risks  for  peace."
34
  The  Israelis  have  shown  a  degree  of  
restraint  in  their  use  of  violence  that  the  Nazis  never  contemplated  
and  that,  more  to  the  point,  no  Muslim  society  would  contemplate  
today. Ask yourself, what are the chances that the  Palestinians would 
show the  same  restraint in killing Jews  if the  Jews were  a powerless 
minority  living under their  occupation  and  disposed  to  acts  of suici-
dal  terrorism?  It  would  be  no  more  likely  than  Muhammad's  flying  
to heaven  on  a  winged horse.
35  
Berman  also  takes  issue  with  Huntington's  thesis,  however,  in  
that  the  concept  of a  "civilization,"  to  his  mind,  fails  to  pick out the 
real  variable  at  issue.  Rather  than  a  clash  of civilizations,  we  have  a  
"clash  of  ideologies,"  between  "liberalism  and  the  apocalyptic  and  
phantasmagorical  movements  that  have  risen  up  against  liberal  civ-
ilization  ever  since the  calamities  of the  First World War."
36
 The dis-
tinction  appears  valid,  but unimportant. The  problem  is  that  certain  
of  our  beliefs  cannot  survive  the  proximity  of  certain  others.  War  
and  conversation  are  our  options,  and  nothing  guarantees  that  we  
will  always  have  a  choice  between  them.  
Berman  sums  up  our  situation  beautifully:  

136        THE    END    OF    FAITH    
What  have  we  needed  for  these  terrorists  to  prosper?  We  have  
needed  immense  failures  of  political  courage  and  imagination  
within  the  Muslim  world. We  have  needed  an  almost  willful  lack  
of  curiosity  about  those  failures  by  people  in  other  parts  of  the  
world—the  lack of curiosity that  allowed us  to suppose that total-
itarianism  had  been  defeated,  even  as  totalitarianism  was  reach-
ing  a  new  zenith.  We  have  needed  handsome  doses  of  wishful  
thinking—the  kind  of  simpleminded  faith  in  a  rational  world  
that,  in  its  inability  to  comprehend  reality,  sparked  the  totalitar-
ian movements  in the  first place.... We  have  needed  a  provincial  
ignorance  about  intellectual  currents  in  other  parts  of the  world.  
We  have  needed  foolish  resentments  in  Europe,  and  a  foolish  
arrogance  in  America.  We  have  needed  so  many  things!   But   
there  has  been  no  lack—every  needed  thing  has  been  here  in  
abundance.
37 
But  we  have  needed  one  more  thing  to  bring  us  precisely  to  this  
moment. We  have  needed  a  religious  doctrine,  spread  over much  of  
the  developing  world,  that  makes  sacraments  of  illiberalism,  igno-
rance,   and   suicidal   violence.   Contrary   to   Berman's   analysis,   
Islamism  is  not  merely  the  latest  flavor  of  totalitarian  nihilism.  
There  is  a  difference between  nihilism  and  a  desire  for  supernatural  
reward.  Islamists  could  smash  the  world  to  atoms  and  still  not  be  
guilty  of  nihilism,  because  everything  in  their  worldview  has  been  
transfigured by the light of paradise.  Given what  Islamists  believe,  it  
is  perfectly  rational  for  them  to  strangle  modernity  wherever  they  
can  lay  hold of it.  It is  rational,  even,  for  Muslim women  to  encour-
age the  suicides  of their children,  as  long as they are  fighting for the 
cause  of  God.  Devout  Muslims  simply  know  that  they  are  going  to  
a  better  place.  God  is  both  infinitely  powerful  and  infinitely  just.  
Why  not,  then,  delight  in  the  death  throes  of  a  sinful  world?  There  
are  other  ideologies  with  which  to  expunge  the  last  vapors  of  rea-
sonableness  from  a  society's discourse, but  Islam is  undoubtedly one 
of the best we've  got.  

THE      PROBLEM      WITH      ISLAM  137  
SECULARISTS  tend to argue that the role of Islam, or religion in gen-
eral,  is  secondary  to  that  of  politics  in  determining  the  character  of  
a  society.  On  this  account,  people  are  motivated  by  their  political  
interests  first  and  find  a  religious  rationale  to  suit  the  occasion.  No  
doubt  there  are  numerous  examples  of  political  leaders'  invoking  
religion  for  purely  pragmatic,  and  even  cynical,  reasons  (the  tenure  
of Pakistan's  Zia  ul-Haq  seems  a  good  example).  But we  should  not  
draw  the  wrong  lesson  here.  A  lever  works  only  if  it  is  attached  to  
something.  Someone,  after  all,  must  believe  in  God,  for  talk  of  God  
to  be  politically  efficacious.  And  I  take  it  to  be  more  or  less  self-
evident  that whenever  large numbers  of people  begin turning them-
selves  into  bombs,  or volunteer their children  for use  in the  clearing  
of  minefields  (as  was  widespread  in  the  Iran-Iraq  war),
38
  the  ratio-
nale behind their actions has ceased to be merely political. This is not 
to  say that the  aspiring martyr does not  relish what he imagines will 
be  the  thunderous  political  significance  of his  final  act,  but  unless  a  
person  believes  some  rather  incredible  things  about  this  universe—  
in particular,  about what happens  after death—he  is very  unlikely  to  
engage in behavior of this sort. Nothing explains the actions of Mus-
lim  extremists,  and the widespread tolerance  of their behavior in the 
Muslim  world,  better  than  the  tenets  of  Islam.  
Given what many  Muslims believe, is genuine  peace in  this world 
possible?  Is  the  relative  weakness  of  Muslim  states  the  only  thing  
that  prevents  outright  war  between  Islam  and  the  West?  I'm  afraid  
that encouraging answers to  such questions  are hard to come by. The 
basis  for liberalism in the doctrine of Islam seems meager to the point 
of  being  entirely  illusory.  Although  we  have  seen  that  the  Bible  is  
itself a  great  reservoir  of intolerance,  for  Christians  and  Jews  alike—  
as  everything  from  the  writings  of Augustine  to  the  present  actions  
of======================================================== and  sent  overseas  for  adoption.  
29
  Reports  of  honor  killings  have  been  steadily  trickling  out  of  Muslim  
countries  for  years.  For  a  recent  example,  see  N.  Banerjee,  "Rape  (and  
Silence  about  It)  Haunts  Baghdad,"  New  York  Times,  July  16,  2003. The 
UNICEF Web  site  posts  the  following  statistics:  
In  1997,  some  300  women  were  estimated  to  have  been  killed  in  the  
name  of  "honour"  in  one  province  of  Pakistan  alone.  According  to  
1999  estimates, more than  two-thirds of all  murders in  Gaza strip  and  
West  bank were  most  likely  "honour"  killings.  In  Jordan  there  are  an  
average  of  23  such murders  per  year.  
Thirty-six  "honour"  crimes  were  reported  in   Lebanon  between  
1996  and  1998,  mainly  in  small  cities  and  villages.  Reports  indicate  
that  offenders  are  often  under  18  and  that  in  their  communities  they  
are  sometimes  treated  as  heroes.  In  Yemen  as  many  as  400  "honour"  
killings  took place in  1997.  In  Egypt there were 52  reported "honour" 
crimes  in  1997.  
30
  In  the  Buddhist  tradition,  which  has  approached  the  cultivation  of  these  
states  most  systematically,  love  and  compassion  are  cultivated  alongside  
equanimity  and  sympathetic  joy  (that  is,  joy  in  the  happiness  of  others).  
Each  state  is  believed  to  balance the  others.  

NOTE    TO    PAGE    192            285            
31
  It  seems  reasonably  clear  that  not  all  people  are  equally  endowed  with  
ethical  intelligence.  In  particular,  not  all  people  are  equally  adept  at  dis­
cerning  the  link  between  their  intentions  toward  others  and  their  own  
happiness. While  it  may  seem  undemocratic  to  posit  a  hierarchy  of moral 
knowledge,  we  know  that  knowledge  cannot  be  equally  distributed  in  the  
world.  This  is  not  to  say  that  one  must  master  a  wide  body  of  facts  to  be  
moral.  Morality  may  be  more  like  chess  than  like  medicine—there  may  
be  very  few  facts  to  understand,  but  it  can  still  be  remarkably  difficult  to  
use  what  one  has  learned  impeccably.  To  assert  that  there  should  be  no  
"experts"  in  morals—as  both  Kantians  and  anti-Kantians  tend  to  do—is,  
on my account, rather like saying that there should be no experts in chess, 
perhaps  adducing  as  one's  evidence  that  every  party  to  our  discourse  can  
plainly  see  how  to  move  the  pieces. We  need  no  experts  to  tell  us  how the 
matter  stands;  nor do we  need  experts  to  tell  us  that  cruelty  is wrong.  But  
we  do  need  experts  to  tell  us  what  the  best  move  is  from  any  given  posi­
tion;  and  there  is  little  doubt  that  we  will  need  experts  to  tell  us  that  
loving  all  people,  without  distinction,  makes  one  happier  than   feeling   
preferential  love  for  one's  intimates  (if  this  is  indeed  the  case).  
Why  should  we  think  that  living  a  profoundly  ethical  life  would  be  
any  more  common  an  attainment  than  playing  brilliant   chess?  Why  
should  penetrating  insight  into  the  logical  relations  among  one's  ethical  
beliefs  be  any  easier  to  come  by  than  penetrating  insight  into  any  other  
logical  framework?  As  in  any  field,  some  cherished  intuitions  may  prove  
irreconcilable  with  some  others,  and  the  search  for  coherence  will  force  
itself  upon  us  as  a  practical  necessity.  Not  everyone  can  play  champi­
onship  chess,  and  not  everyone  can  figure  out  how  to  live  so  as  to  be  as  
happy  as  possible.  We  can  offer  heuristics  for  playing  winning  chess,  of  
course  (secure  the  middle  of  the  board,  keep  good  pawn  structure,  etc.);  
and  we  can  offer  heuristics  for bringing ethical  truths  to  light  (Kant's  cat­
egorical  imperative,  Rawls'  "original  position,"  etc.).  The  fact  that  not  
every  last one  of us  sees the point  of them  does not cast doubt upon  their  
usefulness.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  relations  among  our  ethical  pre­
cepts   and   intuitions   admit   of  deeper   insights,   requiring   greater   and   
greater  intellectual  capacities  on  the  part  of  all  of us  to  comprehend  and,  
comprehending,  to be inspired to practice. Here,  I think, the greatest  dif­
ference  among  persons  is  to  be  found  (along  with  the  greatest  difference  
between  the  ethical  and  the  epistemic  spheres),  since  any  insight  into  
ethical  normativity  must  lay  claim  to  our  emotions  in  order  to  become  
effective.  Once  he  has  understood  that  π  is  the  ratio  of  a  circle's  circum-

286          NOTES    TO    PAGES    192-198    
ference  to  its  diameter,  not  even  the  most  libertine  geometer  will  feel  
tempted  to  compute  a  circle's  area  using  another  measure.  When  a  per-
son  sees that it is generally wrong to lie,  however, this normative ground, 
once  conquered,  must  be  secured  by  feeling.  He  must  feel  that  lying  is  
beneath  him—that  it  is  tending  to  lead  him  away  from  happiness—and  
such  a  conversion  of moral  sentiments  seems  to  require  more  than  mere  
conceptual understanding. But then,  so do certain kinds of reasoning.  See  
A.  Damasio,  Descartes'  Error.  Emotion,  Reason,  and  the  Human  Brain  
(New York: Avon  Books,  1994).  
Put  this  way,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  two  people  who  both  have  learned  
that  lying  is  not  conducive  to  happiness  may  differ  considerably  in  the  
depth  to  which  they  feel  this  proposition  to  be  true,  and  therefore  in  the  
degree  to  which  they   feel  obliged  to  conform  to  it  in  their  actions.  
Instances  of  discrepancy  between  belief  and  action  in  the  moral  sphere  
are  legion:  it  is  one  thing  to  think  it  "wrong"  that  people  are  starving  
elsewhere  in  the  world;  it  is  another  to  find  this  as  intolerable  as  one  
would  if these people were one's  friends. There  may,  in  fact,  be  no  ethical  
justification  for  all  of  us  fortunate  people  to  carry  on  with  our  business  
while other  people  starve  (see  P.  Unger,  Living  High  &  Letting  Die:  Our  
Illusion  of Innocence  [Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1996]).  It  may  be  that  
a  clear  view  of  the  matter—that  is,  a  clear  view  of  the  dynamics  of  our  
own   happiness—would   oblige   us   to   work   tirelessly   to   alleviate  the  
hunger of every last stranger as though it were our own. On  this  account,  
how  could  one  go  to  the  movies  and  remain  ethical?  One  couldn't.  One  
would  simply  be  taking  a  vacation  from  one's  ethics.  
32
  60  Minutes,  Sept.  26,  2002.  
33
 That  these men  are being held  indefinitely,  without  access  to  legal  coun-
sel,  should be genuinely troubling to  us,  however.  See  R.  Dworkin,  "Ter-
ror  and  the  Attack  on  Civil  Liberties,"  New  York  Review  of  Books,  Nov.  
6,  2003, pp. 37-41,  for a  fine analysis  of the  legal and  ethical  issues  here.  
34
 It  seems to me that we  can  stop  this  inquisitorial  slide by  recourse to  the  
"perfect weapon"  argument  presented  in  chapter 4. There  is  a  difference,  
after all, between intending  to  inflict  suffering on  an  innocent  person  and  
inflicting  it  by  accident.  To  include  a  suspected  terrorist's  family  among  
the instruments  of torture  would  be  a  flagrant  violation  of this  principle.  
35
 Quoted  in  Glover,  Humanity,  55.  
36
  I  suspect that  if our  media  did  not  censor the  more  disturbing  images  of  
war, our moral sentiments would  receive a  correction  on  two  fronts:  first,  
we  would  be  more  motivated  by the  horrors  visited  upon  us  by  our  ene-

NOTES    TO    PAGES   199-202          287          
mies:  seeing  Daniel  Pearl  decapitated,  for  instance,  would  have  surely  
provoked  a  level  of  national  outrage  that  did  not  arise  in  the  absence  of  
such  imagery.  Second,  if we  did  not  conceal  the  horrible  reality  of collat-
eral  damage  from  ourselves,  we  would  be  far  less  likely  to  support  the  
dropping of "dumb" bombs, or even "smart"  ones. While our newspapers 
and  newscasts  would  be  horrible  to  look  at,  I  believe  we  would  feel  both  
greater  urgency  and  greater  restraint  in  our  war on  terrorism.  
37
 See J.  D. Greene et al.,  "An  fMRI  Investigation  of Emotional Engagement 
in  Moral  Judgment,"  Science  293  (Sept.  14,  2001):  2105-8;  and  J.  D.  
Greene, "From  Neural 'Is'  to Moral 'Ought': What Are  the  Moral Impli-
cations  of  Neuroscientific  Moral  Psychology?"  Nature  Reviews  Neuro-
science 4  (2003): 846-49. 
38
  For  an  illuminating  account  of  the  use  of "coercion"  by  U.S.  and  Israeli  
interrogators,  see  M.  Bowden,  "The  Dark Art  of  Interrogation,"  Atlantic  
Monthly,  March  2003,  pp.  51-77.  
39
 Many  flavors  of  pacifism  can  be  found  in  the  philosophical  literature.  I  
am considering here  what is  often  called "absolute" pacifism—that  is, the 
belief  that  violence  is  never  morally  acceptable,  whether  in  self-defense  
or  on  behalf of others. This  is  the  sort  of pacifism  that  Gandhi  practiced,  
and  it  is  the  only  form  that  seems  to  carry  with  it  pretensions  of moral 
impregnability. 
40
 Am  I saying that overt opposition to a wrong is the ethical standard?  Yes,  
when  the  stakes  are  high,  I  think  that  it  is.  One  can  always  make  the  
argument  that  covert  resistance  in  particularly  dangerous  situations—  
where  open  opposition  would  be  to  forfeit  one's  life—is  the  best  possible  
course.  Those  remarkable  men  and  women  who  hid  Jews======================================================== bombing  also  entails  sui-
cide,  of course,  which  most  Muslims  believe  is  expressly  forbidden  
by  God.  Consequently,  had  the  question  been  "Is  it  ever justified  to  
target  civilians  in  defense  of  Islam,"  we  could  expect  even  greater  
Muslim  support  for  terrorism.  
But the  Pew results  are actually bleaker than the above table indi-
cates. A closer look at the data reveals that the pollsters  skewed their 
results  by  binning  the  responses  "rarely justified"  and  "never justi-
fied"  together,  thus  giving  a  false  sense  of  Muslim  pacifism.  Take  
another look at the data from Jordan: 43  percent of Jordanians appar-
ently  favor  terrorism,  while  48  percent  do  not.  The  problem,  how-
ever,  is  that  22  percent  of  Jordanians  actually  responded  "rarely  
justified,"  and  this  accounts  for nearly  half of their "No"  responses.  
"Rarely justified"  still means that under certain circumstances, these 
respondents  would  sanction  the  indiscriminate  murder  of  noncom-

126         THE   END    OF   FAITH   
batants  (plus  suicide),  not  as  an  accidental  by-product  of  a  military  
operation  but  as  its  intended  outcome.  A  more  accurate  picture  of  
Muslim  tolerance  for terrorism  emerges  when  we  focus  on  the  per-
centage  of  respondents  who  could  not  find  it  in  their  hearts  to  say  
"never justified"  (leaving aside the many people who  still  lurk in the 
shadows  of  "Don't  Know/Refused").  If  we  divide  the  data  in  this  
way, the sun  of modernity  sets  even  further over the  Muslim world: 
SUICIDE  BOMBING  IN  DEFENSE  OF  ISLAM  
Is  It  Ever  justifiable?  
Lebanon 
Ivory  Coast  
Nigeria 
Jordan 
Bangladesh 
Mali 
Senegal 
Ghana 
Indonesia 
Uganda 
Pakistan 
Turkey 
YES 
82 
73 
66 
65 
58 
54 
47 
44 
43 
40 
38 
20 
No 
12 
2
7 
26 
26 
23 
35 
50 
43 
54 
52 
38 
64 
DK/REFUSED 
6 
0 
8 
8 
19 
11 
3 
12 
3 
8 
23 
14 
These  are  hideous  numbers.  If  all  Muslims  had  responded  as  
Turkey  did  (where  a  mere  4  percent  think  suicide  bombings  are  
"often" justified,  9 percent "sometimes," and 7 percent "rarely"), we 
would  still  have  a  problem  worth  worrying  about;  we  would,  after  
all,  be  talking  about  more  than  200  million  avowed  supporters  of  
terrorism.  But  Turkey  is  an  island  of  ambassadorial  goodwill  com-
pared with  the  rest  of  the  Muslim  world.  
Let us imagine that peace one day comes to the Middle  East. What 
will  Muslims   say   of  the   suicide   bombings  that  they   so  widely  
endorsed? Will they  say,  "We were driven mad by the  Israeli  occupa-
tion"?  Will  they  say,  "We  were  a  generation  of  sociopaths"?  How  

THE    PROBLEM   WITH    ISLAM          127          
will  they  account  for  the  celebrations  that  followed  these  "sacred  
explosions"?  A  young  man,  born  into  relative  privilege,  packs  his  
clothing  with  explosives  and  ball  bearings  and  unmakes  himself  
along  with  a  score  of  children  in  a  discotheque,  and  his  mother  is  
promptly congratulated by hundreds  of her neighbors. What will the 
Palestinians  think  about  such  behavior  once  peace  has  been  estab-
lished? If they are  still devout Muslims here is what they must think: 
"Our  boys  are  in  paradise,  and they have  prepared  the way  for  us  to  
follow.  Hell  has  been  prepared  for the  infidels."  It  seems  to  me  to  be  
an  almost  axiomatic  truth  of human  nature  that  no  peace,  should  it  
ever  be  established,  will  survive  beliefs  of this  sort  for very long. 
We must not  overlook  the  fact that  a  significant percentage of the 
world's  Muslims  believe that the men who brought  down the World 
Trade  Center  are  now  seated  at  the  right  hand  of God,  amid  "rivers  
of  purest  water,  and  rivers  of  milk  forever  fresh;  rivers  of  wine  
delectable  to  those  that  drink  it,  and  rivers  of  clearest  honey"  
(47:15). These  men—who  slit  the  throats  of stewardesses  and deliv-
ered  young  couples  with  their  children  to  their  deaths  at  five  hun-
dred  miles  per  hour—are  at present  being "attended  by  boys  graced  
with  eternal  youth"  in  a  "kingdom  blissful  and  glorious." They  are  
"arrayed   in  garments   of   fine   green   silk   and   rich   brocade,   and   
adorned with  bracelets  of silver"  (76:15). The  list  of their perquisites 
is  long.  But what  is  it that gets  a martyr out  of bed early  on  his  last  
day among the  living?  Did any  of the  nineteen  hijackers make haste 
to Allah's  garden  simply to  get his  hands  on  his allotment of silk?  It  
seems  doubtful. The  irony  here  is  almost  a  miracle  in  its  own  right:  
the  most  sexually  repressive  people  found  in  the  world  today—  
people who  are  stirred  to  a  killing  rage  by  reruns  of  Baywatch—are  
lured  to  martyrdom  by  a  conception  of  paradise  that  resembles  
nothing  so  much  as  an  al  fresco  bordello.
20  
Apart  from  the  terrible  ethical  consequences  that  follow  from  this  
style  of otherworldliness,  we  should  observe just how  deeply implau-
sible the Koranic paradise is. For a seventh-century prophet to say that 
paradise is a garden, complete with  rivers  of milk and honey, is rather 

128         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
like  a twenty-first-century  prophet's  saying  that  it  is  a  gleaming  city  
where  every  soul  drives  a  new  Lexus.  A  moment's  reflection  should  
reveal  that  such  pronouncements  suggest  nothing  at  all  about  the  
afterlife  and much indeed about the limits  of the human imagination. 
Jihad   and   the   Power   of   the   Atom   
For  devout  Muslims,  religious  identity  seems  to  trump  all  others.  
Despite  the  occasional  influence  of  Pan-Arabism,  the  concept  of  an  
ethnic  or national  identity  has  never  taken  root  in  the  Muslim  world  
as  it  has  in  the  West.  The  widespread  support  for  Saddam  Hussein  
among  Muslims,  in  response  to  the American  attack  upon  Iraq,  is  as  
good  a  way  as  any  of calibrating the  reflexivity  of Muslim  solidarity.  
Saddam Hussein was, as both a secularist and a tyrant, widely despised 
in the Muslim world prior to the American invasion; and yet the  reac-
tion of most Muslims revealed that  no matter what his crimes against 
the  Iraqi  people,  against  the  Kuwaitis,  and  against  the  Iranians,  the  
idea  of  an  army  of  infidels  occupying  Baghdad  simply  could  not  be  
countenanced,  no  matter  what  humanitarian  purpose  it  might  serve.  
Saddam may have tortured and  killed more  Muslims than  any person 
in  living memory, but the Americans  are  the  "enemies  of God." 
It  is  important  to  keep the  big picture  in  view,  because the  details,  
being  absurd  to  an  almost  crystalline  degree,  are  truly  meaningless.  
In our dialogue with  the  Muslim  world, we  are  confronted by people 
who hold beliefs  for which there is no rational justification and which 
therefore  cannot even be  discussed,  and yet  these  are  the very  beliefs  
that underlie many of the  demands they  are  likely  to  make  upon  us.  
It  should  be  of  particular  concern  to  us  that  the  beliefs  of  Mus-
lims  pose  a  special  problem  for  nuclear  deterrence.  There  is  little  
possibility  of  our  having  a  cold  war  with  an  Islamist  regime  armed  
with  long-range  nuclear  weapons.  A  cold  war  requires  that  the  par-
ties  be mutually deterred by the  threat  of death.  Notions  of martyr-
dom  and jihad run  roughshod  over  the  logic that  allowed the  United  

THE     PROBLEM    WITH     ISLAM             129             
States  and  the  Soviet Union  to  pass  half a  century  perched,  more  or  
less  stably,  on  the  brink  of  Armageddon.  What  will  we  do  if  an  
Islamist  regime,  which  grows  dewy-eyed  at  the  mere  mention  of  
paradise,  ever  acquires  long-range  nuclear  weaponry?  If  history  is  
any  guide,  we  will  not  be  sure  about  where  the  offending  warheads  
are  or  what  their  state  of  readiness  is,  and  so  we  will  be  unable  to  
rely  on  targeted,  conventional  weapons  to  destroy  them.  In  such  
a  situation,  the  only  thing  likely  to  ensure  our  survival  may  be  a  
nuclear  first  strike  of  our  own.  Needless  to  say,  this  would  be  an  
unthinkable  crime—as  it  would  kill  tens  of  millions  of  innocent  
civilians  in  a  single  day—but  it  may  be  the  only  course  of  action  
available  to  us,  given  what  Islamists  believe.  How  would  such  an  
unconscionable  act  of  self-defense  be  perceived  by  the  rest  of  the  
Muslim  world?  It  would  likely  be  seen  as  the  first  incursion  of  a  
genocidal  crusade. The horrible  irony here  is  that  seeing  could  make  
it  so:  this  very  perception  could  plunge  us  into  a  state  of  hot  war  
with any Muslim  state that had the  capacity to pose  a nuclear threat 
of  its  own.  All  of  this  is  perfectly  insane,  of  course:  I  have  just  
described  a  plausible  scenario  in  which  much  of the  world's  popula-
tion  could be annihilated on  account of religious ideas that belong on 
the  same  shelf with  Batman,  the  philosopher's  stone,  and  unicorns.  
That it would be a horrible absurdity for so many  of us  to die for the 
sake  of  myth  does  not  mean,  however,  that  it  could  not  happen.  
Indeed,  given  the  immunity  to  all  reasonable  intrusions  that  faith  
enjoys  in our  discourse,  a catastrophe  of this  sort seems increasingly 
likely. We must come to terms with the possibility that men who are 
every bit as zealous  to  die as the  nineteen  hijackers may one day get 
their  hands  on  long-range  nuclear======================================================== Druyan.   Shadows  of  Forgotten  Ancestors.  New  York:  Random  
House, 1992. 
Said,  E. W. "The  Clash  of Ignorance."  Nation, Oct. 4,  2001.  
——.      "Suicidal Ignorance."  CounterPunch,  Nov.  18,  2001.  
——.       "An  Unacceptable  Helplessness."  Al-Ahram,  Jan.  16-22,  2003.  
——.      "A Monumental  Hypocricy."  CounterPunch,  Feb.  15,  2003.  
Santayana,  G.  Skepticism  and  Animal  Faith:  Introduction  to  a  System  of  Philosophy.  
New York: Dover, 1923. 
——.      Persons  and Places.  Cambridge: MIT Press,  1963.  
Sartre,  J.  P.  The  Transcendence  of  the  Ego: An  Existentialist  Theory  of  Consciousness.  
Translated by  F. Williams and  R. Kirkpatrick. New York:  Hill and Wang, 1937. 
——.      Being and Nothingness.  Translated by H.  E. Barnes.  1956;  reprint, New York: 
Gramercy  Books,  1994.  
Saxe,  R., and N. Kanwisher. "People Thinking about Thinking People: The Role of the 
Temporo-parietal  Junction  in Theory  of  Mind.'"  Neuolmage  19  (2003):  1835-42.  
Scalia, A. "God's Justice and Ours."  First Things, May  2002, pp. 17-21. 
Schell,  J.  The  Fate  of the  Earth.  New York: Alfred A.  Knopf,  1982.  
——.       The  Unfinished  Twentieth  Century.  London:  Verso,  2001.  
Schilpp,  P.  A.,  ed.  The  Philosophy  of  Bertrand  Russell.  La  Salle,  Ill.:  Open  Court,  
1944. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY          327          
——,       ed.  Albert  Einstein:  Philosopher-Scientist.  London:  Cambridge  Univ.  Press,  
1949. 
Schlosser,  E.  Reefer  Madness:  Sex,  Drugs,  and  Cheap  Labor  in  the  American  Black  
Market.  Boston:  Houghton  Mifflin,  2003.  
Schneewind, J. B. "What Has Moral Philosophy Done for Us ... Lately?'' Undated MS. 
Scholem,  G. Kabbalah. New York: Dorsette  Press,  1974.  
Schooler,  J.  W.,  and  J.  Melcher.  "The  Ineffability  of Insight."  In  The  Creative  Cogni-
tion Approach, ed. S. M. Smith, T. B. Ward, and R. A. Finke. Cambridge: MIT Press, 
1995. 
Schopenhauer,  A.  Essays  and Aphorisms.  Edited  and  translated  by  R.  J.  Hollingdale.  
London: Penguin  Books,  1970.  
Schrödinger,  E.  My   View  of  the   World.  Translated  by  C.  Hastings.  Woodbridge,  
Conn.: Ox Bow Press, 1961. 
——.        What  Is  Life,  Mind  and  Matter  and  Autobiographical  Sketches.  Cambridge:  
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1967. 
Searle,  J.  R.  The  Rediscovery  of  the  Mind.  Cambridge:  MIT  Press,  1992.  
——.      The  Construction  of  Social  Reality.  New York:  Free  Press,  1995.  
——.      "Consciousness  and the  Philosophers."  New  York  Review  of Books,  March  6,  
1997, pp. 43-50. 
——.      The  Mystery  of  Consciousness.  New York:  New  York  Review  Books,  1997.  
——.       "Consciousness."  Annual  Review  of  Neuroscience  23  (2000):  557-78.  
——.      "Further  Reply  to  Libet."  Journal  of  Consciousness  Studies  8,  no.  8  (2001):  
63-65. 
——.     "Free Will  as  a  Problem in  Neurobiology."  2001  MS.  
Sereny,  G.  Into  That  Darkness:  An  Examination  of  Conscience.  New  York:  Vintage,  
1974. 
Shabkar,  Lama.  Flight of the  Garuda. Translated  E.  P. Kunsang. Katmandu: Rangjung 
Yeshe Publications, 1986. 
——.      The  Life  of Shabkar. Translated  by  Matthieu  Ricard. Albany:  State  Univ.  of  
New York Press,  1994.  
Shafir,  E.,  and A. Tversky  "Decision  Making."  In  An  Invitation  to  Cognitive  Science:  
Thinking, ed.  E. E. Smith and D.  N. Osherson. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995. 
Shankaracharya.  The  Crest-Jewel  of  Discrimination.  Translated  by  Swami  Prabha-
vananda and  C.  Isherwood.  Hollywood,  Calif.: Vedanta  Press,  1947.  
——.       Self-knowledge.  Translated  and  edited  by  Swami  Nikhilananda.  Mylapore,  
Madras:  Sri  Ramakrishna  Math,  1987.  
Shattuck,  R.  Forbidden  Knowledge: From  Prometheus  to  Pornography.  New York:  St.  
Martin's  Press, 1996. 
Sheldrake,  R.  Seven  Experiments  That  Could  Change  the  World.  New  York:  River-
head Books, 1995. 
——.        The  Sense  of  Being  Stared  At,  and  Other  Aspects  of  the  Extended  Mind.  
New York: Crown, 2003. 

328            BIBLIOGRAPHY            
Sheldrake,  R.,  T.  McKenna,  and  R. Abraham.  The  Evolutionary  Mind:  Trialogues  at  
the  Edge  of  the  Unthinkable.  Santa  Cruz,  Calif.:  Trialogue  Press,  1998.  
Shoemaker,  S.  "Self-reference  and  Self-awareness."  Journal  of Philosophy  65  (1968):  
——.       "Functionalism  and  Qualia."  In  The  Nature  of  Mind,  ed.  D.  Rosenthal.  
Oxford: Oxford Univ.  Press, 1991. 
Simon,  H.  A.  "What  Is  'Explanation'  of  Behavior?"  Psychological  Science  3  (1992):  
150-61. 
Simons, D. J., C. F. Chabris, T. Schnur, D. T. Levin. "Evidence for Preserved Represen-
tations  in  Change  Blindness."  Consciousness  and  Cognition  11  (2002):  78-97.  
Singer,  P.  Writings  on  an  Ethical  Life.  New York:  Ecco Press,  2000.  
Singer, W.  "Striving  for  Coherence."  Nature 397  (Feb. 4,1999): 391-93. 
Sluga,  H.  "'Whose  House  Is  That?':  Wittgenstein  on  the  Self."  In  The  Cambridge  
Companion  to  Wittgenstein,  ed.  H.  Sluga  and  D.  G.  Stern.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  
Univ. Press, 1996. 
Smith, D. W. "The Structure of  (Self-)  Consciousness."  Topoi 5  (1986): 149-56. 
Smith,  E.  E.  "Concepts  and  Categorization."  In  An  Invitation  to  Cognitive  Science:  
Thinking, ed. E.  E. Smith and D. N. Osherson. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995. 
Smith,  G.  H.  Atheism:  The  Case  against  God.  Buffalo:  Prometheus  Books,  1979.  
Spence,  S. A., and  C.  D.  Frith.  "Towards  a  Functional Anatomy  of Volition." Journal 
of  Consciousness  Studies  6,  no.  8-9  (1999):  11-29.  
Sperry,  R. W. "Cerebral Organization and Behavior."  Science  133  (1961): 1749-57. 
——.        "A   Powerful   Paradigm   Made   Stronger."   Neuropsychologia   36   (1998):   
1063-68. 
Sperry,  R. W., D. Zaidel, and D. Zaidel. "Self Recognition and Social Awareness in the 
Deconnected  Minor  Hemisphere."  Neuropsychologia  17  (1979):  153-66.  
Squire,  L.  R., and  E.  R.  Kandel.  Memory: From  Mind  to  Molecules.  New York:  Scien-
tific American  Library,  2000.  
Squires,  E.  J.  "Quantum Theory  and  the  Need  for  Consciousness."  Journal  of  Con-
sciousness  Studies  1, no.  2  (1994):  201-4.  
Stanovich,  K.  E., and R.  F. West.  "Individual Differences in Rational Thought." Jour-
nal  of  Experimental  Psychology:  General  127  (1998):  161-88.  
Stcherbatsky, T.  The  Buddhist  Conception  of Nirvana.  Delhi: Motilal  Banarsidas, 1968. 
Stevenson,  I.  Twenty  Cases  Suggestive  of Reincarnation.  Charlottesville:  Univ.  Press  
of Virginia,  1974.  
——.        Unlearned   Language:  New   Studies   in   Xenoglossy.  Charlottesville:  Univ.  
Press  of Virginia,  1984.  
——.       Where  Reincarnation  and  Biology  Intersect.  Westport,  Conn.:  Praeger,  1997.  
Storr,  A.  Feet  of  Clay:  Saints,  Sinners,  and  Madmen:  A  Study  of  Gurus.  New  York:  
Free Press, 1996. 
Stroud,  B.  The  Significance  of  Philosophical  Scepticism.  Oxford:  Clarendon  Press,  
1984. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY            329            
Swain,  J.  The  Pleasures  of  the  Torture  Chamber.  New York:  Dorset  Press,  1931.  
Swinburne,  R.  The  Existence  of God.  Oxford:  Clarendon  Press,  1979.  
Tarnas,  R.  The  Passion  of  the  Western  Mind.  New York: Harmony  Books,  1991.  
Taylor,  E.  William  fames  on  Consciousness  beyond  the  Margin.  Princeton:  Princeton  
Univ. Press, 1996. 
Teilhard de  Chardin,  P.  Toward  the  Future. Translated by  R.  Hague.  New York: Har-
court  Brace Jovanovich,  1973.  
Tenzin  Gyatzo  (Dalai  Lama).  The  Buddha  Nature:  Death  and  Eternal  Soul  in  Bud-
dhism.  Woodside,  Calif.:  Bluestar  Communications,  1996.  
——.        Sleeping,  Dreaming,  and  Dying:  An  Exploration  of  Consciousness  with  the  
Dalai Lama.  Edited by F. J. Varela. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1997. 
Thompson-Schill,  S.  L.,  G.  K.  Aguirre,  M.  D'Esposito,  and  M.  J.  Farah.  "A  Neural  
Basis  for  Category  and  Modality  Specificity  of  Semantic  Knowledge."  Neuropsy-
chologia  37  (1999):  671-76.  
Thorne,  K.  S.  Black  Holes  and Time  Warps:  Einstein's  Outrageous  Legacy.  New York: 
W. W. Norton, 1994. 
Tillich,  P.  Dynamics  of Faith.  New York:  Harper and  Row,  1957.  
——.      A  History  of  Christian  Thought.  New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1967.  
Tipler,  F.  The  Physics  of Immortality.  New  York:  Doubleday,  1994.  
Tononi, G., and G.  M.  Edelman. "Consciousness and Complexity." Science's  Compass  
282  (Dec. 4,1998): 1846-51. 
Trachtenberg,  J.  The  Devil  and  the Jews:  The  Medieval  Conception  of  the  Jew  and  Its  
Relation  to  Modern  Anti-Semitism.  Philadelphia:  Jewish  Publication  Society,  1943.  
Trevena, J. A., and J.  Miller.  "Cortical Movement Preparation before and after a Con-
scious  Decision  to  Move."  Consciousness  and  Cognition  11  (2002):  162-90.  
Tsele  Natsok  Rangdrol.  The  Lamp  of  Mahamudra.  Translated  by  E.  P.  Kunsang.  
Boston: Shambhala,  1989.  
——.       The  Mirror  of  Mindfulness:  The  Cycle  of  the  Four  Bardos.  Translated  by  E.  
P. Kunsang. Boston: Shambhala, 1989. 
——.      The  Circle  of  the  Sun.  Translated  by  E.  P.  Kunsang.  Hong  Kong:  Rangjung  
Yeshe Publications,  1990.  
——.       Empowerment  and  the  Path  of  Liberation.  Translated  by  E.  P.  Kunsang.  
Hong Kong: Rangjung Yeshe Publications, 1993. 
——.      The  Heart of the  Matter. Translated by E.  P. Kunsang. Hong Kong: Rangjung 
Yeshe Publications,  1996.  
Tuan,  Y.  Segmented  Worlds  and  Self:  Group  Life  and  Individual  Consciousness.  Min-
neapolis: Univ. of Minnesota  Press, 1982. 
Tversky, A.  "Features  of Similarity."  Psychological  Review  84  (1977): 327-52. 
Tye,  M.  Ten  Problems  of  Consciousness:  A  Representational  Theory  of  the  Phenom-
enal Mind.  Cambridge:  MIT  Press,  1995.  
U  Ba  Khin.  The======================================================== their 
experience,  that would demonstrate the  falsity  of many  of their  core  
beliefs. This  proves  that  these  beliefs  are  not  born  of any  examina-
tion  of the  world,  or  of the  world  of their  experience.  (They  are,  in  
Karl  Popper's  sense,  "unfalsifiable.")  It  appears  that  even  the  Holo-
caust did not lead most Jews  to doubt the  existence  of an omnipotent 

THE    NATURE    OF    BELIEF          67          
and  benevolent  God.  If  having  half  of  your  people  systematically  
delivered  to  the   furnace  does  not  count  as  evidence  against  the  
notion  that  an  all-powerful  God  is  looking  out  for  your  interests,  it  
seems  reasonable  to  assume  that nothing  could.  How  does  the mul-
lah  know  that  the  Koran  is  the  verbatim  word  of  God?  The  only  
answer  to  be  given  in  any  language  that  does  not  make  a  mockery  
of the  word  "know"  is—he  doesn't.  
A man's  faith  is just a subset of his  beliefs about the world: beliefs 
about  matters  of  ultimate  concern  that  we,  as  a  culture,  have  told  
him  he  need  not justify  in  the  present.  It  is  time  we  recognized just 
how maladaptive this  Balkanization  of our discourse has  become. All 
pretensions  to  theological  knowledge  should  now  be  seen  from  the  
perspective  of  a  man  who  was  just  beginning  his  day  on  the  one  
hundredth   floor   of   the   World   Trade   Center   on   the   morning   
of  September  11,  2001,  only  to  find  his  meandering  thoughts—  
of family  and  friends,  of errands  run  and unrun,  of coffee  in  need  of  
sweetener—inexplicably  usurped  by  a  choice  of  terrible  starkness  
and  simplicity: between  being burned  alive by jet  fuel  or leaping one 
thousand  feet  to  the  concrete  below.  In  fact,  we  should  take  the  per-
spective  of thousands  of  such  men,  women,  and  children  who were 
robbed  of  life,  far  sooner  than  they  imagined  possible,  in  absolute  
terror  and  confusion.  The  men  who  committed  the  atrocities  of  
September 11  were certainly not  "cowards," as they were  repeatedly  
described in  the Western  media,  nor were they  lunatics  in  any  ordi-
nary  sense.  They  were  men  of  faith—perfect  faith,  as  it  turns  out—  
and  this,  it must  finally  be  acknowledged,  is  a terrible thing  to  be.  
I   AM  CERTAIN  that  such  a summary  dismissal  of religious  faith  will  
seem  callous  to  many  readers,  particularly  those  who  have  known  
its  comforts  at  first  hand.  But  the  fact  that  unjustified  beliefs  can  
have  a  consoling  influence  on  the  human  mind  is  no  argument  in  
their  favor.  If  every  physician  told  his  terminally  ill  patients  that  
they  were  destined  for  a  complete  recovery,  this  might  also  set  

68         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
many  of their  minds  at  ease,  but  at  the  expense  of  the  truth. Why 
should  we  be  concerned  about  the  truth?  This  question  awaits  its  
Socrates.  For  our  purposes,  we  need  only  observe  that  the  truth  is  
of  paramount  concern  to  the  faithful  themselves;  indeed,  the  truth  
of  a  given  doctrine  is  the  very  object  of  their  faith.  The  search  for  
comfort  at  the  expense  of  truth  has  never  been  a  motive  for  reli-
gious  belief,  since  all  creeds  are  chock-full  of  terrible  proposals,  
which  are  no  comfort  to  anyone  and  which  the  faithful  believe,  
despite the  pain it  causes  them,  for  fear  of leaving  some  dark corner 
of  reality  unacknowledged.  
The  faithful,  in  fact,  hold truth  in  the highest  esteem. And in  this  
sense  they  are  identical  to  most  philosophers  and  scientists.  People  
of faith  claim nothing less than  knowledge  of sacred, redeeming, and 
metaphysical truths:  Christ  died for  your  sins;  He  is  the  Son  of God; 
All  human  beings  have  souls  that  will  be  subject  to  judgment  after  
death.  These are  specific claims about the way the world is. It is only 
the  notion that  a  doctrine  is  in  accord with  reality  at  large  that  ren-
ders  a person's faith useful, redemptive,  or, indeed, logically possible, 
for  faith in  a  doctrine  is  faith in  its  truth. What  else but the truth of 
a  given  teaching  could  convince  its  adherents  of the  illegitimacy  of  
all others ? Heretical doctrines are deemed so, and accorded a healthy 
measure  of disdain,  for no  other  reason than that they  are presumed 
to  be  false.  Thus,  if  a  Christian  made  no  tacit  claims  of  knowledge  
with regard to the literal truth of scripture, he would be just as much 
a  Muslim,  or  a  Jew—or  an  atheist—as  a  follower  of  Christ.  If  he  
were to  discover  (by  some  means  that he  acknowledged to be incon-
trovertible)  that Christ had actually been born of sin and died like an 
animal,  these  revelations  would  surely  deliver  a  deathblow  to  his  
faith. The  faithful  have  never  been  indifferent  to  the  truth;  and  yet,  
the  principle  of  faith  leaves  them  unequipped  to  distinguish  truth  
from  falsity  in  matters  that  most  concern  them.  
The  faithful  can  be  expected  to  behave  just  like  their  secular  
neighbors—which is to  say, more or  less  rationally—in their worldly 
affairs. When  making  important  decisions,  they  tend  to  be  as  atten-

THE    NATURE    OF    BELIEF          69          
tive  to  evidence  and  to  its  authentication  as  any  unbeliever.  While  
Jehovah's  Witnesses  refusing  blood  transfusions,  or  Christian  Scien-
tists  forgoing  modern  medicine  altogether,  may  appear  to  be  excep-
tions  to  this   rule,  they  are  not.  Such  people  are  merely  acting  
rationally  within  the  framework  of  their  religious  beliefs.  After  all,  
no  mother  who  refuses  medicine  for  her  child  on  religious  grounds  
believes  that  prayer  is  merely  a  consoling  cultural  practice.  Rather,  
she  believes  that  her  ultimate  salvation  demands  certain  displays  of  
confidence  in the  power and  attentiveness  of God,  and  this  is  an  end  
toward which  she is willing to pledge even the  life of her child as col-
lateral.  Such apparently unreasonable behavior is  often  in the  service  
of  reason,  since  it  aims  at  the  empirical  authentication  of  religious  
doctrine.  In  fact, even the most extreme expressions  of faith are  often  
perfectly  rational,  given  the  requisite  beliefs. Take the  snake-dancing  
Pentecostals as the most colorful example: in an  effort to demonstrate 
both  their  faith  in  the  literal  word  of  the  Bible  (in  this  case  Mark  
16:18)  and its  truth,  they  "take  up  serpents"  (various  species  of rat-
tlesnakes)  and  "drink  any  deadly  thing"  (generally  strychnine)  and  
test  prophecy  ("it  shall  not  hurt  them")  to  their  heart's  content.  
Some  of  them  die  in  the  process,  of  course,  as  did  their  founder,  
George  Hensley  (of  snake  bite,  in  1955)—proof,  we  can  be  sure,  not  
of  the  weakness  of  their  faith  but  of  the  occasional  efficacy  of  rat-
tlesnake venom  and  strychnine  as  poisons.  
Which  beliefs  one  takes  to  be  foundational  will   dictate  what  
seems  reasonable  at  any  given  moment. When  the  members  of  the  
"Heaven's Gate" cult  failed to  spot the  spacecraft they knew must be 
trailing  the  comet  Hale-Bopp,  they  returned  the  $4,000  telescope  
they  had bought  for  this  purpose,  believing  it  to  be  defective.  
WHERE  faith  really  pays  its  dividends,  however,  is  in  the  conviction  
that  the  future  will  be  better  than  the  past,  or  at  least  not  worse.  
Consider the  celebrated opinion  of Julian  of Norwich  (ca. 1342-1413), 
who  distilled  the  message  of the  Gospels  in  the  memorable  sentence  

70  THE      END      OF      FAITH      
"All  shall be well,  and all  shall  be well,  and all manner  of thing  shall  
be well." The allure of most  religious doctrines is nothing more sub-
lime  or  inscrutable  than  this:  things  will  turn  out  well  in  the  end.  
Faith is  offered as  a means by which the truth of this proposition  can  
be  savored  in  the  present  and  secured  in  the  future.  It  is,  I  think,  
indisputable  that  the  actual  existence  of  such  a  mechanism,  the fact 
that  uttering  a  few words  and  eating  a  cracker  is  an  effective  means  
of  redemption,  the  certainty  that  God  is  watching,  listening,  and  
waiting  to  bestow  his  blessings  upon  one  and  all—in  short,  the  lit-
eral correspondence  of doctrine with  reality  itself—is  of sole  impor-
tance  to  the  faithful.  
The  amazing  pestilence  reached  Paris  that  June  [of  1348],  and  
it  was  to  afflict  the  city  for  a  year  and  a  half...  .  
King Philip  [VI]  asked the medical faculty of the University of 
Paris  for  an  explanation  of  the  disaster.  The  professors  reported  
that  a  disturbance  in the  skies  had  caused  the  sun  to  overheat the 
oceans  near  India,  and  the  waters  had  begun  to  give  off  noxious  
vapors.  The  medical  faculty  offered  a  variety  of  remedies.  Broth  
would  help,  for  example,  if  seasoned  with  ground  pepper,  ginger,  
and  cloves.  Poultry,  water  fowl,  young  pork  and  fatty  meat  in  
general  were  to  be  avoided.  Olive  oil  could  be  fatal.  Bathing  was  
dangerous,  but  enemas  could  be  helpful.  "Men  must  preserve  
chastity,"  the  doctors  warned,  "if they  value  their  lives."  
The  King  still  worried  about  the  divine  wrath.  He  issued  an  
edict against blasphemy.  For the  first  offense, the blasphemer's  lip  
would  be  cut  off;  a  second  offense  would  cost  him  the  other  lip,  
and  a======================================================== of  the  
other  (perhaps they were taught incompatible forms of sign language)  and  
conclude that the other is not a language user at all.  In this  case, these ape 
translators  would  both  be wrong.  If,  on  the  other hand,  they were  to  suc-
cessfully  converse  and  agreed  with  Rorty  that  "truth"  is just  a  matter  of  
what  prevails  in  their  discourse,  they  would  likewise  be  wrong—because  
the  men  and  women  watching their  interaction  would be  acquainted with 
a  variety  of truths  that  they could  not  possibly  be  made  to understand. 
According  to  pragmatism,  beliefs  serve  their purpose  in  different  con-
texts, and there  is  simply no cognitive project that corresponds  to "know-
ing  how  things  are"  or  "knowing  what  reality  is  really  like."  Our  ape  
pragmatists  would  likely  concur,  but they might  also  say  that there  is  no  
such  project  as  "knowing  how  to  fly  to  the  moon"  or  "knowing  where  
babies  come from" either.  Let us postulate that apes are cognitively closed 
to the  facts  of rocket design  and  biology as  we know them—that is, try  as  
he  or  she  might,  no  ape  scientist  will  ever  have  the  requisite  cognitive  
abilities  to  bring  the  relevant  data  into  view,  much  less  make  theoretical  
sense  of  them.  To  this  community  of  pragmatists,  such  facts  simply  do  
not exist.  It  seems  clear that  if there  could  exist worldviews which super-
sede  our  own  in  this  way,  then  what  passes  for  "truth"  in  our  discourse  
could  not  be  the  final  measure  of what  is  true.  
The  only  means  Rorty  has  found  to  resist  this  slide  into  ever-widen-
ing contexts of knowledge is  to  follow Davidson in  claiming that we could 
translate   any  language  into  our  own,   and  therefore  incorporate  any  
"truths"  that more  advanced  language  users might  articulate.  Davidson's  
reasoning is actually  circular here,  because the only reason why we  could  
translate  any  language  is  that  translatability  is  his  criterion  for  picking  
out  a  language  in  the  first  place.  This  simply  begs  the  question  at  issue.  

282          NOTE    TO     PAGE    l8l    
Davidson's claims about translatability also seem to rely on a kind of ver-
ificationist  fallacy:  he  mistakes  the  way  we  pick  out  language  use  in  the  
world  for what language  is  in  itself. The  fact  that  in  order  to  ascribe  lan-
guage  to  another  creature  we  must  first  translate  his  language  into  our  
own  is  simply  irrelevant  to  the  question  of whether  or  not  this  creature  
is actually a language user, has  a mind, or is communicating with his own 
kind. The  error  here  tracks  that  of behaviorism—which  cast  a  stultifying  
shadow over the  sciences  of mind  for most of the  twentieth  century. That 
we may be  constrained to  pick out  mentality  in  others  by  their behavior 
and  verbal  utterance  does  not  mean  that  such  outward  signs  constitute  
what  mind  is  in  itself.  
According  to  Rorty  and  Davidson,  there  is  no  language  game  that  
human  beings  could  not,  in  principle,  play.  The  spectrum  of  possible  
minds,  points  of  view,  "true"  descriptions  of the  world  is  therefore  con-
tinuous.  All  possible  languages  are  commensurable;  all  cognitive  hori-
zons  can  be ultimately  fused. Whether or not this  is  true is  not  really the 
point. The point is that it amounts to a  realistic claim about the nature of 
language  and  cognition.  
It  seems  that  there  are two  possible  forms  of retort  to pragmatism:  in  
the  first  place  we  could  seek  to  demonstrate  that  it  is  not  pragmatic,  and  
specifically  that  it  is  not  as  pragmatic  as  realism.  The  approach  here  
would be  to  show that  it  serves neither our ends  of fashioning  a  coherent  
picture  of  the  world  nor  other  ends  to  which  we  might  be  purposed.  It  
may  be,  for  instance,  that  talking  about truth  and  knowledge  in terms  of  
human  "solidarity," as  Rorty does, could ultimately subvert the very sol-
idarity at issue. While  I  believe that  a pragmatic case against pragmatism 
can  be  made,  I have not made it here  (B. Williams,  in "Auto-da-Fé,"  New  
York  Review  of  Books,  April  28,  1983,  has  taken  a  stab  at  it).  Instead,  I  
have  attempted  to  show  that  pragmatism  is  covertly  realistic,  arguing  
that  in  the  act  of  distancing  himself  from  the  sins  of  realism,  the  prag-
matist  commits  them  with  both  hands.  The  pragmatist  seems  to  be  tac-
itly  saying that he has  surveyed the breadth  and depth  of all  possible  acts  
of  cognition  (not just  his  own,  and  not just  those  that  are  human)  and  
found  both  that  all  knowledge  is  discursive  and  that  all  spheres  of  dis-
course  can  be  potentially  fused.  Pragmatism,  therefore,  amounts  to  the  
assertion that  any epistemic context wider than  our own  can  be  ruled out 
in  principle.  While  I  find  these  claims  incredible,  the  more  important  
point  is that  a  pragmatist  can  believe  otherwise  only  as  a  realist.  
As  a  final  note,  I would  like  to  point out that both  pragmatic and  real-

NOTES    TO    PAGE    185          283          
istic objections  to pragmatism  can be made to converge.  Let us  first reduce 
pragmatism  and  realism  to  their  core  theses  (P and  R  respectively):  
P:  All  statements  about  the  world  are  "true"  only  by virtue  of being 
justified  in  a  sphere  of discourse. 
R:  Certain  statements  about  the  world  are  true,  whether  or  not  they  
can  be justified—and  many justified  statements  happen  to  be  false.  
There  appear  to  be  two  routes  over the  precipice  for the pragmatist— 
and  both  can  be  reached  when  we  press  the  question  "What  if  P  seems  
wrong  to  everybody  and  R  seems  right?"  After  all,  the  pragmatist  must  
admit the possibility that we  might  live  in  a world where  P will  fail  to  be  
justified  (that  is,  pragmatism  itself may  prove  to  be  unpragmatic),  which  
raises  the  question  of  whether  or  not  P  applies  to  itself.  If  P  applies  to  
itself,  and  is  not  justified,  then  it  would  seem  that  pragmatism   self-
destructs  the  moment  it  loses  its  subscribers.  The  pragmatist  cannot  
resist  this  line  by  saying  that  P  does  not  apply  to  itself,  for  then  he  will  
have  falsified  P and endorsed  R; nor can  he  say that it is  a necessary truth 
that  P  will  always  be justified. 
Another   logical   peril   emerges   for  the   pragmatist  the  moment   R   
becomes justified. According to P, if R is justified, it is "true"—but R can-
not  remain true by  virtue  of being justified.  If the  pragmatist attempts  to  
resist the  revaluation of "true" that  R itself urges  upon  us, by  saying that 
R  cannot  be  really  true  (in  the  sense  that  it  corresponds  to  reality  as  it  
is),  this  would  be  tantamount  to  saying  that  P  itself is  true  realistically.  
Hence,  he  will  fall into  contradiction with  his  thesis  once  again. This  is  a  
rock  and  a  hard  place  that  the  pragmatist  cannot  even  be  intelligibly  
accused  of standing between—for they  are,  after  all,  the  same  place.  It  is,  
therefore,  upon  the  very  rock  of  realism—or  beneath  it—that  we  should  
seek  the  pragmatist  out.  
24
 This  is  often  called, erroneously, the  "naturalistic  fallacy." The naturalis-
tic  fallacy,  due  to G.  E. Moore,  is  a  fallacy of another sort. Moore  claimed  
that  our  judgments  of  goodness  cannot  be  reduced  to  other  properties  
like  happiness.  He  would  undoubtedly  argue  that  I  have  committed  the  
naturalistic   fallacy   in   defining  ethics   in  terms   of  human   happiness.   
Moore  felt that  his  "open question argument" was  decisive here: it would 
seem,  for instance, that we can  always coherently ask of any state  of hap-
piness,  "Is  this  form  of happiness  itself good?" The  fact  that  the  question  
still  makes  sense  suggests  that  happiness  and  goodness  cannot  be  the  
same.  I  would  argue,  however,  that  what  we  are  really  asking  in  such  a  
case  is  "Is  this  form  of  happiness  conducive  to  (or  obstructive  of)  some  

284          NOTES    TO     PAGES    186-191    
higher  happiness?"  This  question  is  also  coherent,  and  keeps  our  notion  
of what  is  good  linked  to  the  experience  of sentient  beings.  
25
  S.  Pinker,  The  Blank  Slate  (New York: Viking,  2002), 53-54. 
26
  J.  Glover,  Humanity:  A  Moral  History  of  the  Twentieth   Century  (New  
Haven:  Yale  Univ. Press, 1999), 24. 
27
 Cited in  O.  Friedrich,  The  End  of  the  World: A  History  (New  York:  Cow-
ard, McCann  & Geoghegan,  1982), 61. 
28
 The  role  of  Christian  dogma  in  turning  sexual  neurosis  into  a  principle  
of cultural  oppression  need  hardly  be  elaborated  upon.  Perhaps  the  most  
shocking  disclosures  in  recent  years  (coming  amid  thousands  of  reports  
about  pedophile priests  in  the  United  States)  were  those that  surrounded  
a  group  of  nuns  that  ran  orphanages  throughout  Ireland  during  the  
1950s  and  1960s.  The  incongruously  named  Sisters  of  Mercy  tortured  
children  as young  as  eleven months  (flogging  and  scalding  them,  as  well  
as  subjecting  them  to  astonishing  acts  of psychological  cruelty)  for  "the  
sins  of their parents"  (i.e.,  the  sin  of their  own  illegitimacy).  In  the  ser-
vice  of  ancient  ideas  about  female  sexuality,  original  sin,  virgin  births,  
etc.,  thousands  of  these  infants  were  forcibly  removed  from  the  care  of  
their  unwed  mothers======================================================== Maine:  
Samuel Weiser,  1986.  
——,      ed.  The  Three  Basic  Facts  of Existence.  Kandy,  Sri  Lanka:  Buddhist  Publica-
tion  Society  1974.  
——,      ed.  The  Road  to  Inner  Freedom: A  Survey  of the  Buddha's  Teachings.  Kandy  
Sri  Lanka:  Buddhist  Publication  Society,  1982.  
Nyanatiloka.  Fundamentals  of  Buddhism.  Bauddha  Sahitya  Sabha,  1949.  
——.      The  Buddha's  Path  to  Deliverance.  Kandy,  Sri  Lanka:  Buddhist  Publication  
Society  1952.  
——,     trans, and ed. The Word of the Buddha. Santa Barbara: J. F. Rowny Press, 1959. 
Nyoshul  Khenpo   Rinpoche.   Natural  Great  Perfection.  Translated  by  Surya  Das.  
Ithaca,  N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1995. 
O'Brien,  C.  C.  On  the  Eve  of Millennium:  The  Future  of Democracy  through  an  Age  
of  Unreason.  New York:  Free  Press,  1994.  
Ojemann,  G., J. Ojemann, E. Lettich, and M.  Berger. "Cortical Language Localization 
in  Left,  Dominant  Hemisphere: An  Electrical  Stimulation  Mapping  Investigation  
in  117  Patients."  Journal  of Neurosurgery  71,  no.  3  (1989): 316-26. 
Oltmanns,  T.  F.,  J.  M  Neale,  and  G.  C.  Davison.  Case  Studies  in  Abnormal  Psychol-
ogy. New York: John Wiley, 1999. 
Ornstein,  R.  The  Right  Mind.  New  York:  Harcourt  Brace,  1997.  
Orwell,  G.  "Reflections  on  Gandhi."  In  The  Oxford  Book  of  Essays,  ed.  J.  Gross.  
Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1991. 
Osherson,  D.  N.  "Probability  Judgment."   In  An  Invitation   to   Cognitive   Science:   
Thinking, ed.  E.  E. Smith and D. N. Osherson. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995. 
Osherson. D.N., D. Perani, S. Cappa, T. Schnur, F. Grassi, and F. Fazio. "Distinct Brain 
Loci  in  Deductive  versus  Probabilistic  Reasoning."  Neuropsychologia  36  (1998):  
369-76. 
Osserman,  R.  Poetry  of  the   Universe:  A  Mathematical  Explanation  of  the  Cosmos.  
New York: Doubleday, 1995. 
Ott,  H.  Martin  Heidegger: A  Political  Life.  New York:  HarperCollins,  1993.  
Ott,  J.  Pharmacotheon:  Entheogenic  Drugs,  Their  Plant  Sources  and  History.  Ken-
newick, Wash.: Natural  Products  Company,  1993.  
Padmasambhava.   Self-liberation   through   Seeing  with   Naked  Awareness.  Translated  
by J. M. Reynolds. New York: Station Hill Press, 1989. 
——.        Dakini   Teachings:  Padmasambhava's   Oral  Instructions   to   Lady   Tsogyal.   
Translated by E. P. Kunsang. Boston: Shambhala, 1990. 
——.       Advice  from   the  Lotus-Born.  Translated  by  E.  P.  Kunsang.  Boudhanath:  
Rangjung Yeshe  Publications,  1994.  
——.        The  Light  of  Wisdom   with   Commentary   by  Jamgon  Kongtrul   the   Great.   
Translated by E. P. Kunsang. Boston: Shambhala, 1995. 
Pape,  R.  A.  "The  Strategic  Logic  of  Suicide  Terrorism."  American  Political  Science  
Review 97, no. 3  (2003): 20-32. 

324           BIBLIOGRAPHY           
Pascal,  B.  Pensées.  Translated  by  A.  J.  Krailsheimer.  New  York:  Penguin  Books,  
1966. 
Patrul  Rinpoche.  The  Heart  Treasure  of  the  Enlightened  Ones  with  Commentary  by  
Dilgo  Khyentse.  Boston:  Shambhala,  1992.  
——.       Kunzang  Lama'i  Shelung:  The  Words  of  My  Perfect  Teacher.  San  Francisco:  
HarperCollins,  1994.  
Pelikan,  J. Jesus  through  the  Centuries.  New  York:  Harper  and  Row,  1987.  
Peng,  K., and R. E. Nisbett. "Culture, Dialectics, and Reasoning about Contradiction." 
American  Psychologist  54  (1999):  741-54.  
Pennisi, E.  "Are Our Primate  Cousins 'Conscious'?"  Science  284  (1999): 2073-76. 
Penrose,  R.  The  Emperor's  New  Mind.  Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1989.  
——.      "Mechanisms,  Microtubules,  and the  Mind." Journal  of Consciousness  Stud-
ies 1, no. 2  (1994): 241-49. 
——.       The  Large,  the  Small  and  the  Human  Mind.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  Univ.  
Press, 1997. 
Perry,  J.  A  Dialogue  on  Personal  Identity  and  Immortality.  Indianapolis:  Hackett,  
1978. 
——.      Knowledge,  Possibility,  and  Consciousness.  Cambridge:  MIT  Press,  2001.  
——,      ed.  Personal  Identity.  Berkeley: Univ.  of  California  Press,  1975.  
Peters,  E.  Inquisition.  New York:  Free  Press,  1988.  
Pinchbeck,  D.  Breaking  Open  the  Head.  New  York:  Broadway  Books,  2002.  
Pipes,  D.  Militant  Islam  Reaches  America.  New  York:  W.  W.  Norton,  2002.  
Planck,  M.   Where  Is  Science  Going?  Translated  and  edited  by  J.  Murphy.  1933;  
reprint, Woodbridge, Conn.: Ox Bow Press, 1981. 
Plato.  The  Complete  Works.  Edited by J.  M.  Cooper.  Indianapolis:  Hackett,  1997.  
Pollack, K. H. "'The Crisis of Islam': Faith and Terrorism in the Muslim World."  New  
York  Times  Book  Review, April  6,  2003.  
Popper,  K.  R.  The  Logic  of  Scientific  Discovery.  1959;  reprint,  London:  Routledge,  
1995. 
——.      Objective  Knowledge.  1972;  reprint,  Oxford:  Clarendon  Press,  1995.  
Popper,  K.  R.,  and  J.  C.  Eccles.  The  Self and  Its  Brain.  1977;  reprint,  London:  Rout-
ledge, 1993. 
Posner,  R.  A.  The  Problematics  of  Moral  and  Legal  Theory.  Cambridge:  Harvard  
Univ. Press, 1999. 
Poundstone,  W.  Labyrinths  of  Reason:  Paradox,  Puzzles,  and  the  Frailty  of  Knowl-
edge. New York: Anchor Press,  1988.  
——.       Prisoner's  Dilemma.  New York:  Doubleday,  1992.  
Price, A.  F.,  and W.  Mou-Lam., trans.  The  Diamond  Sutra  and  the  Sutra  of Hui-Neng. 
Boston:  Shambhala,  1990.  
Prinz,  J.  "Functionalism,  Dualism  and  Consciousness."  In  Philosophy  and  the  Neu-
rosciences,  ed. W.  Bechtel,  P.  Mandik,  J. Mundale,  and  R.  S.  Stufflebeam.  Oxford:  
Blackwell, 2001. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY          325          
Pryse-Phillips,  W.  The  Oxford  Companion   to   Clinical  Neurology.  Oxford:  Oxford  
Univ. Press, 2003. 
Putnam,  R.  A.,  ed.  The  Cambridge  Companion  to  William  James.  New  York:  Cam-
bridge Univ. Press, 1997. 
Quattrone,  G. A.,  and A.  Tversky.  "Self-Deception  and  the  Voter's  Illusion."  In  The  
Multiple  Self, ed. J.  Elster. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1985. 
Quine, W. V.  From  a  Logical Point  of View. 1953; reprint, Cambridge: Harvard Univ. 
Press, 1994. 
Quine, W. V.  Pursuit of Truth.  Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press,  1990.  
Radin,  D.  The  Conscious  Universe:  The  Scientific  Truth  of Psychic  Phenomena.  New  
York: HarperCollins, 1997. 
Ramachandran,  V.  S.,  and  S.  Blakeslee.  Phantoms  in  the  Brain.  New  York:  William  
Morrow, 1998. 
Ramachandran, V.  S., and W. Hirstein. "Three  Laws of Qualia: What Neurology Tells 
Us  about  the  Biological  Functions  of   Consciousness."Journal   of  Consciousness  
Studies  4,  nos.  5-6  (1997): 429-57. 
Ramana  Maharshi.  Talks  with   Sri  Ramana.  Tiruvannamalai:  Sri  Ramanasramam,  
1955. 
——.       The  Collected  Works   of  Ramana  Maharshi.   Edited  by  A.  Osborne.  York  
Beach, Maine: Samuel Weiser,  1972.  
——.       Self-enquiry.   Translated   by  T.  M.   P.   Mahadevan.   Tiruvannamalai:   Sri   
Ramanasramam, 1981. 
Reber, A.  S.  "The  Cognitive  Unconscious: An  Evolutionary  Perspective."  Conscious-
ness  and  Cognition  1  (1992): 93-133. 
Rees, G., G. Kreiman, and C. Koch. "Neural Correlates of Consciousness in Humans." 
Nature  Reviews  Neuroscience  3  (2002):  261-70.  
Rees,  M.  Our Final Hour. New York:  Basic Books,  2003.  
Rhodes,  R.  Deadly  Feasts:  Tracking  the  Secrets  of  a  Terrifying  New  Plague.  New  
York: Simon and Schuster,  1997.  
Rips,  L.  "Deduction  and  Cognition."  In  An  Invitation  to  Cognitive  Science:  Thinking,  
ed. E. E. Smith and D. N. Osherson. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995. 
Rorty,  R.  The  Consequences  of Pragmatism.  Minneapolis:  Univ.  of Minnesota  Press,  
1982. 
——.      Objectivity,  Relativism,  and  Truth:  Philosophical  Papers.  Vol.  1.  Cambridge:  
Cambridge Univ. Press,  1991  
——.     "Universality and Truth."  1994  MS.  
——.      Hope  in  Place  of Knowledge: The  Pragmatics  Tradition  in  Philosophy.  Taipei:  
Institute  of European  and American  Studies, Academia  Sinica,  1999.  
Rosenbaum,  R.  Explaining Hitler.  New York:  Basic  Books,  1998.  
Rosenthal,  D.  The  Nature  of Mind.  Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1991.  
Roskies, A.  L.  "Yes,  But Am  I  Free?"  Nature  Neuroscience 4  (2001): 1161. 
Roy, A.  War Talk. Cambridge, Mass.: South  End Press, 2003. 

326           BIBLIOGRAPHY           
Rumelhart, D. E. "Schemata: The Building Blocks of Cognition." In Theoretical Issues 
in Reading Comprehension, ed.  R. J. Spiro, B. C. Bruce, and W. F. Brewer. Hillsdale, 
N.J.: Erlbaum, 1980. 
——.      "The Architecture  of Mind:  A  Connectionist Approach."  In  Foundations  of  
Cognitive  Science,  ed.  M.  I.  Posner.  Cambridge: MIT  Press,  1989.  
Russell,  B.  The  Problems  of Philosophy.  1912;  reprint,  Indianapolis:  Hackett,  1990.  
——.      Religion  and  Science.  1935;  reprint,  Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1997.  
——.       A  History  of  Western  Philosophy.  New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1945.  
——.       Why  I  Am  Not  a  Christian.  Edited  by  P.  Edwards.  New  York:  Simon  and  
Schuster,  1957.  
Russell,  J.  "At  Two  with  Nature: Agency  and  the  Development  of  Self-World  Dual-
ism."  In  The  Body  and The  Self, ed. J. L. Bermudez, A. Marcel, and N.  Eilan. Cam-
bridge: MIT Press, 1995. 
Ruthven,  M.  Islam  in  the  World.  2d  ed.  Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  2000.  
Ryle,  G.  The  Concept  of Mind.  1949;  reprint,  Chicago:  Univ.  of Chicago  Press,  1984.  
Sacks,  O.  The  Man  Who  Mistook  His  Wife  for  a  Hat.  New  York:  Harper  Perennial,  
1970. 
——.       An  Anthropologist  on  Mars:  Seven  Paradoxical  Tales.  New  York:  Vintage,  
1995. 
Saddhatissa,  H.,  trans.  The  Sutta-Nipata.  London:  Curzon  Press,  1985.  
Sagan,  C.  The  Demon  Haunted  World:  Science  as  a  Candle  in  the  Dark.  New  York:  
Random House,  1995.  
Sagan,  C,  and  A.======================================================== terms of our subjectivity to maneuver in  a world that 
appears  to  be  other  than  what  we  are.  Descartes  accentuated  this  
dichotomy  by  declaring  that  two  substances  were  to  be  found  in  
God's  universe:  matter  and  spirit.  For  most  of  us,  a  dualism  of this 
sort  is  more  or  less  a  matter  of  common  sense  (though  the  term  
"spirit"  seems  rather  majestic,  given how our minds  generally  com-
port  themselves).  As  science  has  turned  its  reifying  light  upon  the  
mysteries  of  the  human  mind,  however,  Descartes'  dualism  (along  
with  our  own  "folk psychology")  has  come  in  for  some  rough  treat-
ment.  Bolstered  by  the  undeniable  successes  of  three  centuries  of  
purely  physical   research,  many  philosophers   and   scientists   now   
reject  Descartes'  separation  of  mind  and  body,  spirit  and  matter,  as  
the  concession to Christian piety that it surely was,  and imagine that 

208          THE    END     OF    FAITH    
they  have  thereby  erased the  conceptual  gulf between  consciousness  
and the  physical world. 
In the last chapter we saw that our beliefs  about consciousness are 
intimately  linked  to  our  ethics.  They  also  happen  to  have  a  direct  
bearing upon our view  of death. Most  scientists  consider  themselves  
physicalists;  this  means,  among  other  things,  that  they  believe  that  
our mental  and  spiritual  lives  are  wholly  dependent  upon  the  work-
ings  of our  brains.  On  this  account,  when  the  brain  dies,  the  stream  
of our  being  must  come  to  an  end.  Once  the  lamps  of  neural  activ-
ity  have  been  extinguished,  there  will  be  nothing  left  to  survive.  
Indeed,  many  scientists  purvey  this  conviction  as  though  it  were  
itself  a  special  sacrament,  conferring  intellectual  integrity  upon  any  
man, woman,  or  child who  is  man  enough  to  swallow  it.  
But  the  truth  is  that  we  simply  do  not  know  what  happens  after  
death. While there is much  to be  said against a  naive  conception of a 
soul  that  is  independent  of the  brain,
3
  the  place  of consciousness  in  
the  natural  world  is  very  much  an  open  question.  The  idea  that  
brains  produce  consciousness  is  little  more  than  an  article  of  faith  
among  scientists  at  present,  and  there  are  many  reasons  to  believe  
that the methods  of science will be insufficient to either prove or dis-
prove  it.  
Inevitably,  scientists  treat  consciousness  as  a  mere  attribute  of  
certain large-brained animals. The problem, however, is that nothing 
about  a brain, when  surveyed  as  a  physical  system,  declares  it  to  be  
a  bearer  of that  peculiar,  interior  dimension  that  each  of  us  experi-
ences   as   consciousness   in   his   own   case.   Every   paradigm   that   
attempts  to  shed  light  upon  the  frontier  between  consciousness  and  
unconsciousness,  searching  for  the  physical  difference  that  makes  
the phenomenal  one,  relies  upon  subjective  reports  to  signal  that an 
experimental  stimulus  has  been  observed.
4
  The  operational  defini-
tion  of  consciousness,  therefore,  is  reportability.  But  consciousness  
and  reportability  are  not  the  same.  Is  a  starfish  conscious?  No  sci-
ence  that  conflates  consciousness  with  reportability  will  deliver  an  
answer  to  this  question.  To  look  for  consciousness  in  the  world  on  

EXPERIMENTS  IN  CONSCIOUSNESS          209          
the  basis  of  its  outward  signs  is  the  only  thing  that  we  can  do.  To  
define  consciousness  in terms  of its outward  signs,  however,  is  a  fal-
lacy.  Computers  of the  future,  sufficiently  advanced  to  pass  the Tur-
ing  test,*  will  offer  up  a  wealth  of  self-report—but  will  they  be  
conscious?  If we  don't  already  know,  their  eloquence  on  the  matter  
will  not  decide  the  issue.  Consciousness  may  be  a  far  more  rudi-
mentary  phenomenon  than  are  living  creatures  and  their  brains.  
And  there  appears  to  be  no  obvious  way  of  ruling  out  such  a  thesis  
experimentally.
5 
And  so,  while  we  know many  things  about  ourselves  in  anatom-
ical,  physiological,  and  evolutionary  terms,  we  currently  have  no  
idea why  it  is  "like  something"  to  be what  we  are. The  fact  that  the  
universe is  illuminated where you  stand, the  fact that your thoughts 
and moods and sensations  have a qualitative character, is  an absolute 
mystery—rivaled  only  by  the  mystery,  famously  articulated  by  the  
philosopher  Schelling,  that  there  should  be  anything  at  all  in  this  
universe  rather than nothing. The  problem  is  that  our  experience  of  
brains,  as  objects  in  the  world,  leaves  us  perfectly  insensible  to  the  
reality  of  consciousness,  while  our  experience  as  brains  grants  us  
knowledge  of  nothing  else.  Given  this  situation,  it  is  reasonable  to  
conclude  that  the  domain  of  our  subjectivity  constitutes  a  proper  
(and  essential)  sphere  of  investigation  into  the  nature  of  the  uni-
verse: as some  facts will be discovered only in consciousness, in first-
person  terms,  or  not  discovered  at  all.  
Investigating  the  nature  of  consciousness  directly,  through  sus-
tained introspection, is  simply another name  for spiritual practice.  It  
should  be  clear  that  whatever  transformations  of  your  experience  
are  possible—after  forty  days  and  forty  nights  in  the  desert,  after  
*  The  mathematician  Alan  Turing  once  proposed  a  test  for  the  adequacy  of  a  com-
puter  simulation  of  the  human  mind  (and  this  has  since  been  promoted  in  the  liter-
ature  to  a  test  for  computer  "consciousness").  The  proposed  test  requires  that  a  
human  subject  interrogate  another  person  and  a  computer  by  turns,  without  know-
ing which  is  which.  If,  at the  end  of the  experiment,  he  cannot  identify the  computer  
with  any  confidence,  it  is  said  to  have  "passed"  the Turing test. 

210          THE    END     OF    FAITH    
twenty years  in  a  cave,  or after some new serotonin agonist has  been  
delivered to your synapses—these will  be a matter of changes occur-
ring  in  the  contents  of  your  consciousness.  Whatever  Jesus  experi-
enced,  he  experienced  as  consciousness.  If  he  loved  his  neighbor  as  
himself,  this  is  a  description  of what  it  felt  like  to  be  Jesus  while  in  
the  presence  of  other human  beings. The  history  of human  spiritu-
ality  is  the  history  of our  attempts  to  explore  and  modify  the  deliv-
erances  of  consciousness  through  methods  like  fasting,  chanting,  
sensory  deprivation, prayer, meditation,  and  the use  of psychotropic 
plants. There is no question that experiments of this sort  can be con-
ducted  in  a  rational  manner.  Indeed,  they  are  some  of  our  only  
means  of  determining  to  what  extent  the  human  condition  can  be  
deliberately   transformed.   Such   an   enterprise   becomes   irrational   
only when  people  begin  making  claims  about  the  world  that  cannot  
be  supported  by  empirical  evidence.  
What   Are    We    Calling    "I"?    
Our  spiritual  possibilities  will  largely  depend  on  what  we  are  as  
selves.  In  physical  terms,  each  of us  is  a  system,  locked  in  an unin-
terrupted  exchange  of matter  and  energy  with  the  larger  system  of  
the earth. The  life of your very cells is built upon  a network of barter 
and  exchange  over  which  you  can  exercise  only  the  crudest  con-
scious  influence—in  the  form  of  deciding  whether  to  hold  your  
breath  or  take  another  slice  of  pizza  out  of the  fridge.  As  a  physical  
system, you are no more independent of nature  at this moment than 
your  liver  is   of  the  rest   of  your  body.  As   a   collection   of  self-
regulating  and  continually  dividing  cells,  you  are  also  continuous  
with  your  genetic  precursors:  your  parents,  their  parents,  and  back-
ward  through  tens  of  millions  of  generations—at  which  point  your  
ancestors begin  looking less  like men  and women with bad teeth  and  
more like pond scum. It is true enough  to say that, in physical terms, 
you  are  little  more  than  an  eddy  in  a  great  river  of life. 

EXPERIMENTS     IN     CONSCIOUSNESS               211               
But,  of  course,  your  body  is  itself  an  environment  teeming  with  
creatures,  in  relation  to  which  you  are  sovereign  in  name  alone. To 
examine  the  body  of  a  person,  its  organs  and  tissues,  cells  and  
intestinal  flora  (sometimes  fauna,  alas),  is  to  be  confronted  by  a  
world  that  bears  no  more  evidence  of an  overriding  conscious  intel-
ligence than  does  the  world  at large.  Is  there  any  reason  to  suspect,  
when  observing  the  function  of  mitochondria  within  a  cell,  or  the  
twitching  of  muscle  fibers  in  the  hand,  that  there  is  a  mind,  above  
and beyond  such  processes,  thinking,  "L'état  c'est moi"?  Indeed,  any  
privilege  we might  be  tempted  to  accord the boundary  of the  skin  in  
our  search  for  the  physical  self  seems  profoundly  arbitrary.  
The  frontiers  of  the  mental  self  are  no  easier  to  discern:  memes,  
taboos,  norms  of decorum,  linguistic  conventions,  prejudices,  ideals,  
aesthetic  biases,  commercial  jingles—the  phenomena  that  populate  
the  landscape  of our  minds  are  immigrants  from  the  world  at  large.  
Is  your  desire  to  be  physically  fit—or  your  taste  in  clothing,  your  
sense  of  community,  your  expectation  of  reciprocal  kindness,  your  
shyness,  your  affability,  your  sexual======================================================== Further Praise for The End of Faith 
"A radical  attack on the most  sacred of liberal precepts—the notion 
of tolerance.  .  .  .  [The  End  of Faith]  is  an  eminently  sensible  rally-
ing  cry  for  a  more  ruthless  secularisation  of  society."  
—Stephanie  Merritt,  The  Observer  
"Harris's tour de  force demonstrates how faith—blind,  deaf, dumb, 
and   unreasoned—threatens   our  very   existence.   His   expose   of   
faith-based   unreason—from   the   religious   fanaticism   of   Islamic   
suicide  bombers  to the  secular fanaticism  of Noam  Chomsky—is  a  
clarion  call  for reasoned debate  in this  age  of terrorism.  The  End  of  
Faith  shows  how the  perfect tyranny of religious  and  secular total-
itarianism  demonizes  imperfect  democracies  such  as  the  United  
States  and  Israel.  A must  read  for  all  rational  people."  
—Alan  Dershowitz,  professor  of law  at  
Harvard  University  and  author  of  America  on  Trial  
"[Harris]  writes  with  such  verve  and  frequent  insight  that  even  
skeptical  readers  will  find  it  hard  to  put  down."  
—Daniel  Blue,  San  Francisco  Chronicle  
"At  last  we  have  a  book  that  focuses  on  the  common  thread  that  
links  Islamic  terrorism  with  the  irrationality  of  all  religious  faith.  
The  End  of  Faith  will  challenge  not  only  Muslims  but  Hindus,  
Jews,  and Christians  as well."                     —Peter  Singer,  author  of  
The  President  of  Good  and  Evil:  
The  Ethics  of  George  W.  Bush  
"[Harris's]  brief accounts  of intuition,  and of the notion  of a 'moral 
community,'  are  as  good  as  anything  I  have  read  on these  topics."  
—John  Derbyshire,  New  York  Sun  

"Here  is  a  ringing  challenge  to  all  Americans  who  recognize  the  
danger  to  American  democracy  posed  by  the  political  alliance  of  
right-wing  religion  and  politics  and  the  failure  of  the  tepid  and  
tentative  responses  by  liberal  persons  of  faith.  While  one  might  
dispute  some  of the  claims  and arguments presented by  Harris, the 
need  for  a wake-up  call  to  religious  liberals  is  right  on  the  mark."  
—Joseph  C. Hough  Jr., president  of  
Union  Theological  Seminary,  New  York  

THE   END   OF   FAITH   
Religion,        Terror,        
and    the    Future    of   Reason   
SAM    HARRIS    
W   •   W   •  NORTON   &   COMPANY   
NEW   YORK          LONDON          

Copyright  ©  2005,  2004  by  Sam  Harris  
All  rights  reserved  
Printed  in  the  United  States  of America 
First  published  as  a  Norton  paperback  2005  
For  information  about  permission  to  reproduce  selections  from  this  book,  write  to  
Permissions, W. W. Norton  &  Company, Inc., 500  Fifth Avenue,  New York,  NY  10110  
Manufacturing by The  Courier  Companies,  Inc.  
Book  design  by  Margaret  M.  Wagner  
Production  manager:  Amanda  Morrison  
Library  of  Congress  Cataloging-in-Publication  Data  
Harris,  Sam, date. 
The  end  of  faith  :  religion,  terror,  and the  future  of reason  /  Sam  Harris.—  1st  ed.  
p. cm. 
Includes  bibliographical  references  and  index.  
ISBN  0-393-03515-8  (hardcover)  
1.   Religion—Controversial literature.  2.  Terrorism—Religious  aspects.  
3.  Psychology,  Religious. 4.  Secular humanism.  I. Title. 
BL2775.3.H37  2004  
200—dc22 
2004007874 
ISBN  0-393-32765-5  pbk.  
W. W. Norton  &  Company,  Inc., 500  Fifth Avenue, New York,  N.Y.  10110  
www.wwnorton.com 
W. W. Norton  & Company  Ltd.,  Castle House,  75/76 Wells Street, London W1T 3QT 
1234567890 

For  my  mother  

Contents 
1  Reason   in   Exile       11       
2   The   Nature   of  Belief      50      
3   In   the  Shadow   of  God      80      
4    The   Problem   with   Islam       108       
5    West  of  Eden      153      
6   A   Science   of  Good  and  Evil      170      
7   Experiments    in    Consciousness        204        
Epilogue       223       
Afterword        229        
Notes      239      
Bibliography        303        
Acknowledgments          333          
Index      335      
7 

1 
Reason   in   Exile   
THE  young  man  boards  the bus  as  it  leaves  the  terminal.  He wears 
an  overcoat.  Beneath  his  overcoat,  he  is  wearing  a  bomb.  His  pock-
ets  are  filled with  nails,  ball bearings,  and  rat  poison.  
The  bus  is  crowded  and  headed  for  the  heart  of  the  city.  The  
young man  takes  his  seat  beside  a  middle-aged  couple.  He  will  wait  
for the bus to  reach its next stop. The couple at his side appears  to be 
shopping  for a new refrigerator. The woman has  decided  on  a  model,  
but  her  husband  worries  that  it  will  be  too  expensive.  He  indicates  
another  one  in  a  brochure  that  lies  open  on  her  lap.  The  next  stop  
comes into view. The bus doors swing. The woman observes that the 
model  her  husband  has  selected  will  not  fit  in  the  space  underneath  
their  cabinets.  New  passengers  have  taken  the  last  remaining  seats  
and  begun  gathering  in  the  aisle.  The  bus  is  now  full.  The  young  
man  smiles. With the  press  of a button he destroys  himself, the cou-
ple at his side, and twenty others on the bus. The nails, ball bearings, 
and  rat  poison  ensure  further  casualties  on  the  street  and  in  the  
surrounding cars. All  has  gone  according to  plan.  
The  young  man's  parents  soon  learn  of  his  fate.  Although  sad-
dened  to  have  lost  a  son,  they  feel  tremendous  pride  at  his  accom-
plishment. They  know that he  has  gone  to  heaven  and  prepared  the  
way  for them  to  follow.  He  has  also  sent  his victims  to hell  for  eter-
nity. It is a double victory. The neighbors  find the event a great cause 
for  celebration  and  honor  the  young  man's  parents  by  giving  them  
gifts  of  food  and  money.  
These  are  the  facts.  This  is  all  we  know  for  certain  about  the  
11 

12          THE     END     OF     FAITH     
young  man.  Is  there  anything  else  that  we  can  infer  about  him  on  
the  basis  of  his  behavior?  Was  he  popular  in  school?  Was  he  rich  
or  was  he  poor?  Was  he  of  low  or  high  intelligence?  His  actions  
leave  no  clue  at  all.  Did  he  have  a  college  education?  Did  he  have  
a  bright  future  as  a  mechanical  engineer?  His  behavior  is  simply  
mute  on  questions  of this  sort,  and  hundreds  like  them.
1
 Why  is  it  
so  easy, then,  so  trivially easy—you-could-almost-bet-your-life-on-
it  easy—to  guess  the young  man's  religion?
2  
A  BELIEF  is  a  lever that,  once  pulled,  moves  almost everything  else  
in  a  person's  life. Are you  a  scientist? A  liberal? A  racist? These  are  
merely  species  of belief  in  action.  Your  beliefs  define  your  vision  of  
the  world;  they  dictate  your  behavior;  they  determine  your  emo-
tional  responses  to  other  human  beings.  If you  doubt  this,  consider  
how your  experience  would suddenly  change  if you  came  to  believe  
one  of the  following  propositions:  
1. You  have only two weeks  to  live.  
2. You've just won  a  lottery  prize  of one  hundred  million  dollars.  
3. Aliens  have  implanted  a  receiver  in  your  skull  and  are  manip-
ulating  your  thoughts.  
These are mere words—until you  believe  them. Once  believed, they 
become  part  of the  very  apparatus  of your  mind,  determining  your  
desires,  fears,  expectations,  and  subsequent  behavior.  
There  seems,  however,  to  be  a  problem  with  some  of  our  most  
cherished beliefs about the world: they are  leading  us, inexorably, to 
kill  one  another. A glance  at history,  or  at the  pages  of any  newspa-
per,  reveals that ideas which  divide one group of human  beings  from  
another,  only  to  unite  them  in  slaughter,  generally  have  their  roots  
in  religion.  It  seems that  if our  species  ever  eradicates  itself through 
war,  it  will  not  be  because  it  was  written  in  the  stars  but  because  it  
was written in our books; it is what we do with words like "God" and 
"paradise"  and  "sin"  in  the  present  that  will  determine  our  future.  

REASON       IN       EXILE  13  
Our situation is  this: most of the people in this world believe that 
the  Creator of the universe has written  a  book. We have the  misfor-
tune  of having many  such  books  on hand,  each  making  an  exclusive  
claim  as  to  its  infallibility.  People  tend  to  organize  themselves  into  
factions   according   to   which   of  these   incompatible   claims   they   
accept—rather  than  on  the  basis  of language,  skin  color,  location  of  
birth,  or  any  other  criterion  of  tribalism.  Each  of  these  texts  urges  
its  readers  to  adopt  a variety  of beliefs  and  practices,  some  of which 
are benign, many of which are not. All are in perverse agreement on 
one  point  of  fundamental  importance,  however:  "respect"  for  other  
faiths,  or  for  the  views  of  unbelievers,  is  not  an  attitude  that  God  
endorses. While  all  faiths  have  been  touched, here  and there,  by the 
spirit of ecumenicalism, the  central tenet  of every religious tradition 
is  that  all  others  are  mere  repositories  of  error  or,  at  best,  danger-
ously  incomplete.  Intolerance  is  thus  intrinsic  to  every  creed.  Once  
a  person  believes—really  believes—that  certain  ideas  can  lead  to  
eternal  happiness,  or  to  its  antithesis,  he  cannot  tolerate  the  possi-
bility  that  the  people  he  loves  might  be  led  astray  by  the  blandish-
ments   of   unbelievers.   Certainty   about   the   next   life   is   simply   
incompatible with  tolerance  in  this  one.  
Observations  of this sort pose an immediate problem  for us, how-
ever,  because  criticizing  a  person's======================================================== were  really  wrong  in  ethical  terms,  or  whether  we  just  

A    SCIENCE    OF    GOOD    AND    EVIL          179          
don't  like  their  style  of  life.  It  seems  to  me,  however,  that  the  belief  
that  some  worldviews  really  are  better  than  others  taps  a  different  
set  of  intellectual  and  moral  resources.  These  are  resources  we  will  
desperately need if we  are  to oppose,  and ultimately unseat, the reg-
nant  ignorance  and  tribalism  of our  world.  
The general retort to relativism is simple, because most relativists 
contradict  their  thesis  in  the  very  act  of  stating  it.  Take  the  case  of  
relativism   with   respect   to   morality:   moral   relativists   generally   
believe  that  all  cultural  practices  should  be  respected  on  their  own  
terms,  that  the  practitioners  of  the  various  barbarisms  that  persist  
around the globe  cannot be judged by the  standards of the West, nor 
can  the  people  of the  past  be judged by the  standards  of the  present.  
And  yet,  implicit  in  this  approach  to  morality  lurks  a  claim  that  is  
not  relative  but  absolute.  Most  moral  relativists  believe  that  toler-
ance  of  cultural  diversity  is  better,  in  some  important  sense,  than  
outright  bigotry.  This  may  be  perfectly  reasonable,  of course,  but  it  
amounts   to   an   overarching   claim   about  how   all  human  beings  
should  live.  Moral  relativism, when  used as  a  rationale  for tolerance 
of diversity,  is  self-contradictory.  
There  is,  however,  a  more  sophisticated  version  of  this  line  of  
thinking  that  is  not  so  easily  dispatched.  It  generally  goes  by  the  
name   of   "pragmatism,"   and   its   most   articulate   spokesmen   is   
undoubtedly  Richard Rorty.
17
 While  Rorty is  not  a household name, 
his  work  has  had  a  great  influence  on  our  discourse,  and  it  offers  
considerable  shelter  to  the  shades  of  relativism.  If  we  ever  hope  to  
reach  a  global  consensus  on  matters  of  ethics—if  we  would  say,  for  
instance,  that  stoning  women  for  adultery  is  really  wrong,  in  some  
absolute  sense—we  must  find  deep  reasons  to  reject  pragmatism.  
Doing  so,  we  will  discover  that  we  are  in  a  position  to  make  strong  
cross-cultural  claims  about the  reasonableness  of various  systems  of  
belief and  about  good  and  evil.  
The  pragmatist's  basic  premise  is  that,  try  as  we  might,  the  
currency  of our  ideas  cannot  be  placed  on  the  gold  standard  of  cor-
respondence with reality as it is. To call a statement "true" is merely 

l80          THE    END     OF    FAITH    
to praise it  for how it functions  in  some  area  of discourse; it  is not to 
say anything about  how  it  relates  to  the  universe  at  large.  From  the  
point  of view of pragmatism,  the  notion  that our  beliefs  might  "cor-
respond with  reality"  is  absurd.  Beliefs  are  simply  tools  for  making  
one's way in the world. Does a hammer correspond with reality? No. 
It  has  merely  proven  its  usefulness  for  certain  tasks.  So  it  is,  we  are  
told, with the "truths"  of biology, history, or any other  field.  For the 
pragmatist, the  utility  of a  belief trumps  all  other  concerns,  even  the  
concern  for  coherence.
18
  If a  literalist  reading  of the  Bible works  for  
you  on  Sundays,  while  agnosticism  about  God  is  better  suited  to  
Mondays  at the  office, there  is  no  reason  to worry  about  the  result-
ing contradictions in your worldview. These are not so much  incom-
patible  claims  about  the  way  the  world  is  as  different  styles  of  
talking,  each  suited  to  a  particular  occasion.  
If all of this seems rather academic, it might be interesting to note 
that  Sayyid  Qutb,  Osama  bin  Laden's  favorite  philosopher,  felt  that  
pragmatism   would   spell   the   death   of  American   civilization.   He   
thought  that  it  would,  in  Berman's  phrase,  "undermine  America's  
ability  to  fend  off  its  enemies."
19
  There  may  be  some  truth  to  this  
assertion.  Pragmatism,  when  civilizations  come  clashing,  does  not  
appear  likely  to  be  very  pragmatic.  To  lose  the  conviction  that  you  
can  actually  be  right—about  anything—seems  a  recipe  for  the  End  
of  Days  chaos  envisioned  by  Yeats:  when  "the  best  lack  all  convic-
tion,  while  the  worst  are  full  of  passionate  intensity."  I  believe  that  
relativism  and  pragmatism  have  already  done  much  to  muddle  our  
thinking  on  a  variety  of  subjects,  many  of which  have  more  than  a  
passing  relevance  to  the  survival  of civilization. 
In  philosophical  terms,  pragmatism  can  be  directly  opposed  to  
realism.   For  the  realist,  our  statements  about  the  world  will  be  
"true"  or "false" not merely in virtue of how they  function  amid the 
welter  of  our  other  beliefs,  or  with  reference  to  any  culture-bound  
criteria,  but  because  reality  simply  is  a  certain  way,  independent  of  
our thoughts.
20
 Realists believe that there  are truths  about the world 
that  may  exceed  our  capacity  to  know  them;  there  are  facts  of  the  

A    SCIENCE    OF    GOOD    AND    EVIL           l8l           
matter  whether  or  not  we  can  bring  such  facts  into  view.  To  be  an  
ethical  realist  is  to  believe  that  in  ethics,  as  in  physics,  there  are  
truths  waiting  to be  discovered—and thus we  can  be  right or wrong 
in  our  beliefs  about  them.
21  
According  to  pragmatists  like  Rorty,  realism  is  doomed  because  
there  is  no  way  to  compare  our  description  of  reality  with  a  piece  
of  undescribed  reality.  As  Jürgen  Habermas  says,  "since  the  truth  
of  beliefs  or  sentences  can  in  turn  be  justified  only  with  the  help  
of other  beliefs  and  sentences,  we  cannot  break  free  from  the  magic  
circle  of our  language."
22
  This  is  a  clever  thesis.  But  is  it  true?  The  
fact  that  language  is  the  medium  in  which  our  knowledge  is  repre-
sented  and  communicated  says  nothing  at  all  about  the  possibilities  
of unmediated  knowledge  per  se.  The  fact  that  no  experience  when  
talked  about  escapes  being  mediated  by  language  (this  is  a  tautol-
ogy)  does  not  mean  that  all  cognition,  and  hence  all  knowing,  is  
interpretative.  If it were  possible  for any  facet of reality to be known 
perfectly—if  certain  mystics,  for  instance,  were  right  to  think  that  
they  had  enjoyed unmediated  knowledge  of transcendental truths— 
then  pragmatism  would  be just  plain  wrong,  realistically. The  prob-
lem  for the pragmatist is not that such a mystic stands a good chance 
of  being  right.  The  problem  is  that,  whether  the  mystic  is  right  or  
wrong,  he  must  be  right  or wrong  realistically.  In  opposing the  idea  
that we  can  know  reality  directly, the  pragmatist  has  made  a  covert,  
realistic  claim  about  the  limits  of  human  knowledge.  Pragmatism  
amounts to a  realistic denial of the possibility of realism. And so, like 
the  relativist,  the  pragmatist  appears  to  reach  a  contradiction  before  
he has  even  laced his  shoes. A more thorough argument along these 
lines  has  been  relegated  to  a  long endnote,  so  as  not  to  kill  the gen-
eral  reader  with  boredom.
23  
Relativists  and  pragmatists  believe  that  truth  is just  a  matter  of  
consensus.  I  think  it  is  clear,  however,  that  while  consensus  among  
like  minds  may  be  the  final  arbiter  of  truth,  it  cannot  constitute  it.  
It  is  quite  conceivable  that  everyone  might  agree  and  yet  be  wrong  
about the way the world is. It is also conceivable that a single person 

l82           THE    END    OF    FAITH    
might  be  right  in  the  face  of  unanimous  opposition.  From  a  realist  
point  of view,  it  is  possible  (though  unlikely)  for  a  single  person,  or  
culture,  to  have  a monopoly  on  the truth. 
It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  nothing  stands  in  the  way  of  our  
presuming  that  our  beliefs  about  the  world  can  correspond,  to  a  
greater  or lesser  degree,  to the way the world is—whether or not we 
will  ever  be  in  a  position  to  finally  authenticate  such  correspon-
dence.  Given  that  there  are  likely  to  be  truths  to  be  known  about  
how members  of our species  can be  made as happy as  possible, there 
are almost certainly truths  to  be known  about  ethics. To  say that we 
will  never  agree  on  every  question  of  ethics  is  the  same  as  saying  
that we will never agree  on every question of physics. In neither  case  
does  the  open-endedness  of  our  inquiry  suggest  that  there  are  no  
real  facts  to be known,  or that  some  of the  answers  we  have  in  hand  
are  not  really  better  than  some  others.  Respect  for  diversity  in  our  
ethical views  is, at best, an intellectual holding pattern until more of 
the  facts  are  in.  
Intuition 
One  cannot  walk  far  in  the  company  of  moral  theorists  without  
hearing  our  faculty  of  "moral  intuition"  either  exalted  or  scorned.  
The  reason  for  the  latter  attitude  is  that  the  term  "intuition"  has  
always  carried  the  scent  of  impropriety  in  philosophical  and  scien-
tific discourse.  Having  been  regularly  disgraced  by  its  appearance  in  
colloquialisms   like  "woman's  intuition"   (meaning  "psychic"),  or  
otherwise  directly contrasted with  "reason,"  the  word  now  seems  to  
conjure  up  all  that  is  cloying  and  irrational  outside  the  university  
gates.  The  only  striking  exception  to this  rule  is  to  be  found  among  
mathematicians,======================================================== approaches to  spiritu-
ality, ethics, and the building of strong communities.  Religious mod-
erates  seem  to  believe  that  what  we  need  is  not  radical  insight  and  
innovation  in  these  areas  but  a  mere  dilution  of  Iron  Age  philoso-
phy.  Rather  than  bring  the  full  force  of our  creativity  and  rational-
ity  to  bear  on  the  problems  of  ethics,  social  cohesion,  and  even  
spiritual  experience,  moderates  merely  ask  that  we  relax  our  stan-
dards  of adherence  to  ancient  superstitions  and taboos,  while other-
wise  maintaining  a  belief  system  that  was  passed  down  to  us  from  
men  and  women  whose  lives  were  simply  ravaged  by  their  basic  
ignorance  about  the  world.  In what other  sphere  of life  is  such  sub-
servience  to  tradition  acceptable?  Medicine?  Engineering?  Not  even  
politics  suffers  the  anachronism  that  still  dominates  our  thinking  
about  ethical  values  and  spiritual  experience.  
Imagine  that  we  could  revive  a  well-educated  Christian  of  the  
fourteenth century.  The  man  would  prove  to  be  a  total  ignoramus,  

22          THE     END     OF     FAITH     
except  on  matters  of  faith.  His  beliefs  about  geography,  astronomy,  
and medicine would embarrass  even  a child, but he would know more 
or  less  everything  there  is  to  know  about  God.  Though  he  would  be  
considered a  fool to think that the earth is the center of the cosmos, or 
that trepanning*  constitutes  a wise medical intervention, his religious 
ideas  would  still  be  beyond  reproach. There  are  two  explanations  for  
this:  either  we  perfected  our  religious  understanding  of  the  world  a  
millennium  ago—while  our  knowledge  on  all  other  fronts  was  still  
hopelessly  inchoate—or  religion,  being  the  mere  maintenance  of  
dogma,  is  one  area  of  discourse  that  does  not  admit  of  progress.  We  
will  see that there  is  much  to  recommend the latter view. 
With  each  passing  year,  do  our  religious  beliefs  conserve  more  
and  more  of  the  data  of  human  experience?  If  religion  addresses  a  
genuine   sphere   of  understanding   and  human   necessity,   then   it   
should  be  susceptible  to  progress;  its  doctrines  should  become  more  
useful, rather than less. Progress in religion, as in other  fields, would 
have  to  be  a  matter  of  present  inquiry,  not  the  mere  reiteration  of  
past doctrine. Whatever is true now should be  discoverable  now, and 
describable  in  terms  that  are  not  an  outright  affront  to  the  rest  of  
what  we  know  about  the  world.  By  this  measure,  the  entire  project  
of  religion  seems  perfectly  backward.  It  cannot  survive  the  changes  
that  have  come  over  us—culturally,  technologically,  and  even  ethi-
cally.  Otherwise,  there  are  few  reasons  to  believe  that  we  will  sur-
vive  it.  
Moderates  do  not  want  to  kill  anyone  in  the  name  of  God,  but  
they want us to keep using the word "God" as though we knew what 
we  were  talking  about.  And  they  do  not  want  anything  too  critical  
said  about  people  who  really  believe  in  the  God  of  their  fathers,  
because  tolerance, perhaps  above  all  else,  is  sacred. To  speak plainly 
* Trepanning  (or  trephining)  is  the  practice  of  boring  holes  in  the  human  skull.  
Archaeological  evidence  suggests  that  it  is  one  of  the  oldest  surgical  procedures.  It  
was  presumably  performed  on  epileptics  and  the  mentally  ill  as  an  attempt  at  exor-
cism. While there are  still many  reasons  to  open  a person's  skull  nowadays, the  hope  
that  an  evil  spirit will  use  the  hole  as  a point  of egress  is  not among them. 

REASON       IN       EXILE  23  
and truthfully about the state of our world—to  say,  for instance, that 
the  Bible  and  the  Koran  both  contain  mountains  of  life-destroying  
gibberish—is  antithetical  to  tolerance  as  moderates  currently  con-
ceive  it.  But  we  can  no  longer  afford  the  luxury  of  such  political  
correctness.  We  must  finally  recognize  the  price  we  are  paying  to  
maintain  the  iconography  of our  ignorance.  
The    Shadow   of   the   Past   
Finding  ourselves  in  a universe that seems bent upon destroying us, 
we  quickly  discover,  both  as  individuals  and  as  societies,  that  it  is  a  
good  thing  to  understand the  forces  arrayed  against  us. And  so  it  is  
that  every  human  being  comes  to  desire  genuine  knowledge  about  
the  world.  This  has  always  posed  a  special  problem  for  religion,  
because  every  religion  preaches  the  truth  of  propositions  for  which  
it  has  no  evidence.  In  fact,  every  religion  preaches  the  truth  of  
propositions  for which  no  evidence  is  even  conceivable. This put the 
"leap"  in  Kierkegaard's  leap  of faith. 
What  if all our  knowledge  about the  world were  suddenly  to  dis-
appear?  Imagine that  six billion of us wake up tomorrow morning in 
a  state  of utter  ignorance  and  confusion.  Our  books  and  computers  
are  still  here, but  we  can't  make  heads  or  tails  of their  contents. We 
have even  forgotten how to drive our  cars and brush our teeth. What 
knowledge  would  we  want  to  reclaim  first?  Well,  there's  that  busi-
ness  about growing  food and building  shelter that we would want to 
get  reacquainted  with.  We  would  want  to  relearn  how  to  use  and  
repair  many  of  our  machines.  Learning  to  understand  spoken  and  
written  language would  also be  a  top  priority,  given that  these  skills  
are  necessary  for  acquiring  most  others.  When  in  this  process  of  
reclaiming our humanity will it be important to know that Jesus was 
born  of  a  virgin?  Or  that  he  was  resurrected?  And  how  would  we  
relearn  these  truths,  if they  are  indeed  true?  By  reading  the  Bible?  
Our  tour  of the  shelves  will  deliver  similar  pearls  from  antiquity—  

24         THE     END     OF     FAITH     
like  the  "fact"  that  Isis,  the goddess  of fertility,  sports  an  impressive  
pair  of  cow  horns.  Reading  further,  we  will  learn  that  Thor  carries  
a  hammer  and that  Marduk's  sacred  animals  are  horses,  dogs,  and  a  
dragon with  a  forked tongue. Whom  shall we  give  top billing in  our  
resurrected  world?  Yaweh  or  Shiva?  And  when  will  we  want  to  
relearn  that  premarital  sex  is  a  sin?  Or  that  adulteresses  should  be  
stoned  to  death?  Or  that  the  soul  enters  the  zygote  at  the  moment  
of conception? And what  will  we  think  of those  curious  people who 
begin proclaiming that one of our books  is  distinct  from  all others in 
that  it  was  actually written  by  the  Creator  of the  universe?  
There  are  undoubtedly  spiritual  truths  that  we  would  want  to  
relearn—once  we  manage  to  feed  and  clothe  ourselves—and  these  
are  truths  that  we  have  learned  imperfectly  in  our  present  state.  
How  is  it  possible,  for  instance,  to  overcome  one's  fear  and  inward-
ness and simply love other human beings? Assume,  for the moment, 
that  such  a  process  of personal  transformation  exists  and  that  there  
is  something worth knowing about it; there  is,  in other words,  some  
skill,  or  discipline,  or  conceptual  understanding,  or  dietary  supple-
ment  that  allows  for  the  reliable  transformation  of  fearful,  hateful,  
or indifferent persons into loving ones.  If so, we should be positively 
desperate  to  know  about  it.  There  may  even  be  a  few  biblical  pas-
sages  that  would  be  useful  in  this  regard—but  as  for  whole  rafts  of  
untestable  doctrines,  clearly  there  would  be  no  reasonable  basis  to  
take  them  up  again.  The  Bible  and  Koran,  it  seems  certain,  would  
find  themselves  respectfully  shelved  next  to  Ovid's  Metamorphoses  
and  the  Egyptian  Book  of  the  Dead.  
The  point  is  that  most  of  what  we  currently  hold  sacred  is  not  
sacred  for  any  reason  other  than  that  it  was  thought  sacred  yester-
day.  Surely,  if we  could  create  the  world  anew,  the  practice  of orga-
nizing  our  lives  around  untestable  propositions  found  in  ancient  
literature—to  say  nothing  of killing  and  dying  for  them—would  be  
impossible  to justify. What  stops  us  from  finding  it  impossible  now?  
Many  have  observed that  religion,  by  lending  meaning  to human 
life,  permits  communities  (at  least  those  united  under  a  single  faith)  

REASON    IN    EXILE          25          
to  cohere.  Historically this  is true,  and  on  this  score  religion  is  to be 
credited  as much  for wars  of conquest  as  for  feast days  and brotherly 
love.  But  in  its   effect  upon  the   modern  world—a  world  already  
united, at least potentially, by economic, environmental, political, and 
epidemiological  necessity—religious  ideology  is  dangerously  retro-
grade. Our past is  not  sacred  for being past, and there is  much that is 
behind  us  that we  are  struggling  to  keep  behind  us,  and  to  which,  it  
is  to  be  hoped,  we  could  never  return  with  a  clear  conscience:  the  
divine  right  of  kings,  feudalism,  the  caste  system,  slavery,  political  
executions,   forced   castration,   vivisection,   bearbaiting,   honorable   
duels,  chastity  belts,  trial  by  ordeal,  child  labor,  human  and  animal  
sacrifice,  the  stoning  of  heretics,  cannibalism,  sodomy  laws,  taboos  
against   contraception,   human   radiation   experiments—the   list   is   
nearly  endless,  and  if it were extended indefinitely,  the proportion  of  
abuses  for which  religion  could be found directly responsible is likely 
to  remain======================================================== in  fact,  a  
naturally  occurring  plant.
28
  Cancer  patients  and  paraplegics  have  
been  sentenced to  decades  in  prison  for  marijuana  possession.  Own-
ers  of garden-supply  stores  have  received  similar  sentences  because  
some   of  their   customers   were   caught  growing  marijuana.  What  
explains   this   astonishing   wastage   of   human   life   and   material   
resources ? The only explanation is that our discourse on this  subject  
has  never  been  obliged  to  function  within  the  bounds  of rationality. 
Under our current laws,  it is  safe to  say, if a drug were  invented that 
posed  no  risk of physical harm  or addiction  to its  users  but produced 
a brief feeling  of spiritual bliss  and  epiphany  in  100  percent  of those 
who  tried  it,  this  drug  would  be  illegal,  and  people  would  be  pun-
ished  mercilessly  for  its  use.  Only  anxiety  about  the  biblical  crime  
of  idolatry  would  appear  to  make  sense  of  this  retributive  impulse.  
Because  we  are  a  people  of  faith,  taught  to  concern  ourselves  with  
the  sinfulness  of our neighbors, we have grown tolerant of irrational 
uses  of state  power.  
Our prohibition  of certain  substances  has  led  thousands  of other-
wise productive  and law-abiding  men and women  to  be  locked  away  
for  decades  at  a  stretch,  sometimes   for  life.  Their  children  have  
become  wards  of  the  state.  As  if  such  cascading  horror  were  not  
disturbing  enough,  violent  criminals—murders,  rapists,  and  child  
molesters—are  regularly  paroled to  make  room  for them.
29
  Here we 
appear  to  have  overstepped  the  banality  of  evil  and  plunged  to  the  
absurdity  at  its  depths.
30  
The  consequences  of  our  irrationality  on  this  front  are  so  egre-
gious  that  they bear  closer  examination.  Each  year,  over  1.5  million  
men  and  women  are  arrested  in  the  United  States  because  of  our  
drug  laws. At this moment, somewhere on the order of 400,000 men 
and  women  languish  in  U.S.  prisons  for  nonviolent  drug  offenses.  
One  million  others  are  currently  on  probation.
31
  More  people  are  
imprisoned  for  nonviolent  drug  offenses  in  the  United  States  than  
are incarcerated,  for any reason,  in  all of Western  Europe  (which  has  

WEST    OF    EDEN          163          
a  larger  population).  The  cost  of  these  efforts,  at  the  federal  level  
alone,  is  nearly  $20  billion  dollars  annually.
32
  The  total  cost  of  our  
drug  laws—when  one  factors  in  the  expense  to  state  and  local  gov-
ernments  and the  tax  revenue  lost by our  failure  to  regulate the  sale  
of  drugs—could  easily  be  in  excess  of  $100  billion  dollars  each  
year.
33
  Our  war  on  drugs  consumes  an  estimated  50  percent  of the 
trial  time  of  our  courts  and  the  full-time  energies  of  over  400,000  
police  officers.
34
 These  are  resources  that might otherwise  be  used to 
fight  violent  crime  and  terrorism.  
In  historical  terms,  there  was  every  reason  to  expect  that  such  a  
policy  of  prohibition  would  fail.  It  is  well  known,  for  instance,  that  
the  experiment  with  the  prohibition  of alcohol  in  the  United  States  
did little more than precipitate  a  terrible comedy  of increased drink-
ing,  organized  crime,  and  police  corruption.  What  is  not  generally  
remembered  is  that  Prohibition  was  an  explicitly  religious  exercise,  
being the joint product of the Woman's  Christian Temperance Union 
and  the  pious  lobbying  of certain  Protestant missionary  societies.  
The  problem  with  the  prohibition  of  any  desirable  commodity  is  
money.  The  United  Nations  values  the  drug  trade  at  $400  billion  a  
year.  This  exceeds  the  annual  budget  for  the  U.S.  Department  of  
Defense.  If this  figure  is  correct, the  trade  in illegal drugs  constitutes  
8  percent  of  all  international  commerce  (while  the  sale  of  textiles  
makes up 7.5 percent and motor vehicles just  5.3  percent).
35
 And yet, 
prohibition  itself is what makes the manufacture and  sale of drugs so 
extraordinarily  profitable.  Those  who  earn  their  living  in  this  way  
enjoy  a  5,000  to  20,000  percent return  on  their investment,  tax-free.  
Every  relevant  indicator  of  the  drug  trade—rates  of  drug  use  and  
interdiction,  estimates  of  production,  the  purity  of  drugs  on  the  
street,  etc.—shows  that the government  can  do  nothing to  stop  it  as  
long  as  such  profits  exist  (indeed,  these  profits are  highly corrupting 
of law  enforcement  in  any  case). The  crimes  of the  addict,  to  finance  
the  stratospheric  cost  of his  lifestyle,  and the  crimes  of the  dealer,  to  
protect  both  his  territory  and  his  goods,  are  likewise  the  results  of  
prohibition.
36
 A final  irony, which  seems good enough to be the work 

164         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
of Satan  himself, is that the market we  have  created by our drug  laws  
has become a steady source of revenue  for terrorist organizations like 
Al  Qaeda,  Islamic Jihad,  Hezbollah, Shining  Path,  and others.
37 
Even  if  we  acknowledge  that  stopping  drug  use  is  a  justifiable  
social goal, how does the  financial  cost of our war on drugs  appear in 
light  of the other  challenges  we  face?  Consider that  it would  require  
only  a  onetime  expenditure  of  $2  billion  to  secure  our  commercial  
seaports against smuggled nuclear weapons. At present we have allo-
cated  a  mere  $93  million  for  this  purpose.
38
  How  will  our  prohibi-
tion   of  marijuana  use   look   (this   comes   at   a   cost   of  $4  billion  
annually)  if a new  sun  ever  dawns  over the port  of Los Angeles ?  Or  
consider  that  the  U.S.  government  can  afford  to  spend  only  $2.3  
billion  each  year  on  the  reconstruction  of Afghanistan. The  Taliban  
and  Al  Qaeda  are  now  regrouping.  Warlords  rule  the  countryside  
beyond  the  city  limits  of  Kabul.  Which  is  more  important  to  us,  
reclaiming  this  part  of  the  world  for  the  forces  of  civilization  or  
keeping  cancer  patients  in  Berkeley   from  relieving  their  nausea  
with  marijuana?  Our  present  use  of  government  funds  suggests  
an  uncanny  skewing—we  might  even   say  derangement—of  our  
national  priorities.  Such  a  bizarre  allocation  of  resources  is  sure  to  
keep Afghanistan  in  ruins  for many  years  to  come.  It will  also  leave  
Afghan  farmers with  no  alternative but  to  grow  opium.  Happily  for  
them, our drug  laws  still  render  this  a highly  profitable  enterprise.
39  
Anyone  who  believes  that  God  is  watching  us  from  beyond  the  
stars  will  feel  that  punishing  peaceful  men  and women  for  their pri-
vate pleasure is  perfectly reasonable. We are  now in the twenty-first 
century.  Perhaps  we  should  have  better  reasons  for  depriving  our  
neighbors  of  their  liberty  at  gunpoint.  Given  the  magnitude  of the 
real  problems  that  confront  us-—terrorism,   nuclear  proliferation,  
the  spread  of  infectious  disease,  failing  infrastructure,  lack  of  ade-
quate  funds  for education  and health  care,  etc.—our war  on  sin  is  so  
outrageously unwise  as  to  almost  defy  rational  comment.  How have 
we  grown  so  blind  to our  deeper  interests ? And  how  have  we  man-
aged  to  enact  such  policies  with  so  little  substantive  debate?  

WEST     OF    EDEN            l65            
The    God   of   Medicine   
While  there  is  surely  an  opposition  between  reason  and  faith,  we  
will  see  that  there  is  none  between  reason  and  love  or  reason  and  
spirituality. The  basis  for this  claim  is  simple.  Every  experience that 
a  human  being  can  have  admits  of  rational  discussion  about  its  
causes  and consequences  (or about our ignorance  thereof). Although 
this  leaves  considerable  room  for the  exotic,  it  leaves  none  at  all  for  
faith. There  may  yet  be  good  reasons  to  believe  in  psychic phenom-
ena,  alien life, the doctrine of rebirth, the healing power of prayer,  or  
anything  else—but  our  credulity  must  scale  with  the  evidence.  The  
doctrine  of  faith  denies  this.  From  the  perspective  of faith,  it  is  bet-
ter  to  ape  the behavior  of one's  ancestors  than  to  find  creative  ways  
to  uncover  new truths  in  the  present.  
There  are  sources  of  irrationality  other  than  religious  faith,  of  
course,  but  none  of  them  are  celebrated  for  their  role  in  shaping  
public policy.  Supreme  Court justices  are not in  the  habit of praising 
our  nation  for  its  reliance  upon  astrology,  or  for  its  wealth  of  UFO  
sightings,  or  for exemplifying the various  reasoning biases that psy-
chologists  have  found  to  be  more  or  less  endemic  to  our  species.
40  
Only mainstream  religious  dogmatism  receives  the  unqualified sup-
port  of  government.  And  yet,  religious  faith  obscures  uncertainty  
where  uncertainty  manifestly  exists,  allowing  the  unknown,  the  
implausible,  and the patently  false  to  achieve primacy over the  facts.  
Consider  the  present  debate  over  research  on  human  embryonic  
stem  cells. The  problem  with  this  research,  from  the  religious  point  
of view,  is  simple: it entails the destruction  of human  embryos. The 
embryos  in  question  will  have  been  cultured  in  vitro  (not  removed  
from  a woman's  body)  and permitted  to  grow  for three  to  five  days.  
At  this  stage  of  development,  an  embryo  is  called  a  blastocyst  and  
consists of about 150 cells arranged in  a microscopic sphere. Interior 
to the  blastocyst  is  a  small======================================================== for  my  behavior  to  be  informed  by  what  I  
believe, I must believe things that admit of behavior that is, at a min-
imum,  possible.  Certain  logical  relations,  after  all,  seem  etched  into  
the very structure of our world.
8
 The telephone  rings  .  .  . either it  is  
my brother  on  the  line,  or  it  isn't.  I  may  believe  one  proposition  or  
the  other—or  I  may  believe  that  I  do  not  know—but  under  no  cir-
cumstances  is  it  acceptable  for  me  to  believe  both.  
Departures  from  normativity,  in  particular  with  respect  to  the  

THE    NATURE    OF    BELIEF          55          
rules  of  inference  that  lead  us  to  construct  new  beliefs  on  the  basis  
of  old  ones,  have  been  the   subject  of  much  research  and  much  
debate.
9
  Whatever  construal  of  these  matters  one  adopts,  no  one  
believes  that  human  beings  are  perfect  engines  of  coherence.  Our  
inevitable  failures  of rationality  can  take  many  forms,  ranging  from  
mere  logical  inconsistencies  to  radical  discontinuities  in  subjectivity  
itself.  Most  of  the  literature  on  "self-deception,"  for  instance,  sug-
gests  that  a  person  can  tacitly  believe  one  proposition,  while  suc-
cessfully  convincing  himself  of its  antithesis  (e.g.,  my  wife  is  having  
an  affair,  my  wife  is  faithful),  though  considerable  controversy  still  
surrounds  the  question  of  how  (or  whether)  such  cognitive  contor-
tions  actually  occur.
10
  Other  failures  of  psychological  integration—  
ranging    from    "split-brain"    patients    to    cases    of   "multiple-
personality"—are  at  least  partially  explicable  in  terms  of  areas  of  
belief  processing  in  the  brain  that  have  become  structurally  and/or  
functionally  partitioned  from  one  another.  
The    American      Embassy      
A  case  in  point: While  traveling  in  France,  my  fiancee  and  I  experi-
enced   a   bizarre   partitioning   of  our   beliefs   about  the  American  
embassy  in  Paris:  
Belief system 1: As  the  events  of September  11  still  cast  a  shadow  
over  the  world,  we  had  decided  to  avoid  obvious  terrorist  targets  
while  traveling.  First  on  our  list  of  such  places  was  the American 
embassy  in  Paris.  Paris  is  home  to  the  largest  Muslim  population  
in  the Western  world,  and  this  embassy  had  already  been  the  tar-
get  of  a  foiled  suicide  plot.  The  American  embassy  would  have  
been the last place we would have willingly visited while in France. 
Belief  system  2:  Prior  to  our  arrival  in  Paris,  we  had  great  diffi-
culty  finding  a  hotel  room.  Every  hotel  we  checked  was  full,  

56        THE    END    OF    FAITH    
except  for  one  on  the  Right  Bank,  which  had abundant  vacancies.  
The  woman  at  reservations  even  offered  us   a  complimentary  
upgrade  to  a  suite.  She  also  gave  us  a  choice  of views—we  could  
face  the  inner  courtyard,  or  outward,  overlooking  the  American  
embassy. "Which view would you choose?"  I  asked. "The view of 
the embassy," she  replied. "It's much more peaceful."  I envisioned 
a large, embassy garden. "Great,"  I  said.  "We'll  take  it."  
The  next  day, we  arrived at the  hotel  and  found  that we  had  been  
given  a room with  a courtyard view. Both my  fiancee and  I were dis-
appointed.  We  had,  after  all,  been  promised  a  view  of the  American  
embassy. 
We  called  a  friend  living  in  Paris  to  inform  her  of  our  where-
abouts. Our  friend, who is wise  in the ways  of the  world,  had this  to  
say:  "That  hotel  is  directly  next  to  the  American  embassy.  That's  
why  they're  offering  you  an  upgrade.  Have  you  guys  lost  your  
minds?  Do  you  know what  day  it  is?  It's  the  Fourth  of July." 
The  appearance  of  this  degree  of  inconsistency  in  our  lives  was  
astounding.  We  had  spent  the  better  part  of the  day  simultaneously  
trying  to  avoid  and  gain  proximity  to  the  very  same  point  in  space.  
Realizing  this,  we  could  scarcely  have  been  more  surprised  had  we  
both  grown  antlers.  
But  what  seems  psychologically  so  mysterious  may  be  quite  
trivial  in  neurological  terms.  It  appears  that  the  phrase  "American  
embassy,"  spoken  in  two  different  contexts,  merely  activated  dis-
tinct  networks  of  association  within  our  brains.  Consequently,  the  
phrase  had  acquired  two  distinct  meanings.  In  the  first  case,  it  sig-
nified  a  prime  terrorist  target;  in  the  second,  it  promised  a  desir-
able  view  from  a  hotel  window.  The  significance  of  the  phrase  in  
the  world,  however,  is  single  and  indivisible,  since  only  one  build-
ing  answers  to  this  name  in  Paris.  The  communication  between  
these  networks  of  neurons  appeared  to  be  negligible;  our  brains  
were  effectively  partitioned.  The  flimsiness  of  this  partition  was  
revealed  by  just  how  easily  it  came  down.  All  it  took  for  me  to  

THE       NATURE        OF       BELIEF  57  
unify  my  fiancee's  outlook  on  this  subject  was  to  turn  to  her—she  
who  was  still  silently  coveting  a  view  of the  American  embassy—  
and  say, with  obvious  alarm, "This hotel is ten  feet  from the Amer-
ican  embassy!"  The  partition  came  down,  and  she  was  as  flabber-
gasted as  I was. 
And yet,  the psychologically irreconcilable  facts  are these: on the 
day  in  question,  never  was  there  a  time  when  we  would  have  will-
ingly  placed  ourselves  near  the  American  embassy,  and  never  was  
there  a  time  when  we  were  not  eager  to  move  to  a  room  with  a  
view  of  it.  
While  behavioral  and  linguistic  necessity  demands  that  we  seek  
coherence  among  our  beliefs  wherever  we  can,  we  know  that  total  
coherence,  even  in  a  maximally integrated  brain, would  be  impossi-
ble to achieve. This becomes apparent the moment we imagine a per-
son's  beliefs  recorded  as  a  list  of assertions  like  I  am  walking  in  the  
park;  Parks  generally  have  animals;  Lions  are  animals;  and  so  on—  
each  being a  belief unto  itself,  as  well  as  a  possible basis  upon which 
to  form  further  inferences  (both  good  ones:  I  may  soon  see  an  ani-
mal;  and  bad  ones:  I  may  soon  see  a  lion),  and  hence  new  beliefs,  
about  the  world.  If  perfect  coherence  is  to  be  had,  each  new  belief  
must  be  checked  against  all  others,  and  every  combination  thereof,  
for  logical  contradictions.
11
  But  here  we  encounter  a  minor  compu-
tational   difficulty:   the   number   of  necessary   comparisons   grows   
exponentially  as  each  new  proposition  is  added  to  the  list.  How  
many  beliefs  could  a  perfect  brain  check  for  logical  contradictions?  
The  answer  is  surprising.  Even  if  a  computer  were  as  large  as  the  
known  universe,  built  of  components  no  larger  than  protons,  with  
switching  speeds  as  fast  as  the  speed  of light,  all  laboring  in  parallel  
from  the  moment  of the  big bang  up  to the present,  it would  still be 
fighting  to  add  a  300th  belief  to  its  list.
12
 What  does  this  say  about  
the  possibility  of  our  ever  guaranteeing  that  our  worldview  is  per-
fectly   free  from  contradiction?  It  is  not  even  a  dream  within  a  
dream.
13
  And  yet,  given  the  demands  of  language  and  behavior,  it  
remains  true  that  we  must  strive  for  coherence  wherever  it  is  in  

58         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
doubt,  because  failure  here  is  synonymous  with  a  failure  either  of  
linguistic  sense  or  of behavioral  possibility
14  
Beliefs    as    Representations    of   the    World    
For  even  the  most  basic  knowledge  of the  world  to  be  possible,  reg-
ularities  in  a  nervous  system  must  consistently  mirror  regularities  
in the environment. If a different assemblage of neurons in  my brain 
fired whenever  I  saw a person's  face,  I  would  have  no way  to  form  a  
memory  of  him.  His  face  could  look  like  a  face  one  moment  and  
a toaster the next, and  I would have no reason  to be surprised by the 
inconsistency,  for there would be nothing  for a  given pattern  of neu-
ral  activation  to  be  consistent  with. As  Stephen  Pinker points  out,  it  
is only the orderly mirroring between  a system that processes infor-
mation  (a  brain  or  a  computer)  and  the  laws  of  logic  or  probability  
that  explains  "how  rationality  can  emerge  from  mindless  physical  
process"  in  the  first  place.
15
 Words  are  arranged  in  a  systematic  and  
rule-based way  (syntax),  and  beliefs  are  likewise  (in  that  they  must  
logically cohere), because both body and world are so arranged. Con-
sider  the  statement  There  is  an  apple  and  an  orange  in  jack's  lunch  
box.  The  syntactical  (and  hence  logical)   significance  of  the  word  
"and"  guarantees  that  anyone  who  believes  this  statement  will  also  
believe  the  following propositions:  There  is  an  apple  in  jack's  lunch  
box  and  There  is  an  orange  in  jack's  lunch  box.  This  is  not  due  to  
some  magical property that syntax holds  over the world;  rather,  it is 
a  simple  consequence  of  the  fact  that  we  use  words  like  "and"  to  
mirror  the  orderly  behavior  of  objects.  Someone  who  will  endorse  
the  conjunction  of two statements, while denying them  individually,  
either  does  not  understand  the  use  of  the  word  "and"  or  does  not  
understand  things  like  apples,  oranges,  and  lunch  boxes.
16
  It just  so  
happens  that we  live  in  a universe  in  which,  if you put an  apple======================================================== in  fact,  a  
naturally  occurring  plant.
28
  Cancer  patients  and  paraplegics  have  
been  sentenced to  decades  in  prison  for  marijuana  possession.  Own-
ers  of garden-supply  stores  have  received  similar  sentences  because  
some   of  their   customers   were   caught  growing  marijuana.  What  
explains   this   astonishing   wastage   of   human   life   and   material   
resources ? The only explanation is that our discourse on this  subject  
has  never  been  obliged  to  function  within  the  bounds  of rationality. 
Under our current laws,  it is  safe to  say, if a drug were  invented that 
posed  no  risk of physical harm  or addiction  to its  users  but produced 
a brief feeling  of spiritual bliss  and  epiphany  in  100  percent  of those 
who  tried  it,  this  drug  would  be  illegal,  and  people  would  be  pun-
ished  mercilessly  for  its  use.  Only  anxiety  about  the  biblical  crime  
of  idolatry  would  appear  to  make  sense  of  this  retributive  impulse.  
Because  we  are  a  people  of  faith,  taught  to  concern  ourselves  with  
the  sinfulness  of our neighbors, we have grown tolerant of irrational 
uses  of state  power.  
Our prohibition  of certain  substances  has  led  thousands  of other-
wise productive  and law-abiding  men and women  to  be  locked  away  
for  decades  at  a  stretch,  sometimes   for  life.  Their  children  have  
become  wards  of  the  state.  As  if  such  cascading  horror  were  not  
disturbing  enough,  violent  criminals—murders,  rapists,  and  child  
molesters—are  regularly  paroled to  make  room  for them.
29
  Here we 
appear  to  have  overstepped  the  banality  of  evil  and  plunged  to  the  
absurdity  at  its  depths.
30  
The  consequences  of  our  irrationality  on  this  front  are  so  egre-
gious  that  they bear  closer  examination.  Each  year,  over  1.5  million  
men  and  women  are  arrested  in  the  United  States  because  of  our  
drug  laws. At this moment, somewhere on the order of 400,000 men 
and  women  languish  in  U.S.  prisons  for  nonviolent  drug  offenses.  
One  million  others  are  currently  on  probation.
31
  More  people  are  
imprisoned  for  nonviolent  drug  offenses  in  the  United  States  than  
are incarcerated,  for any reason,  in  all of Western  Europe  (which  has  

WEST    OF    EDEN          163          
a  larger  population).  The  cost  of  these  efforts,  at  the  federal  level  
alone,  is  nearly  $20  billion  dollars  annually.
32
  The  total  cost  of  our  
drug  laws—when  one  factors  in  the  expense  to  state  and  local  gov-
ernments  and the  tax  revenue  lost by our  failure  to  regulate the  sale  
of  drugs—could  easily  be  in  excess  of  $100  billion  dollars  each  
year.
33
  Our  war  on  drugs  consumes  an  estimated  50  percent  of the 
trial  time  of  our  courts  and  the  full-time  energies  of  over  400,000  
police  officers.
34
 These  are  resources  that might otherwise  be  used to 
fight  violent  crime  and  terrorism.  
In  historical  terms,  there  was  every  reason  to  expect  that  such  a  
policy  of  prohibition  would  fail.  It  is  well  known,  for  instance,  that  
the  experiment  with  the  prohibition  of alcohol  in  the  United  States  
did little more than precipitate  a  terrible comedy  of increased drink-
ing,  organized  crime,  and  police  corruption.  What  is  not  generally  
remembered  is  that  Prohibition  was  an  explicitly  religious  exercise,  
being the joint product of the Woman's  Christian Temperance Union 
and  the  pious  lobbying  of certain  Protestant missionary  societies.  
The  problem  with  the  prohibition  of  any  desirable  commodity  is  
money.  The  United  Nations  values  the  drug  trade  at  $400  billion  a  
year.  This  exceeds  the  annual  budget  for  the  U.S.  Department  of  
Defense.  If this  figure  is  correct, the  trade  in illegal drugs  constitutes  
8  percent  of  all  international  commerce  (while  the  sale  of  textiles  
makes up 7.5 percent and motor vehicles just  5.3  percent).
35
 And yet, 
prohibition  itself is what makes the manufacture and  sale of drugs so 
extraordinarily  profitable.  Those  who  earn  their  living  in  this  way  
enjoy  a  5,000  to  20,000  percent return  on  their investment,  tax-free.  
Every  relevant  indicator  of  the  drug  trade—rates  of  drug  use  and  
interdiction,  estimates  of  production,  the  purity  of  drugs  on  the  
street,  etc.—shows  that the government  can  do  nothing to  stop  it  as  
long  as  such  profits  exist  (indeed,  these  profits are  highly corrupting 
of law  enforcement  in  any  case). The  crimes  of the  addict,  to  finance  
the  stratospheric  cost  of his  lifestyle,  and the  crimes  of the  dealer,  to  
protect  both  his  territory  and  his  goods,  are  likewise  the  results  of  
prohibition.
36
 A final  irony, which  seems good enough to be the work 

164         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
of Satan  himself, is that the market we  have  created by our drug  laws  
has become a steady source of revenue  for terrorist organizations like 
Al  Qaeda,  Islamic Jihad,  Hezbollah, Shining  Path,  and others.
37 
Even  if  we  acknowledge  that  stopping  drug  use  is  a  justifiable  
social goal, how does the  financial  cost of our war on drugs  appear in 
light  of the other  challenges  we  face?  Consider that  it would  require  
only  a  onetime  expenditure  of  $2  billion  to  secure  our  commercial  
seaports against smuggled nuclear weapons. At present we have allo-
cated  a  mere  $93  million  for  this  purpose.
38
  How  will  our  prohibi-
tion   of  marijuana  use   look   (this   comes   at   a   cost   of  $4  billion  
annually)  if a new  sun  ever  dawns  over the port  of Los Angeles ?  Or  
consider  that  the  U.S.  government  can  afford  to  spend  only  $2.3  
billion  each  year  on  the  reconstruction  of Afghanistan. The  Taliban  
and  Al  Qaeda  are  now  regrouping.  Warlords  rule  the  countryside  
beyond  the  city  limits  of  Kabul.  Which  is  more  important  to  us,  
reclaiming  this  part  of  the  world  for  the  forces  of  civilization  or  
keeping  cancer  patients  in  Berkeley   from  relieving  their  nausea  
with  marijuana?  Our  present  use  of  government  funds  suggests  
an  uncanny  skewing—we  might  even   say  derangement—of  our  
national  priorities.  Such  a  bizarre  allocation  of  resources  is  sure  to  
keep Afghanistan  in  ruins  for many  years  to  come.  It will  also  leave  
Afghan  farmers with  no  alternative but  to  grow  opium.  Happily  for  
them, our drug  laws  still  render  this  a highly  profitable  enterprise.
39  
Anyone  who  believes  that  God  is  watching  us  from  beyond  the  
stars  will  feel  that  punishing  peaceful  men  and women  for  their pri-
vate pleasure is  perfectly reasonable. We are  now in the twenty-first 
century.  Perhaps  we  should  have  better  reasons  for  depriving  our  
neighbors  of  their  liberty  at  gunpoint.  Given  the  magnitude  of the 
real  problems  that  confront  us-—terrorism,   nuclear  proliferation,  
the  spread  of  infectious  disease,  failing  infrastructure,  lack  of  ade-
quate  funds  for education  and health  care,  etc.—our war  on  sin  is  so  
outrageously unwise  as  to  almost  defy  rational  comment.  How have 
we  grown  so  blind  to our  deeper  interests ? And  how  have  we  man-
aged  to  enact  such  policies  with  so  little  substantive  debate?  

WEST     OF    EDEN            l65            
The    God   of   Medicine   
While  there  is  surely  an  opposition  between  reason  and  faith,  we  
will  see  that  there  is  none  between  reason  and  love  or  reason  and  
spirituality. The  basis  for this  claim  is  simple.  Every  experience that 
a  human  being  can  have  admits  of  rational  discussion  about  its  
causes  and consequences  (or about our ignorance  thereof). Although 
this  leaves  considerable  room  for the  exotic,  it  leaves  none  at  all  for  
faith. There  may  yet  be  good  reasons  to  believe  in  psychic phenom-
ena,  alien life, the doctrine of rebirth, the healing power of prayer,  or  
anything  else—but  our  credulity  must  scale  with  the  evidence.  The  
doctrine  of  faith  denies  this.  From  the  perspective  of faith,  it  is  bet-
ter  to  ape  the behavior  of one's  ancestors  than  to  find  creative  ways  
to  uncover  new truths  in  the  present.  
There  are  sources  of  irrationality  other  than  religious  faith,  of  
course,  but  none  of  them  are  celebrated  for  their  role  in  shaping  
public policy.  Supreme  Court justices  are not in  the  habit of praising 
our  nation  for  its  reliance  upon  astrology,  or  for  its  wealth  of  UFO  
sightings,  or  for exemplifying the various  reasoning biases that psy-
chologists  have  found  to  be  more  or  less  endemic  to  our  species.
40  
Only mainstream  religious  dogmatism  receives  the  unqualified sup-
port  of  government.  And  yet,  religious  faith  obscures  uncertainty  
where  uncertainty  manifestly  exists,  allowing  the  unknown,  the  
implausible,  and the patently  false  to  achieve primacy over the  facts.  
Consider  the  present  debate  over  research  on  human  embryonic  
stem  cells. The  problem  with  this  research,  from  the  religious  point  
of view,  is  simple: it entails the destruction  of human  embryos. The 
embryos  in  question  will  have  been  cultured  in  vitro  (not  removed  
from  a woman's  body)  and permitted  to  grow  for three  to  five  days.  
At  this  stage  of  development,  an  embryo  is  called  a  blastocyst  and  
consists of about 150 cells arranged in  a microscopic sphere. Interior 
to the  blastocyst  is  a  small======================================================== Israeli settlers demonstrates—it is not difficult  to  find great swaths 
of the  Good  Book,  as well  as  Christian and Jewish  exegesis, that offer 
counterarguments. The  Christian  who  wants  to  live  in  the  full pres-
ence of rationality and modernity  can keep the Jesus  of Matthew ser-
monizing  upon  the  mount  and  simply  ignore  the  world-consuming  

138  THE      END      OF      FAITH      
rigmarole of Revelation.  Islam appears to  offer no  such  refuge  for one 
who would live peacefully  in  a pluralistic world.  Of course, glimmers 
of hope  can be  found in even the shadiest of places:  as Berman points 
out,  the  diatribes  of Muslim  orthodoxy  are  predicated  upon  the  fear  
that  Western  liberalism  is  in  the  process  of  invading  the  Muslim  
mind and "stealing his loyalty"—indicating that  Muslims,  like  other  
people,  are  susceptible  to  the  siren's  song  of  liberalism.
39
  We  must  
surely hope  so. The character of their religious  beliefs,  however, sug-
gests  that they will be  less  susceptible than the  rest of us. 
For reasons we have already begun to explore, there is a deep bias 
in  our  discourse  against  conclusions  of  this  sort.  With  respect  to  
Islam, the liberal tendency is  to blame the West  for raising the ire of 
the  Muslim  world,  through  centuries  of  self-serving  conquest  and  
meddling,  while  conservatives  tend  to  blame  other  contingent  fea-
tures  of  Middle  East, Arab,  or  Muslim  history.  The  problem  seems  
to  have  been  located  everywhere  except  at  the  core  of  the  Muslim  
faith—but  faith  is  precisely  what  differentiates  every  Muslim  from  
every  infidel.  Without  faith,  most  Muslim  grievances  against  the  
West would be  impossible  even  to  formulate,  much  less  avenge.  
Leftist    Unreason    and    the    Strange    Case    of   Noam    Chomsky    
Nevertheless,  many  people  are  now  convinced  that  the  attacks  of  
September  11  say little  about  Islam  and much about  the  sordid  career  
of the West—in particular, about the failures of U.S. foreign policy. The 
French  philosopher  Jean  Baudrillard  gives  these  themes  an  especially  
luxuriant  expression,  declaring  that  terrorism  is  a  necessary  conse-
quence  of American  "hegemony."  He goes  so  far as  to suggest that we 
were  secretly hoping that  such  devastation  would be  visited  upon us: 
At  a  pinch  we  can  say  that  they  did  it,  but  we  wished for  it.  .  .  .  
When  global  power  monopolizes  the  situation  to  this  extent,  
when  there  is  such  a  formidable  condensation  of  all  functions  in  

THE    PROBLEM    WITH    ISLAM          139          
the  technocratic  machinery,  and  when  no  alternative  form  of  
thinking  is  allowed,  what  other  way  is  there  but  a  terroristic  
situational  transfer.  It  was  the  system  itself  which  created  the  
objective  conditions  for this brutal  retaliation.  .  .  . This  is  terror  
against  terror—there  is  no  longer  any  ideology  behind  it.  We  
are  far  beyond  ideology  and  politics  now. ...  As  if  the  power  
bearing  these  towers  suddenly  lost  all  energy,  all  resilience;  as  
though   that   arrogant   power   suddenly   gave   way   under   the   
pressure  of  too  intense  an  effort:  the  effort  always  to  be  the  
unique  world  model.
40  
If  one  were  feeling  charitable,  one  might  assume  that  something  
essential  to  these  profundities  got  lost  in  translation.  I  think  it  far  
more  likely,  however,  that  it  did  not  survive  translation  into  French.  
If Baudrillard had been  obliged to  live  in Afghanistan  under the  Tal-
iban,  would  he  have  thought  that  the  horrible  abridgments  of  his  
freedom were  a matter of the United  States's  "effort always  to be the 
unique world model" ? Would the  peculiar halftime entertainment at 
every  soccer  match—where  suspected  fornicators,  adulterers,  and  
thieves  were  regularly  butchered  in  the  dirt  at  centerfield—have  
struck  him  as  the  first  rumblings  of  a  "terroristic  situational  trans-
fer" ? We may be beyond politics, but we are not in the least "beyond 
ideology"  now.  Ideology  is  all  that our enemies  have.
41  
And yet,  thinkers  far more  sober than  Baudrillard view the  events  
of  September  11  as  a  consequence  of American  foreign  policy.  Per-
haps  the  foremost  among  them  is  Noam  Chomsky.  In  addition  to  
making  foundational  contributions  to  linguistics  and the  psychology  
of language, Chomsky has been a persistent critic of U.S.  foreign pol-
icy  for  over  three  decades.  He  has  also  managed  to  demonstrate  a  
principal  failing  of the  liberal  critique  of  power.  He  appears  to  be  an  
exquisitely moral  man whose  political views  prevent  him  from  mak-
ing the most basic moral distinctions—between types of violence, and 
the variety of human  purposes  that  give  rise  to  them.  
In his book 9-11, with rubble  of the World Trade  Center still piled 

140          THE    END    OF    FAITH    
high and smoldering,  Chomsky urged us not to  forget that "the U.S. 
itself is  a leading terrorist state."  In  support  of this  claim  he  catalogs  
a  number  of  American  misdeeds,  including  the  sanctions  that  the  
United  States  imposed  upon  Iraq,  which  led  to  the  death  of "maybe 
half a million  children," and the  1998 bombing of the Al-Shifa phar-
maceuticals plant in  Sudan, which may have set the  stage  for tens of 
thousands  of innocent  Sudanese  to  die  of  tuberculosis,  malaria,  and  
other  treatable  diseases.  Chomsky  does  not  hesitate  to  draw  moral  
equivalences  here:  "For the  first  time in modern  history,  Europe  and  
its  offshoots  were  subjected,  on  home  soil,  to  the  kind  of  atrocity  
that  they  routinely  have  carried  out  elsewhere."
42  
Before  pointing  out just  how  wayward  Chomsky's  thinking  is  on  
this  subject,  I  would  like  to  concede  many  of  his  points,  since  they  
have  the  virtue  of  being  both  generally  important  and  irrelevant  to  
the matter at hand. There is no doubt that the United States has much 
to  atone  for,  both  domestically  and  abroad.  In  this  respect,  we  can  
more  or less  swallow Chomsky's  thesis whole. To produce  this  horri-
ble  confection  at  home,  start  with  our  genocidal  treatment  of  the  
Native Americans,  add  a  couple  hundred  years  of  slavery,  along with 
our  denial  of entry  to  Jewish  refugees  fleeing  the  death  camps  of the 
Third  Reich,  stir  in  our  collusion  with  a  long  list  of modern  despots  
and   our   subsequent   disregard   for   their   appalling   human   rights   
records,  add  our  bombing  of  Cambodia  and  the  Pentagon  Papers  to  
taste,  and then top with our  recent refusals  to  sign the  Kyoto protocol 
for  greenhouse  emissions,  to  support  any  ban  on  land  mines,  and  to  
submit  ourselves  to  the  rulings  of  the  International  Criminal  Court.  
The  result  should  smell  of death,  hypocrisy,  and  fresh  brimstone.  
We  have  surely  done  some  terrible  things  in  the  past.  Undoubt-
edly, we are poised to do terrible things in the future. Nothing I have 
written  in this  book should be  construed as  a  denial  of these  facts,  or  
as defense of state practices that are manifestly abhorrent. There may 
be  much  that  Western  powers,  and  the  United  States  in  particular,  
should  pay  reparations  for. And  our  failure  to  acknowledge  our  mis-
deeds  over  the  years  has  undermined  our  credibility  in  the  interna-
tional   community.   We   can   concede   all   of  this,   and   even   share   

THE    PROBLEM    WITH    ISLAM          141          
Chomsky's  acute  sense  of outrage,  while  recognizing  that  his  analy-
sis  of  our  current  situation  in  the  world  is  a  masterpiece  of  moral  
blindness. 
Take  the  bombing  of  the  Al-Shifa  pharmaceuticals  plant:  accord-
ing  to  Chomsky,  the  atrocity  of  September  11  pales  in  comparison  
with  that perpetrated by  the  Clinton administration  in August  1998.  
But let us  now  ask some very basic questions that Chomsky  seems to 
have neglected to  ask himself: What  did the U.S. government think it 
was  doing  when  it  sent  cruise  missiles  into  Sudan?  Destroying  a  
chemical  weapons  site  used  by  Al  Qaeda.  Did  the  Clinton  adminis-
tration  intend  to  bring  about  the  deaths  of  thousands  of  Sudanese  
children? No. Was our goal to kill as many Sudanese as we could? No. 
Were  we  trying  to  kill  anyone  at  all?  Not  unless  we  thought  mem-
bers of Al Qaeda would be at the Al-Shifa  facility in the middle of the 
night. Asking  these  questions  about  Osama bin  Laden  and the  nine-
teen  hijackers  puts  us  in  a  different  moral  universe  entirely.  
If  we  are  inclined  to  follow  Chomsky  down  the  path  of  moral  
equivalence  and  ignore  the  role  of human  intentions,  we  can  forget  
about the bombing of the Al-Shifa plant, because many of the things 
we  did  not  do  in  Sudan  had  even  greater  consequences. What  about  
all   the   money   and   food  we   simply   never  thought   to   give  the  
Sudanese prior to  1998?  How many  children  did we  kill  (that  is,  not  
save) just by  living in  blissful  ignorance  of the  conditions  in  Sudan?  
Surely  if we had all made it  a priority to  keep death out of Sudan  for  
as  long  as  possible,  untold  millions  could  have  been  saved  from  
whatever  it  was  that  wound  up  killing  them.  We  could  have  sent  
teams of well-intentioned men  and women into Khartoum to ensure 
that  the  Sudanese  wore  their  seatbelts.  Are  we  culpable  for  all  the======================================================== to  some  further end.  Many ethi-
cal  injunctions  converge  here—Kant's  categorical  imperative,  Jesus'  
golden  rule—but  the  basic  facts  are  these:  we  experience  happiness  
and  suffering  ourselves;  we  encounter  others  in  the  world  and  rec-
ognize  that  they  experience  happiness  and  suffering  as  well;  we  
soon  discover  that  "love"  is  largely  a  matter  of wishing  that  others  

A   SCIENCE    OF   GOOD    AND    E  V  I     L     187     
experience  happiness  rather  than  suffering;  and  most  of  us  come  to  
feel  that  love is  more conducive to  happiness,  both  our own  and that 
of  others,  than  hate.  There  is  a  circle  here  that  links  us  to  one  
another:  we  each  want  to  be  happy;  the  social  feeling  of love  is  one  
of  our  greatest  sources  of  happiness;  and  love  entails  that  we  be  
concerned  for  the  happiness  of  others.  We  discover  that  we  can  be  
selfish  together.  
This is just a sketch, but it suggests a clear link between ethics and 
positive  human  emotions. The  fact  that we  want the  people  we  love  
to  be  happy,  and  are  made  happy  by  love  in  turn,  is  an  empirical  
observation.  But  such  observations  are  the  stuff  of  nascent  science.  
What  about  people  who  do  not  love  others,  who  see  no  value  in  it,  
and yet claim  to be perfectly happy? Do such  people  even exist?  Per-
haps they do.  Does this  play havoc with  a  realistic account of ethics? 
No more so than an inability to understand the  special theory of rel-
ativity  would  cast  doubt  upon  modern  physics.  Some  people  can't  
make  heads  or  tails  of  the  assertion  that  the  passage  of  time  might  
be  relative  to  one's  frame  of reference. This prevents  them  from tak-
ing  part in  any  serious  discussion  of physics.  People who  can  see  no  
link  between  love  and  happiness  may  find  themselves  in  the  same  
position  with  respect  to  ethics.  Differences  of opinion  do  not  pose  a  
problem  for  ethical  realism.  
CONSIDER  the  practice  of  "honor  killing"  that  persists  throughout  
much  of  Africa,  the  Middle  East,  and  Southeast  Asia.  We  live  in  a  
world  in  which  women  and  girls  are  regularly  murdered  by  their  
male   relatives   for   perceived   sexual   indiscretions—ranging   from   
merely  speaking  to  a  man  without  permission  to  falling  victim  of  
rape.  Coverage  of  these  atrocities  in  the  Western  media  generally  
refers to them as a "tribal"  practice, although they almost invariably 
occur  in  a  Muslim  context. Whether  we  call  the  beliefs  that  inspire  
this  behavior  "tribal"  or  "religious"  is  immaterial;  the  problem  is  
clearly a product  of what men  in  these  societies  believe about shame 

l88          THE    END     OF    FAITH    
and  honor,  about  the  role  of women,  and  about  female  sexuality.  
One  consequence  of  these  beliefs  has  been  to  promote  rape  as  a  
weapon  of  war.  No  doubt  there  are  more  creaturely,  and  less  calcu-
lating, motives  for  soldiers  to  commit  rape  on  a  massive  scale, but it 
cannot  be  denied  that  male  beliefs  about  "honor"  have  made  it  a  
brilliant  instrument  of  psychological  and  cultural  oppression.  Rape  
has  become  a  means  through  which  the  taboos  of  a  community  can  
be  used  to  rend  it  from  within.  Consider  the  Bosnian  women  sys-
tematically  raped by  Serbs: one might have thought that  since many 
of  their  male  relatives  could  not  escape  getting  killed,  it  would  be  
only  reasonable  to  concede  that  the  women  themselves  could  not  
escape  getting  raped.  But  such  flights  of  ethical  intelligence  cannot  
be  made  with  a  sufficient  payload  of unjustified  belief—in  this  case,  
belief in the  intrinsic  sinfulness  of women,  in  the  importance  of vir-
ginity  prior  to  marriage,  and  in  the  shamefulness  of  being  raped.  
Needless  to  say,  similar  failures  of  compassion  have  a  venerable  
pedigree  in  the  Christian  West.  Augustine,  for  instance,  when  con-
sidering  the  moral  stature  of  virgins  who  had  been  raped  by  the  
Goths,  wondered  whether  they  had  not  been  "unduly  puffed  up  by  
[their]   integrity,  continence  and  chastity."  Perhaps  they  suffered  
"some   lurking  infirmity  which   might   have   betrayed  them   into   
proud and contemptuous bearing,  had they not been  subjected to the 
humiliation   that   befell   them."
27
   Perhaps,   in   other   words,   they   
deserved  it.
28  
Given  the  requisite  beliefs  about  "honor,"  a  man  will  be  desper-
ate  to  kill  his  daughter  upon  learning  that  she  was  raped. The  same  
angel  of  compassion  can  be  expected  to  visit  her  brothers  as  well.  
Such  killings  are  not  at  all  uncommon  in  places  like  Jordan,  Egypt,  
Lebanon,  Pakistan,  Iraq,  the  Gaza  Strip,  and  the  West  Bank.
29
  In  
these parts of the world, a girl of any age who gets raped has brought 
shame upon  her  family.  Luckily,  this  shame  is  not  indelible  and  can  
be   readily   expunged   with   her   blood.   The   subsequent   ritual   is   
inevitably  a low-tech  affair,  as none  of these  societies  have  devised  a  
system  for  administering  lethal  injections  for  the  crime  of bringing 

A    SCIENCE    OF    GOOD    AND    EVIL          l89          
shame upon one's  family. The girl  either has  her throat cut, or she is 
dowsed  with   gasoline   and   set   on   fire,   or   she   is   shot.  The  jail  
sentences  for these  men,  if they  are  prosecuted  at  all,  are  invariably  
short.  Many  are  considered  heroes  in  their  communities.  
What  can  we  say  about  this  behavior?  Can  we  say  that  Middle  
Eastern  men  who  are  murderously  obsessed  with  female  sexual  
purity  actually  love  their  wives,  daughters,  and  sisters  less  than  
American or European men  do? Of course, we can. And what is truly 
incredible  about the  state  of our discourse  is that  such  a claim  is  not  
only  controversial  but  actually  unutterable  in  most  contexts.  
Where's the  proof that these men  are  less  capable of love than the 
rest  of us?  Well,  where  would  the  proof  be  if  a  person  behaved  this  
way in our own  society? Where's the proof that the person who  shot  
JFK  didn't  really  love  him?  All  the  proof  we  need  came  from  the  
book depository. We know how the word "love" functions in our dis-
course.  We  have  all  felt  love,  have  failed  to  feel  it,  and  have  occa-
sionally  felt  its  antithesis.  Even  if  we  don't  harbor  the  slightest  
sympathy  for  their  notion  of  "honor,"  we  know  what  these  honor  
killers  are  up  to—and  it  is  not  a  matter  of expressing  their love  for  
the women in their lives. Of course, honor killing is merely one  facet  
in that terrible kaleidoscope that is the untutored,  male imagination: 
dowry  deaths  and  bride  burnings,  female  infanticide,  acid  attacks,  
female  genital   mutilation,   sexual   slavery—these   and  other  joys  
await  unlucky  women  throughout  much  of  the  world.  There  is  no  
doubt that certain beliefs are incompatible with  love, and this notion 
of "honor"  is  among  them.  
What is love?  Few of us will be tempted to consult a dictionary on 
the  subject.  We  know  that  we  want  those  we  love  to  be  happy.  We  
feel  compassion  for  their  suffering. When  love  is  really  effective—  
that  is,  really  felt,  rather  than  merely  imagined—we  cannot  help  
sharing in the joy of those we love, and in their anguish as well. The 
disposition  of  love  entails  the  loss,  at  least  to  some  degree,  of  our  
utter  self-absorption—and  this  is  surely  one  of the  clues  as  to why 
this  state of mind is  so  pleasurable.  Most  of us  will  find that cutting 

190        THE    END    OF    FAITH    
a  little  girl's  head  off  after  she  has  been  raped  just  doesn't  capture  
these  sentiments  very  well.  
At  this  point,  many  anthropologists  will  want  to  argue  for  the  
importance  of  cultural  context. These  murderers  are  not  murderers  
in  the  usual  sense.  They  are  ordinary,  even  loving  gentlemen  who  
have become the  pawns  of tribal custom. Taken  to  its  logical  conclu-
sion,  this  view  suggests  that  any  behavior  is  compatible  with  any  
mental state.  Perhaps there is  a culture in which you  are expected to 
flay your  firstborn  child  alive  as  an  expression  of "love."  But  unless  
everyone  in  such  a  culture wants  to  be  flayed  alive,  this  behavior  is  
simply  incompatible  with  love  as  we  know  it.  The  Golden  Rule  
really  does  capture  many  of our  intuitions  here.  We  treat  those  we  
love  more  or  less  the  way  we  would  like  to  be  treated  ourselves.  
Honor  killers  do  not  seem  to  be  in  the  habit  of  asking  others  to  
drench  them  in  gasoline  and immolate them  in turn. 
Any culture that raises  men  and boys  to  kill  unlucky  girls,  rather  
than  comfort  them,  is  a  culture  that  has  managed  to  retard  the  
growth  of love.  Such  societies,  of course,  regularly  fail  to  teach  their  
inhabitants many other things—like  how to  read.  Not  learning  how  
to  read  is  not  another  style  of  literacy,  and  not  learning  to  see  oth-
ers  as  ends  in themselves  is not another style of ethics.  It is  a failure 
of  ethics.  
How can  we encourage other human  beings  to extend their moral 
sympathies  beyond  a  narrow  locus?  How  can  we  learn  to  be  mere  
human  beings,  shorn  of  any  more  compelling  national,  ethnic,  or  
religious  identity? We  can  be  reasonable.  It  is======================================================== the  federal  level,  the  average  sentence  for  
a  drug  offense  in  the  U.S.  is  6¼  years  (from  the  Office  of National Drug 
Control   Policy   [ONDCP]   Drug  Data   Summary,  www.whitehousedrug-
policy.gov). 
30
 And  yet,  this  mountain  of  imponderables  reaches  higher  still.  In  many  
states,  a  person  who  has  been  merely  accused  of  a  drug  crime  can  have  
his property  seized, and  those who informed against him  can be rewarded 
with  up  to  25  percent  of  its  value.  The  rest  of  these  spoils  go  to  police  
departments,  which  now  rely  upon  such  property  seizures  to  meet  their  
budgets.  This  is  precisely  the  arrangement  of  incentives  that  led  to  this  
sort  of corruption  during the  Inquisition  (if one  can  even  speak  of such  a  
process  being  "corrupted").  Like  the  heretic,  the  accused  drug  offender  
has  no  hope  but  to  trade  information  for  a  reduced  sentence.  The  person  
who  can't  (or  won't)  implicate  others  inevitably  faces  punishments  of  
fantastical  severity.  Information  has  grown  so  valuable,  in  fact,  that  a  
black  market  for  it  has  emerged.  Defendants  who  have  no  information  to  
trade  can  actually  buy  drug  leads  from  professional  informers  (and  they  
do  not  come  cheap). The  net  result  of  all  this  is  that  police  departments  
have  learned  to target property  rather than  crime.  Property  can  be  seized  
and  forfeited  even  if  a  defendant  is  ultimately  found  innocent  of  any  
criminal  offense.  One  national  survey  found  that  80  percent  of  property  
seizures  occur  without  any  criminal  prosecution  whatsoever  (www.drug  
warfacts.com).  Under  these  enlightened  laws,  couples  in  their  eighties  
have permanently  lost their homes  because  a grandchild  was  caught with 
marijuana.  For  more  facts  of this  sort  see  Schlosser,  Reefer  Madness.  
The war on drugs has clearly done much  to erode our civil  liberties. In 
particular,  the  standards  for  search  and seizure,  pretrial  release,  and judi-

NOTES    TO    PAGES    162-163            269            
cial  discretion  in  sentencing  have  all  been  revised  in  an  attempt  to  make  
this  unwinnable  war  easier  to  prosecute.  Since  drug  offenses  are  covered  
by local, state, and  federal jurisdictions, people can be tried multiple times 
for  the  same  crime—some  have  been  found  not  guilty  at  one  level,  only  
to  receive  life  sentences  upon  subsequent prosecution. On more than  one  
occasion,  members  of  Congress  have  introduced  legislation  seeking  to  
apply  the  death  penalty  to  anyone  caught  selling  drugs.  Unsurprisingly,  
our  attempts  to  eradicate  the  supply  of  drugs  in  other  countries  have  
been  even  more  detrimental  to  the  liberties  of others.  In  Latin  America,  
we have  become  a  tireless  benefactor  of human  rights violators.  (See,  for  
example,  the  Human  Rights Watch  website:  www.hrw.org.)  
In  environmental  terms,  the  war  on  drugs  has  been  no  more  auspi-
cious.  The  aerial  spraying  of  herbicides  has  hastened  the  destruction  of  
the  rainforest  as  well  as  contaminated  water  supplies,  staple  crops,  and  
people. The U.S. government has recently sought approval to use a genet-
ically  engineered   "killer  fungus,"   designed   to   attack  marijuana  crops  
domestically  and  coca  and  opium  plants  abroad.  For  the  moment,  some  
rather  obvious  environmental   concerns  have  prevented   its  use.   (See   
www.lindesmith.org.) 
31
 From  the  ONDCP  Drug  Data  Summary  (March  2003). The war on  drugs  
has  also become  a  great  engine  of racial  inequity,  for while  blacks  consti-
tute  only  12  percent  of the  U.S.  population  and  13  percent  of  U.S.  drug  
users,  38  percent  of those  arrested  and  59  percent  of  those  convicted  for  
drug crimes are  black. Our drug  laws have contributed to the  epidemic of 
fatherlessness  in  the  black  community,  and  this—along  with  the  profits  
and  resultant  criminality  of  the  drug  trade—has  devastated  our  inner  
cities.  (See  www.drugwarfacts.com.)  
32
  Ibid.  
33
 M.  S. Gazzaniga, "Legalizing Drugs: Just  Say Yes,"  National  Review, July 
10,1995, pp. 26-37, makes a similar estimate. Needless to say, the cost has 
only  grown  with  time.  
34
 W.  F.  Buckley  Jr., "The War  on Drugs  Is  Lost,"  National  Review,  Feb.  12,  
1996. 
35
  www.lindesmith.org.  
36
 when  was  the  last  time  someone  was  killed  over  an  alcohol  or  tobacco  
deal  gone  awry?  We  can  be  confident  that  the  same  normalcy  would  be  
achieved  if drugs  were  regulated  by  the  government. At the  inception  of  
the  modern  "war  on  drugs,"  the  economist  Milton  Friedman  observed  
that  "legalizing  drugs  would  simultaneously  reduce the  amount  of crime 

270         NOTES    TO    PAGE    164    
and  raise  the  quality  of law  enforcement."  He  then  invited  the  reader  to  
"conceive  of  any  other  measure  that  would  accomplish  so  much  to  pro-
mote  law  and  order"  (Friedman,  "Prohibition  and  Drugs,"  Newsweek,  
May  1,  1972).  What  was  true  then  remains  true  after  three  decades  of  
pious  misrule;  the  criminality  associated  with  the  drug  trade  is  the  
inescapable  consequence  of our  drug  laws  themselves.  
37
  According  to  the  U.S.  government,  twelve  of  the  twenty-eight  groups  
that  have  been  officially  classed  as  terrorist  organizations  finance  their  
activities,  in  whole  or  in  part,  by  the  drug  trade.  (See  www.theantidrug.  
com/drugs_terror/terrorgroups.html.) 
38
  S.  Weinberg,  "What  Price  Glory,"  New  York  Review  of  Books,  Nov.  6,  
2003, pp. 55-60. 
39
 All  of this  folly  persists,  even  though  the  legalized  and  regulated  sale  of  
drugs  would  most  effectively  keep  them  out  of  the  hands  of  minors  
(when  was  the  last  time  someone  was  caught  selling  vodka  in  a  school-
yard?),  eradicate  organized  crime,  reduce  the  annual  cost  of law  enforce-
ment  by  tens  of billions  of dollars,  raise billions  more  in  new  sales  taxes,  
and  free  hundreds  of  thousands  of  police  officers  for  the  job  of  fighting  
violent crime and terrorism. Against these  remarkable  benefits stands the 
fear  that  the  legalization  of  drugs  would  lead  to  an  epidemic  of  drug  
abuse and addiction. Common  sense,  as  well  as  comparisons between  the  
United  States  and  places  like  Holland,  reveals  this  fear  to  be  unfounded.  
As  more  than  100  million  of  the  estimated  108  million  Americans  who  
have  used  illegal  drugs  can  attest,  addiction  is  a  phenomenon  distinct  
from  mere  use,  and  users  merely  require  good  information  to  keep  from  
becoming  addicts. Addicts  require  treatment,  of  course—for  which  there  
are  at  present  insufficient  funds.  
This  is  not  to  deny  that  a  small  percentage  of  people  who  use  drugs  
(both  legal and illegal)  have their lives  powerfully disrupted by them. We 
generally think  of this  problem  as  having two  stages  of severity: "abuse" 
and  "addiction."  It  remains  true,  however,  that  most  people  who  use  
drugs  do  not  abuse  them,  and many  illegal  drugs  do  not  readily  become  
sources  of addiction  even  in  the hands  of abusers  (marijuana,  LSD,  psilo-
cybin,  mescaline,  etc.). To  say that  a  drug  is  addictive  is  to  say  that  peo-
ple  develop  both  tolerance  to  it   (and  therefore  require  progressively  
higher  doses  to  achieve  the  same  effect)  and  withdrawal  symptoms  upon  
stoppage.  It  is  not  hard  to  see why well-intentioned  people  would  worry  
that others might  become inadvertent  slaves  of such  biochemistry. While 
opium  and  its  derivatives   (like  heroin  and  morphine)   are  the  classic  

NOTES    TO    PAGES   165-168          271          
examples  of drugs  of this  sort,  nicotine  and  alcohol  can  fall  into  this  cat-
egory as well  (depending on usage). Given our laws, however, all users of 
illicit  drugs—whether  dysfunctional  or  not,  addicted  or  not—are  consid-
ered  criminals  and  subject  to  arrest, imprisonment, property  seizure,  and  
other  punishments  by the  state.  
Our   drug   policy   has   created   arbitrary   and   illusory   distinctions   
between  biologically  active  substances,  while  obscuring  valid  ones.  No  
one  doubts  that  the  use  of  certain  drugs  can  destroy  the  lives  of certain 
people.   But  the  same   can  be   said  of  almost  any  commodity.  People  
destroy  their  lives  and  the  lives  of  their  dependents  by  simply  overeat-
ing.  In  2003  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  declared  obesity  to  be  the  
greatest  public  health  problem  in  the  United  States,  and  yet  few  of  us  
imagine  that  new  criminal  laws  should  be  written  to  control  the  use  of  
cheeseburgers.  Where  drugs  are  a  problem,  they  are  a  problem  whose  
remedy is  better education  and better health  care, not incarceration. Sim-
ply  observe  the  people  in  public  life  who  are  incapable  of having  a  ratio-
nal  discussion  on  these  matters  (start  with  John Ashcroft  and  work your 
way  down),  and  you  will  find  that  religious  faith  does  much  to  inform  
their  view  of the  world.  
40
 See, e.g., D. Kahneman and A. Tversky, "On the Reality of Cognitive Illu-
sions,"  Psychological  Review  103  (1996): 582-91. 
41
 "Misguided  Faith on AIDS"  (editorial),  New  York  Times,  Oct.  15,  2003.  
42
  N.  Kristof,  "When  Prudery  Kills,"  New  York  Times,  Oct.  8,  2003.  
43
  Ibid.  
44
  Kristof  also  misinterprets======================================================== in  the  very  nature  of  
reason  to  fuse  cognitive  and  moral  horizons.  Reason  is  nothing  less  
than  the  guardian  of love. 
Morality      and     Happiness     
The  link  between  morality  and  happiness  appears  straightforward,  
though  there  is  clearly  more  to  being  happy  than  merely  being  

A     SCIENCE     OF     GOOD     AND      EVIL  191  
moral.  There  is  no  reason  to  think  that  a  person  who  never  lies,  
cheats, or  steals  is  guaranteed to be  happier than  a person who  com-
mits  each  of  these  sins  with  abandon.  As  we  all  know,  a  kind  and  
compassionate  person  can  still  be  horribly  unlucky,  and  many  a  
brute  appears  to  have  seized  Fortune  herself by  the  skirts.  Children  
born  without  a  functioning  copy  of  the  gene  that  produces  the  
enzyme  hypoxanthine-guanine  phosphoribosyltransferase  will  have  
a  constellation  of  ailments  and  incapacities  known  as  Lesch-Nyhan  
syndrome. They  will  also  compulsively  mutilate  themselves,  possi-
bly  as  a  result  of  the  build-up  of  uric  acid  in  their  tissues.  If  left  
unrestrained,  such  children  helplessly  gnaw  their  lips  and  fingers  
and  even  thrust  pointed  objects  into  their  eyes.  It  is  difficult  to  see  
how  instruction  in  morality  will  contribute  meaningfully  to  their  
happiness. What these  children  need is  not better moral  instruction,  
or   even   more   parental   love.   They   need   hypoxanthine-guanine   
phosphoribosyltransferase. 
Without   denying   that   happiness   has   many   requisites—good   
genes,  a  nervous  system  that  does  not entirely  misbehave,  etc.—we  
can  hypothesize  that  whatever  a  person's  current  level  of happiness 
is,  his  condition  will  be  generally  improved  by  his  becoming  yet  
more  loving  and  compassionate,  and  hence  more  ethical.  This  is  a  
strictly  empirical  claim—one  that  has  been  tested  for  millennia  by  
contemplatives  in  a  variety  of  spiritual  traditions,  especially  within  
Buddhism.  We  might  wonder  whether,  in  the  limit,  the  unchecked  
growth  of  love  and  compassion  might  lead  to  the  diminution  of  a  
person's  sense  of  well-being,  as  the  suffering  of  others  becomes  
increasingly  his  own.  Only  people  who  have  cultivated  these  states  
of mind to an extraordinary degree will be in a position to decide this 
question, but in the general case there seems to be no doubt that love 
and  compassion  are  good,  in  that  they  connect  us  more  deeply  to  
others.
30 
Given  this  situation,  we  can  see  that  one  could  desire  to  become  
more  loving  and  compassionate  for  purely  selfish  reasons. This  is  a  
paradox,  of  sorts,  because  these  attitudes  undermine  selfishness,  by  

192        THE    END    OF    FAITH    
definition. They  also inspire behavior that  tends  to  contribute to the 
happiness  of other human  beings. These  states  of mind  not  only feel 
good; they  ramify  social  relationships that  lead one  to  feel  good  with  
others,  leading  others  to  feel  good  with  oneself.  Hate,  envy,  spite,  
disgust,  shame—these  are  not  sources  of  happiness,  personally  or  
socially.  Love and compassion are.  Like  so much that we know about 
ourselves,  claims  of  this  sort  need  not  be  validated  by  a  controlled  
study.  We  can  easily  imagine  evolutionary  reasons  for  why  positive  
social  emotions  make  us  feel  good,  while  negative  ones  do  not,  but  
they  would  be  beside  the  point.  The  point  is  that  the  disposition  to  
take  the  happiness  of  others  into  account—to  be  ethical—seems  to  
be a  rational way to augment one's own happiness. As we will  see in 
the next  chapter,  the  linkage here becomes  increasingly  relevant  the  
more  rarefied  one's  happiness  becomes.  The  connection  between  
spirituality—the  cultivation  of  happiness  directly,  through  precise  
refinements  of  attention—and  ethics  is  well  attested.  Certain  atti-
tudes  and  behaviors  seem  to  be  conducive  to  contemplative  insight,  
while others  are not. This is not  a proposition to be merely believed. 
It is,  rather,  a hypothesis  to be tested in the laboratory of one's life.
31  
A     Loophole    for    Torquemada?    
Casting  questions  about  ethics  in  terms  of  happiness  and  suffering  
can  quickly  lead  us  into  unfamiliar  territory.  Consider  the  case  of  
judicial torture.  It would  seem,  at  first glance,  to  be unambiguously 
evil.  And  yet,  for  the  first  time  in  living  memory,  reasonable  men  
and  women  in  our  country  have  begun  to  reconsider  it  publicly.  
Interest  in  the  subject  appears  to  have  been  provoked  by  an  inter-
view  given  by  Alan   Dershowitz,   an  erstwhile  champion   of  the  
rights  of  the  innocent-until-proven-guilty,  on  CBS's  60  Minutes.
32  
There,  before  millions  who  would  have  thought  the  concept  of tor-
ture  impossible  to  rehabilitate,  Dershowitz  laid  out  the  paradig-
matic  ticking-bomb  case.  

A    SCIENCE    OF    GOOD    AND    EVIL           193           
Imagine  that  a  known  terrorist  has  planted  a  large  bomb  in  the  
heart  of a nearby  city. This  man  now  sits  in your  custody. As  to the 
bomb's  location,  he  will  say nothing  except that the  site was  chosen  
to  produce  the  maximum  loss  of life.  Given  this  state  of  affairs—in  
particular,  given  that  there  is  still  time  to  prevent  an  imminent  
atrocity—it  seems  there  would  be  no  harm  in  dusting  off the  strap-
pado  and  exposing  this  unpleasant  fellow  to  a  suasion  of  bygone  
times. 
Dershowitz  has  argued  that  this  situation  can  be  cast  in  terms  
that  will  awaken  the  Grand  Inquisitor  in  all  of us.  If a  ticking bomb 
doesn't   move   you,   picture   your   seven-year-old   daughter   being   
slowly asphyxiated in  a warehouse just  five minutes  away, while the 
man  in  your  custody holds  the keys  to her  release.  If your daughter 
won't  tip  the  scales,  then  add  the  daughters  of  every  couple  for  a  
thousand  miles—millions  of little girls  have,  by  some perverse  neg-
ligence  on  the part of our government, come under the control  of an 
evil  genius  who  now  sits  before  you  in  shackles.  Clearly,  the conse-
quences  of one  man's  uncooperativeness  can  be  made  so  grave,  and  
his  malevolence  and  culpability  so  transparent,  as  to  stir  even  the  
most  self-hating  moral  relativist  from  his  dogmatic  slumbers.  
It is generally thought that the gravest ethical problem  we  face  in  
resorting to torture is that we would be bound to torture some num-
ber  of innocent men  and women.  Most  of us  who were  eager  to  don  
the  Inquisitor's  cap  in  the  case  above  begin  to  falter  in  more  realis-
tic  scenarios,  as  a  person's  guilt  becomes  a  matter  of  some  uncer-
tainty. And this is  long before other concerns  even attract our notice. 
What,  for  instance,  is  the  reliability  of testimony  elicited  under tor-
ture ? We need not even pose questions of this sort yet, since we have 
already  balked  at the  knowledge  that,  in the  real world,  we  will not 
be  able  to  tell  the  guilty  from  the  innocent just by  looking.  
So it seems that we have two situations that will strike most sane 
and decent people as ethically distinct: in the  first  case, as envisioned 
by  Dershowitz,  it  seems  perverse  to  worry  about  the  rights  of  an  
admitted  terrorist  when  so  many  innocent  lives  are  at  stake;  while  

194         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
under  more  realistic  conditions,  uncertainty  about  a  person's  guilt  
will  generally  preclude  the  use  of  torture.  Is  this  how  the  matter  
really  sits  with  us?  Probably  not.  
It  appears  that  such  restraint  in  the  use  of  torture  cannot  be  
reconciled with  our willingness  to wage  war  in the  first  place. What, 
after  all,  is  "collateral  damage"  but the  inadvertent  torture  of inno-
cent  men,  women,  and  children?  Whenever  we  consent  to  drop  
bombs,  we  do  so with  the  knowledge  that  some number  of children 
will  be  blinded,  disemboweled,  paralyzed,  orphaned,  and  killed  by  
them.  It  is  curious  that  while  the  torture  of Osama  bin  Laden  him-
self  could  be  expected  to  provoke  convulsions  of  conscience  among  
our   leaders,   the   unintended   (though   perfectly   foreseeable,   and   
therefore  accepted)  slaughter  of children  does  not.  
So  we  can now  ask,  if we are willing  to  act  in  a way that guaran-
tees  the misery  and  death  of some  considerable number of innocent 
children,  why  spare  the  rod  with  suspected  terrorists?  What  is  the  
difference  between  pursuing  a  course  of  action  where  we  run  the  
risk  of  inadvertently  subjecting  some  innocent  men  to  torture,  and  
pursuing  one  in  which  we  will  inadvertently  kill  far  greater  num-
bers  of innocent  men,  women,  and  children?  Rather,  it  seems  obvi-
ous  that  the  misapplication  of torture  should  be  far  less  troubling to 
us  than  collateral  damage:  there  are,  after  all,  no  infants  interned  at  
Guantanamo  Bay, just  rather  scrofulous young men, many of whom 
were  caught  in  the  very  act  of  trying  to  kill  our  soldiers.
33
  Torture  
need not  even impose  a  significant  risk of death  or permanent injury 
on  its  victims;  while  the  collaterally  damaged  are,  almost  by  defini-
tion,  crippled  or  killed. The  ethical  divide  that  seems  to  be  opening  
up  here  suggests  that  those  who  are  willing  to  drop  bombs  might  
want  to  abduct the  nearest and======================================================== 10:34—"Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  send  peace  on  
earth:  I  came  not  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword."  For  a  remarkably  elegant  
demonstration  of the  incoherency  of the  Bible,  I  recommend  Burr's  Self-
contradictions  of the  Bible  (1860).  In  it,  Burr presents  144  propositions—  
theological,  moral,   historical,  and  speculative—all  neatly  opposed  by  
their  antitheses,  in  the  following  manner:  God  is  seen  and  heard/God  is  
invisible  and  cannot  be  heard; God  is  everywhere  present,  sees  and  knows  
all   things/God   is   not   everywhere  present,   neither  sees   nor   knows   all   
things;  God  is  the  author  of  evil/God  is  not  the  author  of  evil;  Adultery  
forbidden/adultery   allowed;  The  father  of  Joseph,   Mary's   husband,   was   
Jacob/The   father   of   Mary's    husband   was    Heli;   The    infant    Christ    
was  taken  into  Egypt/The  infant  Christ  was  not  taken  into  Egypt;  John  
was  in  prison  when  Jesus  went  into  Galilee/John  was  not  in  prison  when  
Jesus  went  into  Galilee;  Jesus  was  crucified  at  the  third  hour/Jesus  was  
crucified  at  the  sixth  hour;  Christ  is  equal  with  God/Christ  is  not  equal  
with  God;  It  is  impossible  to  fall  from  grace/It  is  possible  to  fall  from  
grace; etc.—all  with  supporting quotations  from  the  Old  and  New Testa-
ments.  Many  of  these  passages  represent  perfect  contradictions  (that  is,  
one  cannot  affirm  the  truth  of  one  without  equally  asserting  the  falsity  
of the  other). There  is,  perhaps,  no  greater  evidence  for  the  imperfection  
of  the  Bible  as  an  account  of  reality,  divine  or  mundane,  than  such  
instances  of  self-refutation.  Of  course,  once  faith  has  begun  its  reign  of  
folly,  even  perfect  contradictions  may  be  relished  as  heavenly  rebukes  to  
earthly  logic. Martin  Luther  closed the door on  reason with  a  single  line:  
"The Holy Spirit has an eye only to substance and is not bound by words." 
The  Holy  Spirit,  it  seems,  is  happy  to  play  tennis without  the  net.  
n
  It  is  true  that  Augustine  was  not  a   perfect  sadist.  He  thought  that  

NOTES    TO    PAGES    85-89           255           
heretics  should  be  examined  "not  by  stretching them  on  the  rack,  not  by  
scorching them  with  flames  or  furrowing  their flesh with  iron  claws, but 
by  beating  them  with  rods."  See  P.  Johnson,  A  History  of  Christianity  
(New York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1976),  116-17.  
14
 Voltaire,  "Inquisition,"  Philosophical  Dictionary,  ed  and trans. T.  Bester-
man  (London: Penguin  Books,  1972),  256.  
15
 From  The  Percy Anecdotes,  cited  in  Swain,  Pleasures,  181.  
16
 Manchester,  A  World  Lit  Only  by  Fire,  190-93.  
17
  W.  Durant,  The  Age  of  Faith  (1950;  reprint,  Norwalk,  Conn.:  Easton  
Press, 1992), 784. 
18
 The Christians, while they were still a lowly sect, had been accused of the 
same  crime  by  pagan  Romans.  There  were,  in  fact,  many  points  of  con-
vergence  between  witches  and  Jews  in  the  mind  of  medieval  Christians.  
Jews  were  regularly  accused  of  sorcery,  and  magical  texts  were  often  
attributed (speciously)  to  Solomon and to  a variety of kabbalistic sources. 
19
  R.  Briggs,  Witches  and  Neighbors:  The  Social  and  Cultural  Context  of  
European  Witchcraft  (New York: Viking,  1996),  8,  has  this  to  say  on  the  
subject: 
On  the  wilder  shores  of  the  feminist  and  witch-cult  movements  a  
potent  myth  has  become  established,   to  the   effect  that   9  million  
women  were  burned  as  witches  in  Europe;  gendercide  rather  than  
genocide. This  is  an overestimate by a  factor  of up  to  200,  for the most 
reasonable  modern  estimates  suggest  perhaps  100,000  trials  between  
1450  and  1750,  with  something  between  40,000  and  50,000  execu-
tions,  of which  20  to  25  per  cent were men. 
Such  a  revaluation  of  numbers  does  little  to  mitigate  the  horror  and  
injustice  of  this  period.  Even  to  read  of  the  Salem  witch  trials,  which  
resulted  in  the  hanging  of "only"  nineteen  people,  is  to  be  brought  face  
to  face  with  the  seemingly  boundless  evil  that  is  apt  to  fill  the  voids  in  
our  understanding  of the  world.  
20
  C.   Mackay,   Extraordinary   Popular   Delusions   and   the   Madness   of   
Crowds  (1841; reprint,  New York:  Barnes  &  Noble,  1993), 529. 
21
  R.  Rhodes,  Deadly  Feasts:  Tracking  the   Secrets   of  a  Terrifying  New  
Plague  (New York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1997), 78. 
22
 There  is  some doubt  as  to whether the  Fore,  or any other  people  for that 
matter,  ever  practiced  systematic  cannibalism  (see  the  entry  "cannibal-
ism"  in  The  Oxford  Companion  to  the  Body).  If  these  doubts  are  borne  
out,  an  alternative  explanation  for  the  transmission  of kuru  would  have  

256         NOTES    TO    PAGES    90-95    
to  be  found.  But  it  should  go  without  saying  that  its  vector  was  not  sor-
cery.  Scholarly  doubts  about  cannibalism  seem  somewhat  far-fetched,  
however,  given  the  widespread  evidence  of  it  among  modern  African  
militias  in  countries  like  Congo,  Uganda,  Liberia, Angola,  and elsewhere. 
In  such  places,  magical  beliefs  remain  widespread—like  the  notion  that  
eating  your  enemy's  organs  can  make  you  immune  to  bullets.  See  D.  
Bergner,  "The  Most  Unconventional  Weapon,"  New  York  Times  Maga-
zine, March  26,  2003, pp. 48-53. 
23
  Friedrich  Spee  (1631),  cited  in  Johnson,  History  of  Christianity,  311.  
24
  Mackay,  Delusions,  540-41.  
25
  B.  Russell,  Religion  and  Science  (1935;  reprint,  Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  
Press, 1997), 95. 
26
 Mackay,  Delusions,  525-26.  
27
  "Anti-Semitism,"  like  the  term  "Aryan,"  is  a  misnomer  of  nineteenth-
century  German  pseudo-science.   Semitic  (derived  from   Shem,  one  of  
Noah's   three   sons)   "designated   a   group   of   cognate   languages   that   
included  Hebrew,  Arabic,  Aramaic,  Babylonian,  Assyrian  and  Ethiopic,  
not  an  ethnic  or  racial  group."  See  R.  S.  Wistrich,  Anti-Semitism:  The  
Longest  Hatred (New York:  Schocken  Books,  1991), xvi. "Anti-Semitism" 
should  therefore  denote  a  hatred  of  Arabs  as  well,  which  it  does  not.  
Despite  its  mistaken  roots,  "anti-Semitism"  has  become  the  only  accept-
able  term  for  the  hatred  of  Jews.  
28
 D. J. Wakin, "Anti-Semitic 'Elders  of Zion'  Gets  New  Life on  Egypt TV," 
New  York  Times,  Oct.  26,  2002. This  spurious  document  is  actually  cited  
in  the  founding  covenant  of  Hamas.  See  J.  I.  Kertzer,  "The  Modern  Use  
of Ancient  Lies,"  New  York  Times,  May  9,  2002.  
29
 E.  Goldberg,  The  Executive  Brain:  Frontal  Lobes  and  the  Civilized  Mind  
(Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  2001).  
30
 This  said,  Judaism  is  a  far  less  fertile  source  of militant extremism.  Jews  
tend  not  to  draw  their  identity  as  Jews  exclusively  from  the  contents  of  
their beliefs  about  God.  It  is  possible,  for  instance,  to  be  a  practicing  Jew  
who  does  not  believe  in  God.  The  same  cannot  be  said  for  Christianity  
and  Islam.  
31
  See  B.  M.  Metzger  and  M.  D.  Coogan,  eds.,  The  Oxford  Companion  to  
the  Bible  (Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1993),  789-90,  and A.  N. Wilson, 
Jesus: A  Life  (New  York:  W. W. Norton,  1992),  79.  Many  other  uncouth  
pairings have been pointed out: Matt. 2:3-5  and  Micah  5:2; Matt.  2:16-18  
and  Jer.  31:15/Gen.  35:19;  Matt.  8:18  and  Isa.  53:4;  Matt.  12:18  and  Isa.  
42:1-4;  Matt.  13:35  and  Ps.  78:2;  Matt.  21:5k  and  Zech.  9:9/Isa.  62:11.  

NOTES    TO    PAGES   95-97         257         
Matt.  27:9-10  claims  to  fulfill  a  saying  that  it  erroneously  attributes  to  
Jeremiah,  which  actually  appears  in  Zech.  11:12—providing  further  evi-
dence  of the  text's  "inerrancy."  
32
 The  stigma  attached  to  illegitimacy  among  Jews  in  the  first century  CE  
was  considerable.  See  S.  Mitchell,  The  Gospel  According  to  Jesus  (New  
York: HarperCollins, 1991). 
33
  See  ibid.,  78,  and  J.  Pelikan,  Jesus  through  the  Centuries  (New  York:  
Harper and  Row,  1987),  80.  
34
  B.  Pascal,  Pensées,  trans.  A.  J.  Krailsheimer  (Baltimore:  Penguin  Books,  
1966), sec. 189. 
35
  Nietzsche  had  it  right  when  he  wrote,  "The  most  pitiful  example:  the  
corruption   of   Pascal,   who   believed   in   the   corruption   of  his   reason   
through  original  sin  when  it  had  in   fact  been  corrupted  only  by  his  
Christianity"  (The  Portable  Nietzsche,  trans.  W.  Kaufmann  [New  York:  
Viking,  1954], 572).  It is true that  Pascal had what was  for him  an aston-
ishing  contemplative  experience  on  the  night  of Nov.  23,1654—one that 
converted him  entirely  to Jesus  Christ.  I  do  not doubt  the  power  of  such  
experiences,  but  it  seems  to  me  self-evident  that  they  are  no  more  the  
exclusive  property  of devout  Christians  than  are  tears  shed  in joy.  Hin-
dus,  Buddhists,  Muslims,  Jews,  along  with  animists  of every  description  
have  had  these  experiences  throughout  history.  Pascal,  being  highly  
intelligent  and  greatly  learned,  should  have  known  this;  that  he  did  not  
(or  chose  to  disregard  it)  testifies  to  the  stultifying  effect  of orthodoxy. 
36
 They  also  avenged  themselves  against  their  Roman  persecutors:  "The  
Christians  threw  Maximian's  wife  into the Orontes,  and put  to  death  all  
his  relatives.  In  Egypt  and  Palestine  they  massacred the  magistrates  who======================================================== bombing  also  entails  sui-
cide,  of course,  which  most  Muslims  believe  is  expressly  forbidden  
by  God.  Consequently,  had  the  question  been  "Is  it  ever justified  to  
target  civilians  in  defense  of  Islam,"  we  could  expect  even  greater  
Muslim  support  for  terrorism.  
But the  Pew results  are actually bleaker than the above table indi-
cates. A closer look at the data reveals that the pollsters  skewed their 
results  by  binning  the  responses  "rarely justified"  and  "never justi-
fied"  together,  thus  giving  a  false  sense  of  Muslim  pacifism.  Take  
another look at the data from Jordan: 43  percent of Jordanians appar-
ently  favor  terrorism,  while  48  percent  do  not.  The  problem,  how-
ever,  is  that  22  percent  of  Jordanians  actually  responded  "rarely  
justified,"  and  this  accounts  for nearly  half of their "No"  responses.  
"Rarely justified"  still means that under certain circumstances, these 
respondents  would  sanction  the  indiscriminate  murder  of  noncom-

126         THE   END    OF   FAITH   
batants  (plus  suicide),  not  as  an  accidental  by-product  of  a  military  
operation  but  as  its  intended  outcome.  A  more  accurate  picture  of  
Muslim  tolerance  for terrorism  emerges  when  we  focus  on  the  per-
centage  of  respondents  who  could  not  find  it  in  their  hearts  to  say  
"never justified"  (leaving aside the many people who  still  lurk in the 
shadows  of  "Don't  Know/Refused").  If  we  divide  the  data  in  this  
way, the sun  of modernity  sets  even  further over the  Muslim world: 
SUICIDE  BOMBING  IN  DEFENSE  OF  ISLAM  
Is  It  Ever  justifiable?  
Lebanon 
Ivory  Coast  
Nigeria 
Jordan 
Bangladesh 
Mali 
Senegal 
Ghana 
Indonesia 
Uganda 
Pakistan 
Turkey 
YES 
82 
73 
66 
65 
58 
54 
47 
44 
43 
40 
38 
20 
No 
12 
2
7 
26 
26 
23 
35 
50 
43 
54 
52 
38 
64 
DK/REFUSED 
6 
0 
8 
8 
19 
11 
3 
12 
3 
8 
23 
14 
These  are  hideous  numbers.  If  all  Muslims  had  responded  as  
Turkey  did  (where  a  mere  4  percent  think  suicide  bombings  are  
"often" justified,  9 percent "sometimes," and 7 percent "rarely"), we 
would  still  have  a  problem  worth  worrying  about;  we  would,  after  
all,  be  talking  about  more  than  200  million  avowed  supporters  of  
terrorism.  But  Turkey  is  an  island  of  ambassadorial  goodwill  com-
pared with  the  rest  of  the  Muslim  world.  
Let us imagine that peace one day comes to the Middle  East. What 
will  Muslims   say   of  the   suicide   bombings  that  they   so  widely  
endorsed? Will they  say,  "We were driven mad by the  Israeli  occupa-
tion"?  Will  they  say,  "We  were  a  generation  of  sociopaths"?  How  

THE    PROBLEM   WITH    ISLAM          127          
will  they  account  for  the  celebrations  that  followed  these  "sacred  
explosions"?  A  young  man,  born  into  relative  privilege,  packs  his  
clothing  with  explosives  and  ball  bearings  and  unmakes  himself  
along  with  a  score  of  children  in  a  discotheque,  and  his  mother  is  
promptly congratulated by hundreds  of her neighbors. What will the 
Palestinians  think  about  such  behavior  once  peace  has  been  estab-
lished? If they are  still devout Muslims here is what they must think: 
"Our  boys  are  in  paradise,  and they have  prepared  the way  for  us  to  
follow.  Hell  has  been  prepared  for the  infidels."  It  seems  to  me  to  be  
an  almost  axiomatic  truth  of human  nature  that  no  peace,  should  it  
ever  be  established,  will  survive  beliefs  of this  sort  for very long. 
We must not  overlook  the  fact that  a  significant percentage of the 
world's  Muslims  believe that the men who brought  down the World 
Trade  Center  are  now  seated  at  the  right  hand  of God,  amid  "rivers  
of  purest  water,  and  rivers  of  milk  forever  fresh;  rivers  of  wine  
delectable  to  those  that  drink  it,  and  rivers  of  clearest  honey"  
(47:15). These  men—who  slit  the  throats  of stewardesses  and deliv-
ered  young  couples  with  their  children  to  their  deaths  at  five  hun-
dred  miles  per  hour—are  at present  being "attended  by  boys  graced  
with  eternal  youth"  in  a  "kingdom  blissful  and  glorious." They  are  
"arrayed   in  garments   of   fine   green   silk   and   rich   brocade,   and   
adorned with  bracelets  of silver"  (76:15). The  list  of their perquisites 
is  long.  But what  is  it that gets  a martyr out  of bed early  on  his  last  
day among the  living?  Did any  of the  nineteen  hijackers make haste 
to Allah's  garden  simply to  get his  hands  on  his allotment of silk?  It  
seems  doubtful. The  irony  here  is  almost  a  miracle  in  its  own  right:  
the  most  sexually  repressive  people  found  in  the  world  today—  
people who  are  stirred  to  a  killing  rage  by  reruns  of  Baywatch—are  
lured  to  martyrdom  by  a  conception  of  paradise  that  resembles  
nothing  so  much  as  an  al  fresco  bordello.
20  
Apart  from  the  terrible  ethical  consequences  that  follow  from  this  
style  of otherworldliness,  we  should  observe just how  deeply implau-
sible the Koranic paradise is. For a seventh-century prophet to say that 
paradise is a garden, complete with  rivers  of milk and honey, is rather 

128         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
like  a twenty-first-century  prophet's  saying  that  it  is  a  gleaming  city  
where  every  soul  drives  a  new  Lexus.  A  moment's  reflection  should  
reveal  that  such  pronouncements  suggest  nothing  at  all  about  the  
afterlife  and much indeed about the limits  of the human imagination. 
Jihad   and   the   Power   of   the   Atom   
For  devout  Muslims,  religious  identity  seems  to  trump  all  others.  
Despite  the  occasional  influence  of  Pan-Arabism,  the  concept  of  an  
ethnic  or national  identity  has  never  taken  root  in  the  Muslim  world  
as  it  has  in  the  West.  The  widespread  support  for  Saddam  Hussein  
among  Muslims,  in  response  to  the American  attack  upon  Iraq,  is  as  
good  a  way  as  any  of calibrating the  reflexivity  of Muslim  solidarity.  
Saddam Hussein was, as both a secularist and a tyrant, widely despised 
in the Muslim world prior to the American invasion; and yet the  reac-
tion of most Muslims revealed that  no matter what his crimes against 
the  Iraqi  people,  against  the  Kuwaitis,  and  against  the  Iranians,  the  
idea  of  an  army  of  infidels  occupying  Baghdad  simply  could  not  be  
countenanced,  no  matter  what  humanitarian  purpose  it  might  serve.  
Saddam may have tortured and  killed more  Muslims than  any person 
in  living memory, but the Americans  are  the  "enemies  of God." 
It  is  important  to  keep the  big picture  in  view,  because the  details,  
being  absurd  to  an  almost  crystalline  degree,  are  truly  meaningless.  
In our dialogue with  the  Muslim  world, we  are  confronted by people 
who hold beliefs  for which there is no rational justification and which 
therefore  cannot even be  discussed,  and yet  these  are  the very  beliefs  
that underlie many of the  demands they  are  likely  to  make  upon  us.  
It  should  be  of  particular  concern  to  us  that  the  beliefs  of  Mus-
lims  pose  a  special  problem  for  nuclear  deterrence.  There  is  little  
possibility  of  our  having  a  cold  war  with  an  Islamist  regime  armed  
with  long-range  nuclear  weapons.  A  cold  war  requires  that  the  par-
ties  be mutually deterred by the  threat  of death.  Notions  of martyr-
dom  and jihad run  roughshod  over  the  logic that  allowed the  United  

THE     PROBLEM    WITH     ISLAM             129             
States  and  the  Soviet Union  to  pass  half a  century  perched,  more  or  
less  stably,  on  the  brink  of  Armageddon.  What  will  we  do  if  an  
Islamist  regime,  which  grows  dewy-eyed  at  the  mere  mention  of  
paradise,  ever  acquires  long-range  nuclear  weaponry?  If  history  is  
any  guide,  we  will  not  be  sure  about  where  the  offending  warheads  
are  or  what  their  state  of  readiness  is,  and  so  we  will  be  unable  to  
rely  on  targeted,  conventional  weapons  to  destroy  them.  In  such  
a  situation,  the  only  thing  likely  to  ensure  our  survival  may  be  a  
nuclear  first  strike  of  our  own.  Needless  to  say,  this  would  be  an  
unthinkable  crime—as  it  would  kill  tens  of  millions  of  innocent  
civilians  in  a  single  day—but  it  may  be  the  only  course  of  action  
available  to  us,  given  what  Islamists  believe.  How  would  such  an  
unconscionable  act  of  self-defense  be  perceived  by  the  rest  of  the  
Muslim  world?  It  would  likely  be  seen  as  the  first  incursion  of  a  
genocidal  crusade. The horrible  irony here  is  that  seeing  could  make  
it  so:  this  very  perception  could  plunge  us  into  a  state  of  hot  war  
with any Muslim  state that had the  capacity to pose  a nuclear threat 
of  its  own.  All  of  this  is  perfectly  insane,  of  course:  I  have  just  
described  a  plausible  scenario  in  which  much  of the  world's  popula-
tion  could be annihilated on  account of religious ideas that belong on 
the  same  shelf with  Batman,  the  philosopher's  stone,  and  unicorns.  
That it would be a horrible absurdity for so many  of us  to die for the 
sake  of  myth  does  not  mean,  however,  that  it  could  not  happen.  
Indeed,  given  the  immunity  to  all  reasonable  intrusions  that  faith  
enjoys  in our  discourse,  a catastrophe  of this  sort seems increasingly 
likely. We must come to terms with the possibility that men who are 
every bit as zealous  to  die as the  nineteen  hijackers may one day get 
their  hands  on  long-range  nuclear======================================================== thrown  forth  by  the  prism  of  the  brain.  We  really  are  
such  stuff  as  dreams  are  made  of.  Our  waking  and  dreaming  brains  
are  engaged  in  substantially  the  same  activity;  it  is  just  that  while  
dreaming,  our brains  are  far  less constrained by sensory information 
or by the  fact-checkers who  appear  to  live  somewhere  in  our  frontal  
lobes. This  is  not  to  say  that  sensory  experience  offers  us  no  indica-
tion  of  reality  at  large;  it  is  merely  that,  as  a  matter  of  experience,  
nothing  arises  in  consciousness  that  has  not  first  been  structured,  
edited,  or  amplified  by  the  nervous  system. While  this  gives  rise  to  
a   few  philosophical  problems  concerning  the  foundations  of  our  
knowledge,  it  also offers  us  a  remarkable opportunity to deliberately 
transform  the  character  of  our  experience.  
For  every  neuron  that  receives  its  input  from  the  outside  world,  
there are  ten  to  a hundred others  that  do  not. The  brain  is  therefore  

42         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
talking  mostly  to  itself,  and  no  information  from  the  world  (with  
the  exception  of  olfaction)  runs  directly  from  a  sensory  receptor  to  
the   cortex,   where   the   contents   of   consciousness   appear   to   be   
sequestered.  There  are  always  one  or  two  breaks  in  the  circuit—  
synapses—giving  the  neurons  in  question  the  opportunity  to  inte-
grate  feedback  information,  or  information  from  other  regions  of  
the  brain.  This  sort  of  integration/contamination  of  signal  explains  
how  certain  drugs,  emotional  states,  or  even  conceptual  insights  can  
radically alter the character of our experience. Your brain  is  tuned  to  
deliver  the  vision  of the  world  that  you  are  having  at  this  moment.  
At  the  heart  of  most  spiritual  traditions  lurks  the  entirely  valid  
claim  that  it  can  be  tuned  differently.  
It  is  also true,  however, that  people  occasionally  have  experiences  
that  are  rightly  characterized  as  psychotic. As  it turns  out,  there  are  
many  ways  to  deconstruct  a  self,  to  extract  (apparent)  meaningful-
ness  from  the  deliverances  of  one's  senses,  and  to  believe  that  one  
knows  how  the  world  is.  Not  all  visionary  experiences  are  created  
equal, to  say nothing of the worldviews  derived  from them. As in  all  
things,  some  differences  here  make  all  the  difference;  these  differ-
ences,  moreover,  can  be  rationally  discussed.  
As we will  see, there  is  an intimate  connection  between spiritual-
ity,  ethics,  and  positive  emotions. Although  a  scientific  approach  to  
these  subjects  is  still  struggling  to  be  born,  it  is  probably  no  more  
mysterious  that  most  of  us  prefer  love  to  fear,  or  regard  cruelty  as  
wrong,  than  that  we  agree  in  our judgments  about  the  relative  size  
of objects  or  about the  gender  of  faces. At  the  level  of the  brain,  the  
laws  that  underwrite  human  happiness  are  unlikely  to  vary  widely  
from person  to person.  In  the  later chapters  of this  book, we  will  see  
that  much  can  be  made  of this  fact,  long  before  the  scientific  details  
ever  become  available  to  us.  
ONCE  we  have  examined  the  problems  inherent  to  faith,  and  the  
threat  that  even  "moderate"  religious  faith,  however  inadvertently,  

REASON    IN    EXILE          43          
now  poses  to  our  survival,  we  can  begin  to  situate  our  ethical intu-
itions  and our  capacity  for  spiritual experience within  the context  of  
a rational worldview. This will require that we marshal insights  from  
our  growing  understanding  of  the  human  brain,  our  genetic  conti-
nuity  with  the  rest  of  life,  and  the  history  of our  religious  ideas.  In  
the  chapters  that  follow,  I  will  try  to  reconcile  the  bewildering jux-
taposition  of  two  facts:  (1)  our  religious  traditions  attest  to  a  range  
of  spiritual  experiences  that  are  real  and  significant  and  entirely  
worthy  of  our  investigation,  both  personally  and  scientifically;  (2)  
many  of  the  beliefs  that  have  grown  up  around  these  experiences  
now  threaten  to  destroy  us.  
We  cannot  live  by  reason  alone.  This  is why  no  quantity  of  rea-
son,  applied  as  antiseptic,  can  compete  with  the  balm  of  faith,  once  
the terrors  of this world begin  to intrude upon our lives.
20
 Your child 
has  died,  or  your  wife  has  acquired  a  horrible  illness  that  no  doctor  
can  cure,  or your  own  body  has  suddenly begun  striding  toward the 
grave—and  reason,  no  matter  how  broad  its  compass,  will  begin  to  
smell  distinctly  of  formaldehyde.  This  has  led  many  of  us  to  con-
clude, wrongly, that human  beings  have needs  that only  faith  in  cer-
tain  fantastical  ideas  can  fulfill.  It  is  nowhere  written,  however,  that  
human beings must be irrational, or live in  a perpetual state of siege, 
to  enjoy  an  abiding  sense  of the  sacred.  On  the  contrary,  I  hope  to  
show  that  spirituality  can  be—indeed,  must  be—deeply  rational,  
even  as  it  elucidates  the  limits  of  reason.  Seeing  this,  we  can  begin  
to  divest  ourselves  of many  of the  reasons  we  currently  have  to  kill  
one  another.  
Science will  not  remain mute  on spiritual  and  ethical questions  for  
long. Even  now, we can  see the first stirrings among psychologists and 
neuroscientists  of  what  may  one  day  become  a  genuinely  rational  
approach to  these matters—one that will bring even the  most  rarefied  
mystical  experience  within  the  purview  of open,  scientific  inquiry.  It  
is  time  we  realized  that  we  need  not  be  unreasonable  to  suffuse  our  
lives  with  love,  compassion,  ecstasy,  and  awe;  nor  must  we  renounce  
all  forms of spirituality or mysticism to be on good terms with reason. 

44         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
In the chapters that  follow,  I will attempt to  make both the conceptual 
and  the  experiential  bases  for these  claims  explicit.  
Coming   to   Terms   with    Belief    
It  is  time  we  recognized  that  belief  is  not  a  private  matter;  it  has  
never  been  merely  private.  In  fact,  beliefs  are  scarcely  more  private  
than  actions  are,  for every  belief is  a  fount  of action  in  potentia. The 
belief that  it  will  rain  puts  an  umbrella  in  the  hand  of every man  or  
woman who  owns  one.  It should  be easy enough  to  see that  belief in 
the  full  efficacy  of  prayer,   for  instance,  becomes  an  emphatically  
public  concern  the  moment  it  is   actually  put  into   practice:  the  
moment  a  surgeon  lays  aside  his  worldly  instruments  and  attempts  
to suture his  patients with prayer,  or  a pilot tries  to land  a passenger 
jet  with  nothing  but  repetitions  of the  word  "Hallelujah"  applied  to  
the  controls,  we  are  swiftly  delivered  from  the  provinces  of  private  
faith  to  those  of a  criminal  court.  
As  a  man  believes,  so  he  will  act.  Believe  that  you  are  the mem-
ber of a  chosen  people,  awash  in the  salacious  exports  of an  evil  cul-
ture  that  is  turning your  children  away  from  God,  believe  that  you  
will  be  rewarded with  an  eternity  of unimaginable  delights  by deal-
ing  death  to  these  infidels—and  flying  a  plane  into  a  building  is  
scarcely more  than  a matter  of being  asked  to  do  it.  It  follows, then, 
that  certain  beliefs  are  intrinsically  dangerous.  We  all  know  that  
human  beings  are  capable  of  incredible  brutality,  but  we  would  do  
well  to  ask, What  sort  of  ideology  will  make  us  most  capable  of  it?  
And  how  can  we  place  these  beliefs  beyond  the  fray  of normal  dis-
course,  so  that  they  might  endure  for  thousands  of  years,  unper-
turbed  by  the  course  of  history  or  the  conquests  of  reason?  These  
are  problems  of both  cultural  and  psychological  engineering.  It  has  
long been  obvious  that the  dogma  of faith—particularly  in  a  scheme  
in which the  faithful are promised eternal  salvation  and doubters are 
damned—is  nothing  less  than  their  perfect  solution.  

REASON    IN    EXILE          45          
It  is  time  we  admitted,  from  kings  and  presidents  on  down,  that  
there  is  no  evidence that any of our books  was authored by the Cre-
ator  of  the  universe.  The  Bible,  it  seems  certain,  was  the  work  of  
sand-strewn  men  and  women  who  thought  the  earth  was  flat  and  
for  whom  a  wheelbarrow  would  have  been  a  breathtaking  example  
of emerging  technology. To rely on  such  a document  as  the basis  for  
our worldview—however heroic the  efforts  of redactors—is  to  repu-
diate  two  thousand years  of civilizing  insights that the human  mind  
has  only  just  begun  to  inscribe  upon  itself  through  secular  politics  
and  scientific  culture.  We  will  see  that  the  greatest  problem  con-
fronting  civilization  is  not  merely  religious  extremism:  rather,  it  is  
the  larger  set  of  cultural  and  intellectual  accommodations  we  have  
made  to  faith  itself.  Religious  moderates  are,  in  large  part,  responsi-
ble  for  the  religious  conflict  in  our  world,  because  their  beliefs  pro-
vide the  context  in  which  scriptural literalism  and  religious  violence  
can  never  be  adequately  opposed.  
EVERY  sphere  of genuine  discourse  must,  at  a  minimum,  admit  of  
discourse—and   hence   the   possibility   that   those   standing   on   its   
fringe  can  come  to  understand the truths  that it  strives  to  articulate.  
This  is why======================================================== in  fact,  a  
naturally  occurring  plant.
28
  Cancer  patients  and  paraplegics  have  
been  sentenced to  decades  in  prison  for  marijuana  possession.  Own-
ers  of garden-supply  stores  have  received  similar  sentences  because  
some   of  their   customers   were   caught  growing  marijuana.  What  
explains   this   astonishing   wastage   of   human   life   and   material   
resources ? The only explanation is that our discourse on this  subject  
has  never  been  obliged  to  function  within  the  bounds  of rationality. 
Under our current laws,  it is  safe to  say, if a drug were  invented that 
posed  no  risk of physical harm  or addiction  to its  users  but produced 
a brief feeling  of spiritual bliss  and  epiphany  in  100  percent  of those 
who  tried  it,  this  drug  would  be  illegal,  and  people  would  be  pun-
ished  mercilessly  for  its  use.  Only  anxiety  about  the  biblical  crime  
of  idolatry  would  appear  to  make  sense  of  this  retributive  impulse.  
Because  we  are  a  people  of  faith,  taught  to  concern  ourselves  with  
the  sinfulness  of our neighbors, we have grown tolerant of irrational 
uses  of state  power.  
Our prohibition  of certain  substances  has  led  thousands  of other-
wise productive  and law-abiding  men and women  to  be  locked  away  
for  decades  at  a  stretch,  sometimes   for  life.  Their  children  have  
become  wards  of  the  state.  As  if  such  cascading  horror  were  not  
disturbing  enough,  violent  criminals—murders,  rapists,  and  child  
molesters—are  regularly  paroled to  make  room  for them.
29
  Here we 
appear  to  have  overstepped  the  banality  of  evil  and  plunged  to  the  
absurdity  at  its  depths.
30  
The  consequences  of  our  irrationality  on  this  front  are  so  egre-
gious  that  they bear  closer  examination.  Each  year,  over  1.5  million  
men  and  women  are  arrested  in  the  United  States  because  of  our  
drug  laws. At this moment, somewhere on the order of 400,000 men 
and  women  languish  in  U.S.  prisons  for  nonviolent  drug  offenses.  
One  million  others  are  currently  on  probation.
31
  More  people  are  
imprisoned  for  nonviolent  drug  offenses  in  the  United  States  than  
are incarcerated,  for any reason,  in  all of Western  Europe  (which  has  

WEST    OF    EDEN          163          
a  larger  population).  The  cost  of  these  efforts,  at  the  federal  level  
alone,  is  nearly  $20  billion  dollars  annually.
32
  The  total  cost  of  our  
drug  laws—when  one  factors  in  the  expense  to  state  and  local  gov-
ernments  and the  tax  revenue  lost by our  failure  to  regulate the  sale  
of  drugs—could  easily  be  in  excess  of  $100  billion  dollars  each  
year.
33
  Our  war  on  drugs  consumes  an  estimated  50  percent  of the 
trial  time  of  our  courts  and  the  full-time  energies  of  over  400,000  
police  officers.
34
 These  are  resources  that might otherwise  be  used to 
fight  violent  crime  and  terrorism.  
In  historical  terms,  there  was  every  reason  to  expect  that  such  a  
policy  of  prohibition  would  fail.  It  is  well  known,  for  instance,  that  
the  experiment  with  the  prohibition  of alcohol  in  the  United  States  
did little more than precipitate  a  terrible comedy  of increased drink-
ing,  organized  crime,  and  police  corruption.  What  is  not  generally  
remembered  is  that  Prohibition  was  an  explicitly  religious  exercise,  
being the joint product of the Woman's  Christian Temperance Union 
and  the  pious  lobbying  of certain  Protestant missionary  societies.  
The  problem  with  the  prohibition  of  any  desirable  commodity  is  
money.  The  United  Nations  values  the  drug  trade  at  $400  billion  a  
year.  This  exceeds  the  annual  budget  for  the  U.S.  Department  of  
Defense.  If this  figure  is  correct, the  trade  in illegal drugs  constitutes  
8  percent  of  all  international  commerce  (while  the  sale  of  textiles  
makes up 7.5 percent and motor vehicles just  5.3  percent).
35
 And yet, 
prohibition  itself is what makes the manufacture and  sale of drugs so 
extraordinarily  profitable.  Those  who  earn  their  living  in  this  way  
enjoy  a  5,000  to  20,000  percent return  on  their investment,  tax-free.  
Every  relevant  indicator  of  the  drug  trade—rates  of  drug  use  and  
interdiction,  estimates  of  production,  the  purity  of  drugs  on  the  
street,  etc.—shows  that the government  can  do  nothing to  stop  it  as  
long  as  such  profits  exist  (indeed,  these  profits are  highly corrupting 
of law  enforcement  in  any  case). The  crimes  of the  addict,  to  finance  
the  stratospheric  cost  of his  lifestyle,  and the  crimes  of the  dealer,  to  
protect  both  his  territory  and  his  goods,  are  likewise  the  results  of  
prohibition.
36
 A final  irony, which  seems good enough to be the work 

164         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
of Satan  himself, is that the market we  have  created by our drug  laws  
has become a steady source of revenue  for terrorist organizations like 
Al  Qaeda,  Islamic Jihad,  Hezbollah, Shining  Path,  and others.
37 
Even  if  we  acknowledge  that  stopping  drug  use  is  a  justifiable  
social goal, how does the  financial  cost of our war on drugs  appear in 
light  of the other  challenges  we  face?  Consider that  it would  require  
only  a  onetime  expenditure  of  $2  billion  to  secure  our  commercial  
seaports against smuggled nuclear weapons. At present we have allo-
cated  a  mere  $93  million  for  this  purpose.
38
  How  will  our  prohibi-
tion   of  marijuana  use   look   (this   comes   at   a   cost   of  $4  billion  
annually)  if a new  sun  ever  dawns  over the port  of Los Angeles ?  Or  
consider  that  the  U.S.  government  can  afford  to  spend  only  $2.3  
billion  each  year  on  the  reconstruction  of Afghanistan. The  Taliban  
and  Al  Qaeda  are  now  regrouping.  Warlords  rule  the  countryside  
beyond  the  city  limits  of  Kabul.  Which  is  more  important  to  us,  
reclaiming  this  part  of  the  world  for  the  forces  of  civilization  or  
keeping  cancer  patients  in  Berkeley   from  relieving  their  nausea  
with  marijuana?  Our  present  use  of  government  funds  suggests  
an  uncanny  skewing—we  might  even   say  derangement—of  our  
national  priorities.  Such  a  bizarre  allocation  of  resources  is  sure  to  
keep Afghanistan  in  ruins  for many  years  to  come.  It will  also  leave  
Afghan  farmers with  no  alternative but  to  grow  opium.  Happily  for  
them, our drug  laws  still  render  this  a highly  profitable  enterprise.
39  
Anyone  who  believes  that  God  is  watching  us  from  beyond  the  
stars  will  feel  that  punishing  peaceful  men  and women  for  their pri-
vate pleasure is  perfectly reasonable. We are  now in the twenty-first 
century.  Perhaps  we  should  have  better  reasons  for  depriving  our  
neighbors  of  their  liberty  at  gunpoint.  Given  the  magnitude  of the 
real  problems  that  confront  us-—terrorism,   nuclear  proliferation,  
the  spread  of  infectious  disease,  failing  infrastructure,  lack  of  ade-
quate  funds  for education  and health  care,  etc.—our war  on  sin  is  so  
outrageously unwise  as  to  almost  defy  rational  comment.  How have 
we  grown  so  blind  to our  deeper  interests ? And  how  have  we  man-
aged  to  enact  such  policies  with  so  little  substantive  debate?  

WEST     OF    EDEN            l65            
The    God   of   Medicine   
While  there  is  surely  an  opposition  between  reason  and  faith,  we  
will  see  that  there  is  none  between  reason  and  love  or  reason  and  
spirituality. The  basis  for this  claim  is  simple.  Every  experience that 
a  human  being  can  have  admits  of  rational  discussion  about  its  
causes  and consequences  (or about our ignorance  thereof). Although 
this  leaves  considerable  room  for the  exotic,  it  leaves  none  at  all  for  
faith. There  may  yet  be  good  reasons  to  believe  in  psychic phenom-
ena,  alien life, the doctrine of rebirth, the healing power of prayer,  or  
anything  else—but  our  credulity  must  scale  with  the  evidence.  The  
doctrine  of  faith  denies  this.  From  the  perspective  of faith,  it  is  bet-
ter  to  ape  the behavior  of one's  ancestors  than  to  find  creative  ways  
to  uncover  new truths  in  the  present.  
There  are  sources  of  irrationality  other  than  religious  faith,  of  
course,  but  none  of  them  are  celebrated  for  their  role  in  shaping  
public policy.  Supreme  Court justices  are not in  the  habit of praising 
our  nation  for  its  reliance  upon  astrology,  or  for  its  wealth  of  UFO  
sightings,  or  for exemplifying the various  reasoning biases that psy-
chologists  have  found  to  be  more  or  less  endemic  to  our  species.
40  
Only mainstream  religious  dogmatism  receives  the  unqualified sup-
port  of  government.  And  yet,  religious  faith  obscures  uncertainty  
where  uncertainty  manifestly  exists,  allowing  the  unknown,  the  
implausible,  and the patently  false  to  achieve primacy over the  facts.  
Consider  the  present  debate  over  research  on  human  embryonic  
stem  cells. The  problem  with  this  research,  from  the  religious  point  
of view,  is  simple: it entails the destruction  of human  embryos. The 
embryos  in  question  will  have  been  cultured  in  vitro  (not  removed  
from  a woman's  body)  and permitted  to  grow  for three  to  five  days.  
At  this  stage  of  development,  an  embryo  is  called  a  blastocyst  and  
consists of about 150 cells arranged in  a microscopic sphere. Interior 
to the  blastocyst  is  a  small======================================================== faith  is  currently  taboo  in  every  
corner  of  our  culture.  On  this  subject,  liberals  and  conservatives  
have  reached  a  rare  consensus:  religious  beliefs  are  simply  beyond  
the scope of rational discourse. Criticizing a person's ideas about God 
and  the  afterlife  is  thought  to  be  impolitic  in  a  way  that  criticizing  
his  ideas  about  physics  or  history  is  not.  And  so  it  is  that  when  a  
Muslim  suicide  bomber  obliterates  himself  along  with  a  score  of  
innocents  on  a  Jerusalem  street,  the  role  that  faith  played  in  his  
actions  is  invariably  discounted.  His  motives must have  been politi-
cal,  economic,  or  entirely  personal. Without  faith,  desperate  people  
would  still  do  terrible things.  Faith  itself is  always,  and everywhere, 
exonerated. 
But  technology  has  a  way  of  creating  fresh  moral  imperatives.  
Our  technical  advances  in  the  art  of war  have  finally  rendered  our  

14        THE    END    OF    FAITH    
religious  differences—and  hence  our  religious   beliefs—antithetical   
to our survival. We  can  no  longer ignore  the  fact that billions  of our 
neighbors  believe  in the metaphysics  of martyrdom, or in  the literal 
truth  of  the  book  of  Revelation,  or  any  of  the  other  fantastical  
notions that  have lurked in the minds  of the  faithful  for millennia— 
because  our neighbors  are  now armed with  chemical,  biological,  and  
nuclear  weapons.  There  is  no  doubt  that  these  developments  mark  
the  terminal  phase  of  our  credulity.  Words  like  "God"  and  "Allah"  
must  go  the  way  of  "Apollo"  and  "Baal,"  or  they  will  unmake  our  
world. 
A  few  minutes  spent  wandering  the  graveyard  of  bad  ideas  sug-
gests that such conceptual revolutions are possible. Consider the  case  
of  alchemy:  it  fascinated  human  beings  for  over  a  thousand  years,  
and  yet  anyone  who  seriously  claims  to  be  a  practicing  alchemist  
today  will  have  disqualified  himself  for  most  positions  of  responsi-
bility  in  our  society  Faith-based  religion  must  suffer  the  same  slide  
into  obsolescence.  
What is the alternative to  religion as we  know it? As  it turns  out,  
this  is  the  wrong  question  to  ask.  Chemistry  was  not  an  "alterna-
tive"  to  alchemy;  it  was  a  wholesale  exchange  of  ignorance  at  its  
most  rococo  for  genuine  knowledge.
3
  We  will  find  that,  as  with  
alchemy,  to  speak  of  "alternatives"  to  religious  faith  is  to  miss  
the  point.  
OF  COURSE,  people  of  faith  fall  on  a  continuum:  some  draw  solace  
and  inspiration  from  a  specific  spiritual  tradition,  and  yet  remain  
fully  committed  to  tolerance  and  diversity,  while  others  would burn 
the  earth  to  cinders  if  it  would  put  an  end  to  heresy.  There  are,  in  
other  words,  religious  moderates  and  religious  extremists,  and  their  
various  passions  and  projects  should  not  be  confused.  One  of  the  
central themes  of this  book, however, is that religious moderates  are  
themselves  the  bearers  of  a  terrible  dogma:  they  imagine  that  the  
path  to  peace  will  be  paved  once  each  of  us  has  learned  to  respect  

REASON    IN    EXILE          15          
the  unjustified  beliefs  of  others.  I  hope  to  show  that  the  very  ideal  
of  religious  tolerance—born  of  the  notion  that  every  human  being  
should  be  free  to  believe  whatever  he  wants  about  God—is  one  of  
the  principal  forces  driving  us  toward the  abyss.  
We  have  been  slow  to  recognize  the  degree  to  which  religious  
faith  perpetuates  man's  inhumanity  to  man. This  is  not  surprising,  
since many  of us  still believe that  faith  is  an essential component  of  
human  life.  Two  myths  now  keep  faith  beyond  the  fray  of  rational  
criticism,  and they  seem  to  foster  religious  extremism  and  religious  
moderation equally: (1) most of us believe that there are good things 
that  people  get  from  religious  faith  (e.g.,  strong  communities,  ethi-
cal  behavior,  spiritual  experience)  that  cannot  be  had  elsewhere;  (2)  
many  of us  also  believe  that  the  terrible  things  that  are  sometimes  
done  in the  name  of religion  are  the  products  not  of faith  per  se but 
of our  baser  natures—forces  like  greed,  hatred,  and  fear—for which 
religious  beliefs  are  themselves the  best  (or  even the  only)  remedy.  
Taken  together,  these  myths  seem  to  have granted us  perfect immu-
nity  to  outbreaks  of reasonableness  in  our  public  discourse.  
Many  religious  moderates  have  taken  the  apparent  high  road  of  
pluralism,  asserting  the  equal  validity  of  all  faiths,  but  in  doing  so  
they  neglect  to  notice  the  irredeemably  sectarian  truth  claims  of  
each. As  long  as  a Christian believes that only his  baptized brethren 
will  be  saved  on  the  Day  of Judgment,  he  cannot  possibly  "respect"  
the  beliefs  of others,  for  he  knows  that  the  flames  of hell  have been 
stoked by these very ideas and await their adherents  even now. Mus-
lims  and  Jews  generally  take  the  same  arrogant  view  of  their  own  
enterprises  and  have  spent  millennia  passionately  reiterating  the  
errors  of  other  faiths.  It  should  go  without  saying  that  these  rival  
belief  systems  are  all  equally  uncontaminated  by  evidence.  
And  yet,  intellectuals  as  diverse  as  H.  G.  Wells,  Albert  Einstein,  
Carl Jung, Max Planck, Freeman Dyson, and Stephen Jay Gould have 
declared  the  war  between  reason  and  faith  to  be  long  over.  On  this  
view,  there  is  no  need  to  have  all  of our  beliefs  about  the  universe  
cohere.  A  person  can  be  a  God-fearing  Christian  on  Sunday  and  a  

l6         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
working  scientist  come  Monday  morning,  without  ever  having  to  
account  for the partition that  seems  to have erected  itself in  his  head  
while  he  slept.  He  can,  as  it were,  have  his  reason  and  eat  it  too. As 
the  early  chapters  of this  book  will  illustrate,  it  is  only  because  the  
church  has  been  politically  hobbled  in  the  West  that  anyone  can  
afford  to think  this  way.  In  places  where  scholars  can  still  be  stoned  
to  death  for  doubting  the  veracity  of the  Koran,  Gould's  notion  of a 
"loving  concordat"  between  faith  and  reason  would  be  perfectly  
delusional.
4 
This   is   not  to  say  that  the   deepest  concerns   of  the   faithful,   
whether  moderate  or  extreme,  are  trivial  or  even  misguided.  There  
is  no  denying  that  most  of  us  have  emotional  and  spiritual  needs  
that are now addressed—however obliquely and at a terrible  price—  
by  mainstream  religion.  And  these  are  needs  that  a  mere  under-
standing  of  our  world,   scientific   or  otherwise,  will  never   fulfill.   
There  is  clearly  a  sacred  dimension  to  our  existence,  and  coming  to  
terms  with  it  could  well  be  the  highest  purpose  of human  life.  But  
we  will  find  that  it  requires  no  faith  in  untestable  propositions—  
Jesus  was born  of  a  virgin;  the  Koran  is  the  word  of  God—for  us  to  
do this. 
The    Myth     of    "Moderation"    in    Religion    
The  idea that any  one  of our  religions  represents  the  infallible  word  
of the One True  God  requires  an  encyclopedic  ignorance  of history, 
mythology,  and  art  even  to  be  entertained—as  the  beliefs,  rituals,  
and iconography  of each  of our  religions  attest  to centuries  of cross-
pollination  among  them.  Whatever  their  imagined  source,  the  doc-
trines  of modern  religions  are no more tenable than those which,  for  
lack  of adherents,  were  cast  upon  the  scrap  heap  of mythology  mil-
lennia ago;  for there  is  no more  evidence  to justify a  belief in the lit-
eral  existence  of  Yahweh  and  Satan  than  there  was  to  keep  Zeus  
perched  upon  his  mountain  throne  or  Poseidon  churning  the  seas.  

REASON       IN       EXILE  17  
According  to  Gallup,  35  percent  of  Americans  believe  that  the  
Bible  is the literal  and inerrant word of the  Creator  of the universe.
5  
Another  48  percent  believe  that  it  is  the  "inspired"  word  of  the  
same—still  inerrant,  though  certain  of  its  passages  must  be  inter-
preted  symbolically  before  their truth  can be brought  to  light.  Only  
17  percent  of us  remain  to  doubt that  a  personal  God,  in  his  infinite  
wisdom,  is  likely  to  have  authored  this  text—or,  for  that  matter,  to  
have  created  the  earth  with  its  250,000  species  of  beetles.  Some  46  
percent  of  Americans  take  a  literalist  view  of  creation  (40  percent  
believe  that  God  has  guided  creation  over  the  course  of millions  of  
years).  This  means  that  120  million  of  us  place  the  big  bang  2,500  
years  after the  Babylonians  and  Sumerians  learned  to  brew  beer.  If  
our polls are to be trusted, nearly 230 million Americans believe that 
a  book  showing  neither  unity  of  style  nor  internal  consistency  was  
authored  by  an  omniscient,  omnipotent,  and  omnipresent  deity.  A  
survey of Hindus, Muslims, and Jews around the world would surely 
yield  similar  results,  revealing  that  we,  as  a  species,  have  grown  
almost perfectly intoxicated by our myths. How is it that, in this one 
area  of our  lives,  we have  convinced  ourselves that our  beliefs  about  
the  world  can  float entirely  free  of reason  and  evidence?  
It  is  with  respect  to  this  rather  surprising  cognitive  scenery  that  
we  must  decide  what  it  means  to  be  a  religious  "moderate"  in  the======================================================== egregious  credulity  of entire  societies  to  
be  brought  off.  Consider  the  millions  of  people  who  were  killed  by  
Stalin  and  Mao:  although  these  tyrants  paid  lip  service  to  rational-
ity,  communism  was  little  more  than  a  political  religion.
36
 At  the  
heart  of  its  apparatus  of  repression  and  terror  lurked  a  rigid  ideol-
ogy,  to  which  generations  of men  and  women  were  sacrificed.  Even  
though  their  beliefs  did not  reach beyond this world, they were  both  
cultic and irrational. To cite only one example, the dogmatic embrace 
of Lysenko's  "socialist" biology—as distinguished  from the  "capital-
ist" biology of Mendel and Darwin—helped pave the way  for tens  of  
millions of deaths  from  famine  in the  Soviet Union and China in the 
first  part  of  the  twentieth  century.  
In  the  next  chapter  we  will  examine  two  of the  darkest  episodes  
in the history of faith: the Inquisition and the Holocaust.  I have cho-
sen  the  former  as  a  case  study because there  is  no  other  instance  in  
which  so many ordinary men  and women have  been so  deranged by 
their  beliefs  about  God;  nowhere  else  has  the  subversion  of  reason  
been  so  complete  or  its  consequences  so  terrible.  The  Holocaust  is  
relevant  here  because  it  is  generally  considered  to  have  been  an  
entirely  secular  phenomenon.  It  was  not.  The  anti-Semitism  that  
built  the  crematoria  brick  by  brick—and  that  still  thrives  today—  
comes  to  us  by  way  of  Christian  theology.  Knowingly  or  not,  the  
Nazis  were  agents  of religion. 

3 
In   the   Shadow   of  God  
WITHOUT  warning  you  are  seized  and  brought  before  a judge.  Did  
you  create  a thunderstorm  and  destroy the  village  harvest ?  Did you 
kill  your  neighbor  with  the  evil  eye?  Do  you  doubt  that  Christ  is  
bodily  present  in  the  Eucharist?  You  will  soon  learn  that  questions  
of this  sort  admit  of  no  exculpatory  reply.  
You  are  not  told  the  names  of your  accusers.  But  their  identities  
are  of little account,  for even  if,  at  this  late  hour, they were  to  recant  
their  charges  against  you,  they  would  merely  be  punished  as  false  
witnesses,  while  their  original  accusations  would  retain  their  full  
weight  as  evidence  of your guilt. The  machinery  of justice  has  been  
so  well  oiled  by  faith  that  it  can  no  longer  be  influenced.  
But  you  have  a  choice,  of  sorts:  you  can  concede  your  guilt  and  
name  your  accomplices.  Yes,  you  must  have  had  accomplices.  No  
confession  will  be  accepted  unless  other  men  and  women  can  be  
implicated  in  your  crimes.  Perhaps  you  and  three  acquaintances  of  
your choosing  did change into hares  and  consort with the  devil him-
self.  The  sight  of  iron  boots  designed  to  crush  your  feet  seems  to  
refresh your  memory.  Yes,  Friedrich, Arthur,  and  Otto  are  sorcerers  
too. Their  wives? Witches  all.  
You  now  face  punishment  proportionate  to  the  severity  of  your  
crimes:  flogging,  a pilgrimage on  foot to the Holy  Land, forfeiture of 
property,  or,  more  likely,  a  period  of  long  imprisonment,  probably  
for  life.  Your  "accomplices"  will  soon  be  rounded  up  for torture. 
Or you  can maintain your innocence, which  is almost certainly the 
truth  (after  all,  it  is  the  rare  person who  can  create  a  thunderstorm).  
80 

IN    THE    SHADOW    OF    GOD          8l          
In  response,  your  jailers  will  be  happy  to  lead  you  to  the  furthest  
reaches of human suffering, before burning you at the stake. You may 
be imprisoned in total darkness  for months  or years  at a time,  repeat-
edly  beaten  and  starved,  or  stretched  upon  the  rack.  Thumbscrews  
may  be  applied,  or  toe  screws,  or  a  pear-shaped  vise  may  be  inserted  
into  your  mouth,  vagina,  or  anus,  and  forced  open  until your misery 
admits  of no possible increase.  You may be hoisted to the  ceiling on  a  
strappado  (with  your  arms  bound  behind  your  back  and  attached  to  
a pulley, and weights tied to your feet), dislocating your shoulders. To 
this  torment  squassation  might  be  added,  which,  being  often  suffi-
cient  to  cause your death,  may yet spare you  the  agony of the  stake.
1  
If you  are  unlucky  enough  to  be  in  Spain,  where judicial  torture  has  
achieved  a  transcendent  level  of  cruelty,  you  may  be  placed  in  the  
"Spanish chair":  a throne  of iron,  complete with  iron  stocks  to  secure  
your neck and limbs. In the interest of saving your soul, a coal brazier 
will  be  placed  beneath  your  bare  feet,  slowly  roasting them.  Because  
the  stain  of  heresy  runs  deep,  your  flesh  will  be  continually  larded  
with  fat  to  keep it  from burning too  quickly. Or you may  be bound to 
a  bench,  with  a  cauldron  filled  with  mice  placed  upside-down  upon  
your bare abdomen. With the requisite application  of heat to the iron, 
the  mice  will  begin  to burrow into your belly  in  search  of an  exit.
2  
Should  you,  while  in  extremis,  admit  to  your  torturers  that  you  
are  indeed  a  heretic,  a  sorcerer,  or  a witch, you will be  made  to  con-
firm your  story  before  a judge—and  any  attempt  to  recant,  to  claim  
that  your  confession  has  been  coerced  through  torture,  will  deliver  
you either  to your tormentors  once  again  or directly  to  the  stake.  If,  
once  condemned,  you  repent  of your  sins,  these  compassionate  and  
learned men—whose  concern  for the  fate  of your eternal  soul  really  
knows  no  bounds—will  do  you  the  kindness  of  strangling  you  
before  lighting  your  pyre.
3  
THE  medieval  church  was  quick to  observe that the  Good  Book was 
good  enough  to  suggest  a  variety  of  means  for  eradicating  heresy,  

82        THE    END    OF    FAITH    
ranging from  a communal volley of stones  to cremation while alive.
4  
A literal reading of the Old Testament not only permits but  requires  
heretics  to  be  put  to  death.  As  it  turns  out,  it  was  never  difficult  to  
find  a  mob  willing  to  perform  this  holy  office,  and  to  do  so  purely  
on the authority  of the  Church—since  it was  still a capital  offense to 
possess  a  Bible  in  any  of  the  vernacular  languages  of  Europe.
5
  In  
fact, scripture was not to become generally accessible to the common 
man  until  the  sixteenth  century.  As  we  noted  earlier,  Deuteronomy  
was  the  preeminent  text  in  every  inquisitor's  canon,  for  it  explicitly  
enjoins  the  faithful  to  murder  anyone  in  their  midst,  even  members  
of  their  own  families,  who  profess  a  sympathy  for  foreign  gods.  
Showing  a  genius  for  totalitarianism  that  few  mortals  have  ever  
fully  implemented,  the  author  of  this  document  demands  that  any-
one  too  squeamish  to  take  part  in  such  religious  killing  must  be  
killed as  well  (Deuteronomy 17:12-13).
6
 Anyone who imagines that 
no  justification  for  the  Inquisition  can  be  found  in  scripture  need  
only  consult  the  Bible  to  have  his  view  of the  matter  clarified:  
If you  hear that  in  one  of the  towns  which  Yahweh your  God has 
given  you  for  a  home,  there  are  men,  scoundrels  from  your  own  
stock, who have  led their fellow-citizens astray, saying, "Let us go 
and  serve  other  gods,"  hitherto  unknown  to  you,  it  is  your  duty  
to  look  into  the  matter,  examine  it,  and inquire  most  carefully.  If  
it  is  proved  and  confirmed  that  such  a  hateful  thing  has  taken  
place  among  you,  you  must  put  the  inhabitants  of  that  town  to  
the  sword;  you  must  lay  it  under  the  curse  of  destruction—the  
town and everything in it.  You must pile up all its loot in the pub-
lic  square  and  burn  the  town  and  all  its  loot,  offering  it  all  to  
Yahweh your God.  It is  to be  a ruin  for  all time and never rebuilt. 
(Deuteronomy  13:12-16).  
For  obvious  reasons,  the  church  tended  to  ignore  the  final  edict:  the  
destruction  of heretic  property.  
In  addition  to  demanding  that  we  fulfill  every  "jot"  and  "tittle"  

IN    THE    SHADOW    OF   GOD          83          
of Old Testament  law,
7
  Jesus  seems  to  have  suggested,  in  John  15:6,  
further  refinements  to  the  practice  of killing  heretics  and  unbeliev-
ers:  "If  a  man  abide  not  in  me,  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  branch,  and  is  
withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the  fire, and they 
are  burned." Whether  we  want  to  interpret  Jesus  metaphorically  is,  
of course, our business. The problem with  scripture,  however, is that 
many  of  its  possible  interpretations  (including  most  of  the  literal  
ones)  can  be  used  to justify  atrocities  in  defense  of the  faith.  
The  Holy  Inquisition  formally  began  in  1184  under  Pope  Lucius  
III,  to  crush the popular movement of Catharism. The Cathars  (from  
the  Greek  katharoi,  "the  pure  ones")  had  fashioned their  own  brand  
of  Manicheanism  (Mani  himself  was  flayed  alive  at  the  behest  of  
Zoroastrian  priests  in  276  CE),  which  held  that  the  material  world  
had  been  created  by  Satan  and  was  therefore  inherently  evil.  The  
Cathars  were  divided  by  a  schism  of  their  own  and  within  each  of  
their  sects  by the  distinction  between the  renunciate  perfecti and the 
lay  credentes  ("the  believers")  who  revered  them.  The  perfecti  ate  
no  meat,  eggs,  cheese,  or  fat,  fasted  for  days  at  a  time,  maintained  
strict  celibacy,  and  abjured  all  personal  wealth.  The  life  of the  per-
fecti  was  so  austere  that  most======================================================== out  and  said  it:  "I  should  not  be  a  
Christian  but  for  the  miracles."  A  millennium  later,  Blaise  Pascal—  

96          THE    END    OF    FAITH    
mathematical prodigy,  philosopher,  and physicist—was  so impressed 
by  Christ's  confirmation  of prophecy  that  he  devoted  the  last  years  
of  his  short  life  to  defending  Christian  doctrine  in  writing:  
Through Jesus we know God. All those who have claimed to know 
God  and  prove  his  existence  without  Jesus  Christ  have  only  had  
futile  proofs  to  offer.  But  to  prove  Christ  we  have  the  prophecies  
which  are  solid  and  palpable  proofs.  By being  fulfilled  and proved 
true  by  the  event,  these  prophecies  show  that  these  truths  are  
certain  and thus  prove that Jesus  is  divine.
34  
"Solid  and  palpable"?  That  so  nimble  a  mind  could  be  led  to  labor  
under  such dogma was  surely one  of the great wonders  of the  age.
35  
Even   today,   the  apparent   confirmation   of  prophecy   detailed   in   
the  New Testament  is  offered  as  the  chief  reason  to  accept  Jesus  as  
the  messiah.  The  "leap  of  faith"  is  really  a  fiction.  No  Christians,  
not  even  those  of the  first  century,  have  ever  been  content  to  rely  
upon  it.  
WHILE  God  had  made  his  covenant  with  Israel,  and  delivered  his  
Son  in  the  guise  of  a  Jew,  the  earliest  Christians  were  increasingly  
gentile,  and  as  the  doctrine  spread,  the  newly  baptized  began  to  see  
the Jews'  denial of Jesus'  divinity as  the  consummate  evil. This  sec-
tarian  ethos  is  already  well  established by  the  time  of  Paul:  
For ye,  brethren,  became  followers  of the  churches  of  God which 
in  Judaea  are  in  Christ  Jesus:  for  ye  also  like  things  of your  own  
countrymen,  even  as  they  have  of the  Jews: Who  both  killed  the  
Lord  Jesus,  and  their  own  prophets,  and  have  persecuted  us;  and  
they please not God, and are contrary to  all men:  Forbidding us to 
speak to the Gentiles that they might be  saved, to  fill up their sins 
alway:  for the wrath  is  come  upon  them  to the  uttermost.  (Thes-
salonians  2:14-16)  

IN     THE     SHADOW      OF     GOD  97  
The  explicit demonization  of the Jews  appears  in the  Gospel  of John: 
Jesus  said  unto  them  [the  Jews],  If  God  were  your  Father,  ye  
would  love  me:  for  I  proceeded  forth and came  from  God; neither 
came  I  of  myself, but  he  sent  me. Why  do  ye  not  understand  my  
speech?  Even  because  ye  cannot  hear  my  word.  Ye  are  of  your  
father the  devil,  and the  lusts  of your  father ye  will  do.  He  was  a  
murderer  from the beginning,  and abode not in the truth, because 
there  is  no truth  in  him. When  he  speaketh  a  lie,  he  speaketh  of  
his own:  for he is a  liar, and the father of it. And because  I tell you 
the  truth,  ye  believe  me  not.  (John  8:41-45)  
With the destruction of the Temple in 70  CE, Christians—gentile 
and  Jew  alike—felt  that  they  were  witnessing  the  fulfillment  of  
prophecy, imagining that the  Roman  legions  were meting out  God's  
punishment   to   the   betrayers   of   Christ.   Anti-Semitism   soon   
acquired  a  triumphal  smugness,  and  with  the  ascension  of  Chris-
tianity  as  the  state  religion  in  312   CE,  with  the  conversion  of  
Constantine,  Christians  began  openly  to  relish  and  engineer  the  
degradation  of world  Jewry.
36
  Laws  were  passed that  revoked  many  
of   the   civic   privileges   previously   granted   to   Jews.   Jews   were   
excluded  from  the  military  and  from  holding  high  office  and  were  
forbidden  to  proselytize  or  to  have  sexual  relations  with  Christian  
women  (both  under  penalty  of  death).  The  Justinian  Code,  in  the  
sixth  century,  essentially  declared  the  legal  status  of the  Jews  null  
and   void—outlawing   the   Mishnah   (the   codification   of   Jewish   
oral  law)  and  making  disbelief  in  the  Resurrection  and  the  Last  
Judgment  a  capital  offense.
37
  Augustine,  ever  the  ready  sectarian,  
rejoiced  at  the  subjugation  of the  Jews  and  took  special  pleasure  in  
the  knowledge  that  they  were  doomed  to  wander the  earth  bearing  
witness  to  the  truth  of  scripture  and  the  salvation  of  the  gentiles.  
The  suffering  and  servitude  of  the  Jews  was  proof  that  Christ  had  
been  the  messiah  after  all.
38  
Like witches, the Jews  of Europe were often  accused of incredible 

98          THE    END    OF   FAITH   
crimes,  the  most  prevalent  of  which  has  come  to  be  known  as  the  
"blood  libel"—born  of  the  belief  that  Jews  require  the  blood  of  
Christians   (generally   newborn)   for  use  in   a  variety  of  rituals.  
Throughout  the  Middle Ages,  Jews  were  regularly  accused  of mur-
dering Christian  infants,  a crime  for which they were duly despised. 
It was  well known that  all  Jews  menstruated, male  and  female  alike,  
and  required  the  blood  of  a  Christian  to  replenish  their  lost  stores.  
They  also  suffered  from  terrible  hemorrhoids  and  oozing  sores  as  a  
punishment  for  the  murder  of  Christ—and  as  a  retort  to  their  
improbable  boast  before  the  "innocent"  Pontius  Pilate  (Matthew  
27:25),  "His  blood be  on us  and on our children."  It  should  come as 
no  surprise  that  Jews  were  in  the  habit  of applying  Christian  blood  
as  a  salve  upon  these  indignities.  Christian  blood  was  also  said  to  
ease  the  labor  pains  of  any  Jewess  fortunate  enough  to  have  it  
spread  upon  pieces  of parchment  and  placed  into her  clenched  fists.  
It  was  common  knowledge,  too,  that  all  Jews  were  born  blind  and  
that,  when  smeared  upon  their  eyes,  Christian  blood  granted  them  
the  faculty  of  sight.  Jewish  boys  were  frequently  born  with  their  
fingers  attached  to  their  foreheads,  and  only  the  blood  of  a  Chris-
tian  could  allow  this  pensive  gesture  to  be  broken  without  risk  to  
the  child.  
Once  born,  a  Jew's  desire  for  Christian  blood  could  scarcely  be  
slaked.  During  the  rite  of  circumcision  it  took  the  place  of  conse-
crated  oil  (crissam,  an  exclusively  Christian  commodity);  and  later  
in life, Jewish children of both sexes had their genitalia smeared with 
the  blood  of  some  poor,  pious  man—waylaid  upon  the  road  and  
strangled  in  a  ditch—to  make  them   fertile.  Medieval  Christians  
believed that  Jews  used their blood  for everything  from  a  rouge  to  a  
love philter and as  a prophylactic against leprosy. Given this state  of  
affairs, who  could  doubt that  Jews  of all ages  would be  fond of suck-
ing blood out  of Christian children "with quills  and  small  reeds,"  for  
later use  by their  elders  during wedding  feasts?  Finally, with  a  mind  
to  covering  all  their  bases,  Jews  smeared  their  dying  brethren  with  
the  blood  of an  innocent  Christian  babe  (recently  baptized  and  then  

IN     THE     SHADOW      OF      GOD  99  
suffocated),  saying,  "If  the  Messiah  promised  by  the  prophets  has  
really come, and he be Jesus, may this  innocent blood ensure  for you 
eternal  life!"
39  
The  blood  libel  totters  on  shoulders  of  other  giant  misconcep-
tions,  of  course,  especially  the  notion,  widely  accepted  at  the  time,  
that the various constituents of the human body possess  magical and 
medicinal  power. This  explains  the  acceptance  of similar  accusations  
leveled at  witches,  such  as the  belief that  candles  made  from  human  
fat  could  render  a  man  invisible  while  lighting  up  his  surround-
ings.
40
  One  wonders  just  how  many  a  thief  was  caught  striding  
through  his  neighbor's  foyer  in  search  of  plunder,  bearing  a  mal-
odorous  candle  confidently  aloft,  before  these  miraculous  tools  of  
subterfuge  fell  out  of  fashion.  
But  for  sheer  gothic  absurdity  nothing  surpasses  the  medieval  
concern  over  host  desecration,  the punishment of which  preoccupied  
pious  Christians  for  centuries.  The  doctrine  of  transubstantiation  
was  formally  established  in  1215  at  the  Fourth  Lateran  Council  (the  
same  one  that  sanctioned  the  use  of torture  by  inquisitors  and pro-
hibited  Jews  from  owning  land  or  embarking  upon  civil  or  military  
careers),  and  thereafter  became  the  centerpiece   of  the  Christian  
(now  Catholic)  faith.  (The  relevant  passage  from  The  Profession  of  
Faith  of  the  Roman  Catholic  was  cited  in  chapter  2.)  Henceforth,  it  
was  an  indisputable  fact  of  this  world  that  the  communion  host  is  
actually  transformed  at  the   Mass  into  the  living  body  of  Jesus  
Christ.  After  this  incredible  dogma  had  been  established,  by  mere  
reiteration,   to   the   satisfaction   of  everyone,   Christians  began   to   
worry  that  these  living  wafers  might  be  subjected  to  all  manner  of  
mistreatment, and even physical torture, at the hands of heretics and 
Jews.  (One  might  wonder  why  eating  the  body  of  Jesus  would  be  
any  less  of  a  torment  to  him.)  Could  there  be  any  doubt  that  the  
Jews  would  seek  to  harm  the  Son  of  God  again,  knowing  that  his  
body  was  now  readily  accessible  in  the  form  of defenseless  crackers?  
Historical  accounts  suggest  that  as  many  as  three  thousand  Jews  
were  murdered  in  response  to  a  single  allegation  of  this  imaginary  

100         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
crime.  The   crime  of  host  desecration   was   punished  throughout  
Europe  for  centuries.
41  
It is out of this history of theologically mandated======================================================== persecution that 
secular   anti-Semitism   emerged.   Even   explicitly   anti-Christian   
movements,  as  in  the  cases  of  German  Nazism  and  Russian  social-
ism,  managed  to  inherit  and  enact  the  doctrinal  intolerance  of  the  
church.  Astonishingly,  ideas  as  spurious  as  the  blood  libel  are  still  
very  much  with  us,  having  found  a  large  cult  of  believers  in  the  
Muslim  world.
42  
The      Holocaust      
The  National  Socialism  of  all  of  us  is  anchored  in  uncritical  loy-
alty,  in the surrender  to  the  Führer  that  does  not  ask  for the why 
in  individual  cases,  in  the  silent  execution  of  his  orders.  We  
believe that the  Führer  is obeying a higher call to  fashion German 
history. There  can  be  no  criticism  of this  belief.  
Rudolf Hess,  in  a  speech,  June  1934.
43  
The  rise  of  Nazism  in  Germany  required  much  in  the  way  of  
"uncritical  loyalty."  Beyond  the  abject  (and  religious)  loyalty  to  
Hitler,  the  Holocaust  emerged  out  of  people's  acceptance  of  some  
very  implausible  ideas.  
Heinrich Himmler thought the  SS  should have  leeks  and mineral 
water  for  breakfast.  He  thought  people  could  be  made  to  confess  
by  telepathy.  Following  King  Arthur  and  the  round  table,  he  
would have only twelve people to dinner. He believed that Aryans 
had not  evolved  from  monkeys  and  apes  like  other  races,  but  had  
come  down  to  earth  from  the  heavens, where  they  had  been  pre-
served  in  ice  from  the  beginning  of time.  He  established  a  mete-
orology  division  which  was  given  the  task  of proving  this  cosmic  
ice theory. He also thought he was a reincarnation of Heinrich the 

IN    THE    SHADOW    OF    GOD           101           
First. Himmler was an extreme  case: the picture is perhaps one of 
someone quite mad. But one of his characteristics was much more 
widely shared—his mind  had not been  encouraged to grow.  Filled  
with  information  and opinion,  he  had  no  critical  powers.
44  
At  the  heart  of  every  totalitarian  enterprise,  one  sees  outlandish  
dogmas, poorly arranged, but working ineluctably like gears in some 
ludicrous  instrument  of  death.  Nazism  evolved  out  of  a  variety  of  
economic  and  political  factors,  of course, but  it was  held  together  by  
a  belief  in  the  racial  purity  and  superiority  of  the  German  people.  
The  obverse  of  this  fascination  with  race  was  the  certainty  that  all  
impure  elements—homosexuals,  invalids,  Gypsies,  and,  above  all,  
Jews—posed a threat to the  fatherland. And while the hatred of Jews 
in  Germany  expressed  itself  in  a  predominately  secular  way,  it  was  
a  direct  inheritance  from  medieval  Christianity.  For  centuries,  reli-
gious  Germans  had viewed  the  Jews  as  the  worst  species  of heretics 
and  attributed  every  societal  ill  to  their  continued  presence  among  
the  faithful.  Daniel  Goldhagen  has  traced  the  rise  of  the  German  
conception  of the  Jews  as  a "race" and a "nation,"  which culminated 
in  an  explicitly  nationalistic  formulation  of  this  ancient  Christian  
animus.
45
  Of course, the  religious  demonization  of the Jews was  also  
a contemporary phenomenon.  (Indeed, the Vatican  itself perpetuated 
the  blood  libel  in  its  newspapers  as  late  as  1914.)
46
  Ironically,  the  
very  fact that Jews had been mistreated in Germany  (and elsewhere) 
since  time  immemorial—by  being  confined  to  ghettos  and  deprived  
of  civic  status—gave  rise  to  the  modern,  secular  strand  of  anti-
Semitism,  for  it  was  not  until  the  emancipation  efforts  of the  early  
nineteenth century that the  hatred  of the  Jews  acquired  an  explicitly  
racial  inflection.  Even  the  self-proclaimed  "friends  of the  Jews" who 
sought the admission of Jews into German society with the  full priv-
ileges  of  citizenship  did  so  only  on  the  assumption  that  the  Jews  
could  be  reformed  thereby  and  rendered  pure  by  sustained  associa-
tion  with  the  German  race.
47
  Thus,  the  voices  of  liberal  tolerance  
within  Germany  were  often  as  anti-Semitic  as  their  conservative  

102          THE    END    OF    FAITH    
opponents,  for they  differed only in  the  belief that  the  Jew was  capa-
ble  of  moral  regeneration.  By  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century,  
after  the  liberal  experiment  had  failed  to  dissolve  the  Jews  in  the  
pristine  solvent  of  German  tolerance,  the  erstwhile  "friends  of  the  
Jews"  came  to  regard  these  strangers  in  their  midst  with  the  same  
loathing  that  their  less  idealistic  contemporaries  had  nurtured  all  
along.  An  analysis  of  prominent  anti-Semitic  writers  and  publica-
tions  from  1861  to  1895  reveals  just  how  murderous  the  German  
anti-Semites  were  inclined  to  be:   fully  two-thirds  of  those  that  
purported to  offer "solutions"  to the  "Jewish problem"  openly advo-
cated  the  physical  extermination  of  the  Jews—and  this,  as  Gold-
hagen points out, was several decades before the rise of Hitler.  Indeed,  
the  possibility  of  exterminating   a  whole   people   was   considered   
before "genocide" was even  a proper concept, and long before  killing  
on  such  a  massive  scale  had  been  shown  to  be  practically  feasible  in  
the  First  and  Second World Wars. 
While  Goldhagen's  controversial  charge  that  the  Germans  were  
Hitler's  "willing  executioners"  seems  generally  fair,  it  is  true  that  
the  people  of  other  nations  were  equally  willing.  Genocidal  anti-
Semitism  had been  in  the  air  for  some  time,  particularly  in  Eastern  
Europe.  In  the  year  1919,  for  instance,  sixty-thousand  Jews  were  
murdered  in  Ukraine  alone.
48
  Once  the Third  Reich  began  its  overt  
persecution  of Jews, anti-Semitic pogroms erupted in  Poland,  Ruma-
nia,  Hungary, Austria,  Czechoslovakia,  Croatia,  and  elsewhere.
49  
With  passage  of the  Nuremberg  laws  in  1935  the  transformation  
of  German  anti-Semitism  was  complete.  The  Jews  were  to  be  con-
sidered  a  race,  one  that  was  inimical  to  a  healthy  Germany  in  prin-
ciple. As  such, they were  fundamentally irredeemable,  for while  one  
can  cast  away  one's  religious  ideology,  and  even  accept  baptism  into  
the  church,  one  cannot  cease  to  be  what  one  is. And  it  is  here  that  
we  encounter  the  overt  complicity  of  the  church  in  the  attempted  
murder  of  an  entire  people.  German  Catholics  showed  themselves  
remarkably  acquiescent  to  a  racist  creed  that  was  at  cross-purposes  
with  at  least  one  of  their  core  beliefs:  for  if  baptism  truly  had  the  

IN    THE    SHADOW    OF    GOD          103          
power to  redeem, then  Jewish  converts  should  have  been  considered  
saved  without  residue  in  the  eyes  of  the  church.  But,  as  we  have  
seen,  coherence  in  any  system  of  beliefs  is  never  perfect—and  the  
German  churches,  in  order  to  maintain  order  during  their  services,  
were  finally  obliged  to  print  leaflets  admonishing  their  flock  not  to  
attack  Jewish  converts  during  times  of worship.  That  a  person's  race  
could  not  be  rescinded  was  underscored  as  early  as   1880,  in  a  
Vatican-approved paper: "Oh  how wrong and deluded are those who 
think  Judaism  is just  a  religion,  like  Catholicism,  Paganism,  Protes-
tantism, and not in  fact a race, a people, and a nation!  ...  For the Jews 
are  not only Jews  because of their religion ... they are Jews  also and 
especially  because  of  their  race."
50
 The  German  Catholic  episcopate  
issued  its  own  guidelines  in  1936:  "Race,  soil,  blood  and  people  are  
precious natural values, which  God the  Lord has  created and the care 
of which  he  has  entrusted  to  us  Germans."
51  
But  the  truly  sinister  complicity  of  the  church  came  in  its  will-
ingness  to  open  its  genealogical  records  to  the  Nazis  and  thereby  
enable  them  to  trace  the  extent  of  a  person's  Jewish  ancestry.  A  
historian  of the  Catholic  Church,  Guenther  Lewy,  has written: 
The very  question  of whether the  [Catholic]  Church  should  lend  
its  help  to  the  Nazi  state  in  sorting  out  people  of  Jewish  descent  
was  never debated. On the  contrary. "We have  always unselfishly 
worked  for the people without regard to gratitude or ingratitude," 
a priest wrote in  Klerusblatt in September 1934. "We shall  also do 
our  best  to  help  in  this   service  to  the  people."  And  the  co-
operation  of  the  Church  in  this  matter  continued  right  through  
the war  years, when  the  price  of being Jewish  was  no  longer  dis-
missal  from  a government job  and loss  of livelihood, but deporta-
tion  and  outright  physical  destruction.
52  
All of this, despite  the  fact that the  Catholic  Church  was  in very real 
opposition  to  much  of  the  Nazi  platform,  which  was  bent  upon  
curtailing  its  power.  Goldhagen  also  reminds  us  that  not  a  single  

l04          THE    END    OF    FAITH    
German  Catholic  was  excommunicated  before,  during,  or  after  the  
war,  "after  committing  crimes  as  great  as  any  in  human  history."  
This  is  really  an  extraordinary  fact.  Throughout  this  period,  the  
church  continued  to  excommunicate  theologians  and  scholars  in  
droves  for  holding  unorthodox  views  and  to  proscribe  books  by  the  
hundreds,  and  yet  not  a  single  perpetrator  of  genocide—of  whom  
there  were  countless  examples—succeeded  in  furrowing  Pope  Pius  
XII's  censorious  brow.  
This astonishing situation merits  a slight digression. At the======================================================== visionary   strata   of  the   mind—in   dreams,   or   trance,   or   psychedelic   
swoon—in  search  of  the  sacred.  While  I  have  no  doubt  that  remarkable  
experiences  are  lying  in  wait  for  the  initiate  down  each  of these  byways,  
the  fact  that  consciousness  is  always  the  prior  context  and  condition  of  
every  visionary  experience  is  a  great  clarifying  truth—and  one  which  
brands   all   such   excursions   as   fundamentally  unnecessary.  That  con-
sciousness  is  not  improved—not  made  emptier  of  self,  or  more  mysteri-
ous,  transcendental,  etc.—by  the  pyrotechnics  of  esotericism  is  a  fact,  
which  contemplatives  of  every  persuasion  could  confirm  in  their  own  
experience. 
The  modern  version  of the  visionary  impulse,  perhaps  best  exempli-
fied in the exquisite  ravings  of Terence  McKenna,  is the equation  of spir-
itual  transcendence  with  information  of  a  transcendental  kind. Thus,  any  
experience  (most effectively  invoked with the  aid of psychedelic drugs)  in  
which  the  mind  is  flooded  by  paradoxical  disclosures—visions  of  other  

NOTE       TO        PAGE        221  301  
realms,  ethereal  beings,  the  grammatology  of  alien  intelligences,  etc.—is  
considered  to  be  an  improvement  upon  ordinary  consciousness.  What  
such  a  romance  of the  subtle overlooks,  however,  is the sublimity of con-
sciousness  itself,  prior  to  subject/object  perception.  That  subtle  disclo-
sures  are  captivating  to  the  intellect  (whether  or  not  they  are  "true"),  
there  can  be  no  doubt.  But  their  impermanence—any  vision,  having  
arisen,  is  destined to pass  away—proves that such phenomena are not the 
basis  for  permanent  transformation.  
I  do  not  mean  to  suggest,  however,  that  these  "interior"  landscapes  
should  remain  unexplored.  Increasingly  subtle  appearances  hold  intrinsic  
interest  for  anyone  who  would  acquire  more  knowledge  about  the  body,  
the  mind,  or  the  universe  at  large.  I  am  simply  saying  that  to  seek free-
dom  amid  any  continuum  of  possible  disclosures  seems  a  mistake,  one  
that  only  the  nondual  schools  of  mysticism  have  adequately  criticized.  
What  is  more,  the  fascination  with  such  esoterica  is  largely  responsible  
for  the  infantilism  and  mere  credulity  that  attends  most  expressions  of  
spirituality  in   the  West.   Either  we   find  mere   belief,  wedded  to  the  
hideous  presumption  of  its  own  sufficiency,  or  we  are  met  by  the  fren-
zied   search   for   novelty—psychic   experience,   prophecies   of  doom   or   
splendor,  and  a thousand errant  convictions  about the personality of God. 
But  the  fact  remains  that  whatever  changes  occur  in  the  stream  of  our  
experience—whether  a  vision  of Jesus appears  to  each  of us,  or  the total-
ity  of  human  knowledge  can  one  day  be  downloaded  directly  onto  our  
synapses—in  spiritual  terms  we will be  consciousness  first,  and  only,  and  
already  free  of "I."  It  does  not  seem  too  soon  for  us  to  realize  this.  
24
 Whether mysticism  entails the  transcendence  of all  concepts  is  surely an 
open  question.  The  claim  here  is  merely  that  the  concepts  that  under-
write  our  dualistic  perception  of the  world  are  left  aside  by  mystics.  

Bibliography 
Aarons,  M.,  and  J.  Loftus.   Unholy  Trinity:  The  Vatican,  the  Nazis,  and  the  Swiss  
Banks.  Rev.  ed.  New York:  St. Martin's  Griffin,  1998.  
Abraham,  R.,  T.  McKenna,  and  R.  Sheldrake.  Trialogues  at  the  Edge  of  the  West:  
Chaos,  Creativity,  and  the  Resacralization  of  the  World.  Santa  Fe:  Bear  Publish-
ing, 1992. 
Adolphs,  R.,  D.  Tranel,  and  A.  R.  Damasio.  "The  Human Amygdala  in  Social  Judg-
ment."  Nature  393  (June 4,1998): 470-74. 
Ahmad,  Z.,  L.  M.  Balsamo,  B.  C.  Sachs,  B.  Xu,  and W.  D.  Gaillard.  "Auditory  Com-
prehension  of  Language  in  Young  Children:  Neural  Networks  Identified  with  
fMRI."  Neurology  60  (2003):  1598-605.  
Albert,  D.  Z.  Quantum  Mechanics  and  Experience.  Cambridge:  Harvard  Univ.  Press,  
1992. 
Allman,  J.  M.  Evolving  Brains.  New York:  Scientific American  Library,  1999.  
Anderson,  J.  R.  "The  New  Theoretical  Framework."  In  The  Adaptive  Character  of  
Thought.  Hillsdale,  N.J.:  Erlbaum,  1990.  
Andresen,  J.  "Meditation  Meets  Behavioral  Medicine:  The  Story  of  Experimental  
Research  on  Meditation."  Journal  of  Consciousness  Studies  7,  nos.  11-12  (2000):  
17-73. 
Anonymous.  Terrorist  Hunter.  New York:  HarperCollins,  2003.  
Anscombe,  G.  E.  M.  "The  First  Person."  In  Self-knowledge,  ed.  Q.  Cassam.  Oxford:  
Oxford Univ.  Press,  1975.  
Appleyard,  B.   Understanding  the  Present:  Science  and  the   Soul  of  Modern   Man.   
New York:  Doubleday,  1992.  
Armstrong,  K.  A  History  of  God.  New  York: Alfred A.  Knopf,  1994.  
Astavakra.  The  Ashtavakra  Gita.  Translated  by Thomas  Byrom.  Boston:  Shambhala,  
1990. 
Augustine,  Saint.  The  City  of God. Translated by  M. Dods. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago 
Press, 1952. 
——.       Confessions.  Translated  by  J.  G.  Pilkington.  Great  Britain:  Folio  Society,  
1993. 
303 

304            BIBLIOGRAPHY            
Austin,  J.  H.  Zen  and  the  Brain:  Toward  an  Understanding  of  Meditation  and  Con-
sciousness.  Cambridge:  MIT  Press,  1998.  
Austin,  J.  L.  Sense  and  Sensibilia.  London:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1962.  
Ayer, A.  J.  Wittgenstein.  New York:  Random  House,  1985.  
Bacovcin,  H.,  trans.  The  Way  of  a  Pilgrim  and  A  Pilgrim  Continues  His  Way.  New  
York: Doubleday, 1978. 
Baddeley,  A.  "The  Fractionation  of Working  Memory."  Proceedings  of  the  National  
Academy  of  Sciences  U.S.A.  93  (1996):  13468-72.  
Baier,  A.  C.  Moral  Prejudices:  Essays  on  Ethics.  Cambridge:  Harvard  Univ.  Press,  
1994. 
Baker,  L.  R.  Saving  Belief:  A   Critique  of  Physicalism.  Princeton:  Princeton  Univ.  
Press, 1987. 
Bankei.   The   Unborn:  The   Life   and  Teaching  of  Zen   Master  Bankei   (1622-1693).   
Translated by  N. Waddell.  San  Francisco:  North  Point  Press,  1984.  
Barnstone,  W.,  ed.  The  Other  Bible:  Jewish  Pseudepigrapha,   Christian  Apocrypha,  
Gnostic  Scriptures,  Kabbalah,  Dead  Sea  Scrolls.  San  Francisco:  Harper  San  Fran-
cisco, 1984. 
Barrett, W., and  H.  D. Aiken.,  eds.  Philosophy  in  the  20th  Century.  4 vols.  New York: 
Random  House,  1962.  
Baudrillard,  J.  The  Spirit  of  Terrorism.  Translated  by  C.  Turner.  New  York:  Verso,  
2002. 
Baumgartner,  P.,  and  S.  Payr,  eds.  Speaking  Minds:  Interviews  with  Twenty  Eminent  
Cognitive  Scientists.  Princeton:  Princeton  Univ.  Press,  1995.  
Bechara,  A.,  H.  Damasio,  D.  Tranel,  and  A.  R.  Damasio.  "Deciding  Advantageously  
before Knowing the Advantageous  Strategy."  Science  275  (1997):  1293-95.  
Becker,  E.  The  Denial  of Death.  New York:  Free  Press,  1973.  
Beedle,  A.   S.   "A  Philosopher   Looks   at   Neuroscience."   Journal   of  Neuroscience  
Research  55  (1999):  141-46.  
Beloff,  J.  "Minds  and  Machines:  A  Radical  Dualist  Perspective."  Journal  of  Con-
sciousness  Studies  1,  no.  1  (1994): 32-37. 
Bennet,  J.  "In  Israeli  Hospital,  Bomber  Tells  of  Trying  to  Kill  Israelis."  New  York  
Times, June  8,  2002.  
Bennett, J. "How  Is  Cognitive  Ethology  Possible?"  In  Cognitive  Ethology: The  Minds  
of  Other Animals,  ed.  C. A.  Ristau.  Hillsdale,  N.J.:  Erlbaum,  1991.  
Benson,  H.,  with  M.  Stark.  Timeless  Healing:  The  Power  and  Biology  of  Belief.  New  
York:  Charles  Scribner,  1996.  
Bergson,  H.  Time  and  Free  Will: An  Essay  on  the  Immediate  Data  of  Consciousness.  
Translated by F.  L. Pogson.  1910; reprint, London: George Allen  & Unwin, 1971. 
Berkow,  R.,  ed.  The  Merck  Manual  of Diagnosis  and  Therapy.  16th  ed.  Rahway,  N.J.:  
Merck  Research  Laboratories,  1992.  
Berman,  P.  "The  Philosopher  of  Islamic  Terror."  New  York  Times  Magazine,  March  
23,  2003.  

BIBLIOGRAPHY          305          
——.     Terror  and  Liberalism.  New York: W. W. Norton,  2003.  
Beyerstein,  B.  L.  "Neuropathology and the  Legacy of Spiritual  Possession."  Skeptical  
Inquirer 12, no. 3  (1998): 248-61. 
Binder,  L.  Islamic  Liberalism:  A  Critique  of  Development  Ideologies.  Chicago:  Univ.  
of Chicago  Press,  1988.  
Blake,  R.,  and  N.  K.  Logothetis.  "Visual  Competition."  Nature  Reviews  Neuroscience  
3,  no.  1  (2002): 13-21. 
Blakemore,  C,  and  S.  Jennett,  eds.  The  Oxford  Companion  to   the  Body.  Oxford:  
Oxford Univ. Press, 2001. 
Block,  N.  "Troubles  with  Functionalism."  In  The  Nature  of  Mind,  ed.  D.  Rosenthal.  
Oxford: Oxford Univ.  Press,  1991.  
——.      "The  Mind  as  the  Software  of the  Brain."  In  An  Invitation  to  Cognitive  Sci-
ence: Thinking,  ed. E.  E. Smith and D. N. Osherson. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995. 
Block,  N.,  O.  Flanagan,  and  G.  Güzeldere,  eds.  The  Nature  of  Consciousness:  Philo-
sophical  Debates.  Cambridge:  MIT  Press,  1997.  
Bloom,  H.  Omens  of  the  Millennium:  The  Gnosis  of Angels,  Dreams,  and  Resurrec-
tion.  New York:  Riverhead  Books,  1996.  
——,     ed.  The  Book  of J.  Translated by D.  Rosenberg. New York: Vintage,  1990.  
Bobrow,  R.  S.  "Paranormal  Phenomena  in  the  Medical  Literature:  Sufficient  Smoke  
to Warrant  a  Search  for  Fire."  Medical  Hypotheses  60  (2003):  864-68.  
Bogen  J.  E.  "Mental Duality  in the  Intact Brain."  Bulletin  of Clinical  Neuroscience 51 
(1986): 3-29. 
——.      "On  the  Neuropsychology  of  Consiousness:  Parts  I  and  II."  Consciousness  
and  Cognition  4======================================================== experiment  have  shown  that human memory  comes  in  many  forms.  
Not  only  are  our  long-term  and  short-term  memories  the  products  
of distinct  and dissimilar  neural  circuits;  they  have  themselves  been  
divided  into  multiple  subsystems.
1
  To  speak  simply  of  "memory,"  
therefore,  is  now  rather  like  speaking  of  "experience."  Clearly,  we  
must be  more  precise  about what  our  mental  terms  mean  before  we  
attempt  to  understand  them  at  the  level  of the  brain.
2  
Even  dogs  and  cats,  insofar  as  they  form  associations  between  
people, places, and events, can be said to "believe" many things about 
the world. But this is not the sort of believing we  are  after. When we 
talk  about  the  beliefs  to  which  people  consciously  subscribe—"The  
house  is  infested  with  termites,"  "Tofu  is  not  a  dessert,"  "Muham-
mad  ascended  to  heaven  on  a  winged  horse"—we  are  talking  about  
50 

THE     NATURE     OF    BELIEF            51            
beliefs  that are  communicated,  and acquired,  linguistically.  Believing  
a  given  proposition  is  a  matter  of  believing  that  it  faithfully  repre-
sents  some  state  of  the  world,  and  this  fact  yields  some  immediate  
insights  into  the  standards  by  which  our  beliefs  should  function.
3
  In  
particular,  it  reveals  why  we  cannot  help  but  value  evidence  and  
demand  that  propositions  about  the  world  logically  cohere.  These  
constraints  apply  equally  to  matters  of religion.  "Freedom  of belief" 
(in  anything  but  the  legal  sense)  is  a myth.  We  will  see that we  are  
no  more  free  to  believe  whatever  we  want  about  God  than  we  are  
free  to  adopt  unjustified  beliefs  about  science  or  history,  or  free  to  
mean  whatever we want when  using words  like "poison"  or "north" 
or  "zero." Anyone who would lay  claim  to  such entitlements  should  
not  be  surprised  when  the  rest  of us  stop  listening  to  him.  
Beliefs    as    Principles    of  Action  
The  human  brain  is  a  prolific  generator  of  beliefs  about  the  world.  
In   fact,  the  very  humanness  of  any  brain  consists  largely  in  its  
capacity to evaluate  new statements  of propositional truth in light of 
innumerable others that it already  accepts.  By  recourse to intuitions 
of  truth   and   falsity,   logical   necessity  and  contradiction,  human  
beings  are  able  to  knit  together  private  visions  of  the  world  that  
largely  cohere.  What  neural  events  underlie  this  process?  What  
must  a  brain  do  in  order  to  believe  that  a  given  statement  is  true  or  
false?. We  currently  have  no  idea.  Language  processing  must  play  a  
large  role,  of  course,  but  the  challenge  will  be  to  discover  how  the  
brain  brings  the  products  of  perception,  memory,  and  reasoning  to  
bear  on  individual  propositions  and  magically  transforms  them  into  
the  very  substance  of our  living.  
It  was  probably  the  capacity  for  movement,  enjoyed  by  certain  
primitive  organisms,  that  drove  the  evolution  of  our  sensory  and  
cognitive  faculties.  This  follows  from  the  fact  that  if  no  creature  
could  do  anything  with  the  information  it  acquired  from  the  world,  

52          THE     END     OF     FAITH     
nature  could  not  have  selected  for  improvements  in  the  physical  
structures  that  gather,  store,  and  process  such  information.  Even  a  
sense as primitive  as vision, therefore,  seems  predicated on the exis-
tence  of  a  motor  system.  If  you  cannot  catch  food,  avoid  becoming  
food  yourself,  or  wander  off  a  cliff,  there  does  not  seem  to  be  much  
reason  to  see the world  in  the  first  place—and  certainly  refinements  
in  vision,  of  the  sort  found  everywhere  in  the  animal  kingdom,  
would never have  come  about  at  all.  
For  this  reason,  it  seems  uncontroversial  to  say  that  all  higher-
order  cognitive  states  (of which  beliefs  are  an  example)  are  in  some  
way  an  outgrowth  of  our  capacity  for  action.  In  adaptive  terms,  
belief  has  been  extraordinarily  useful.  It  is,  after  all,  by  believing  
various propositions about the world that we predict events  and con-
sider the  likely  consequences  of our actions.  Beliefs  are principles  of  
action: whatever they may be at the  level of the brain, they are pro-
cesses  by  which  our  understanding  (and  misunderstanding)  of  the  
world  is  represented  and  made  available  to  guide  our  behavior.
4  
THE  power  that  belief  has  over  our  emotional  lives  appears  to  be  
total.  For  every  emotion  that  you  are  capable  of  feeling,  there  is  
surely a belief that could invoke it in  a matter of moments.  Consider  
the  following  proposition:  
Your  daughter  is  being  slowly  tortured  in  an  English jail. 
What  is  it  that  stands  between  you  and  the  absolute  panic  that  
such  a  proposition  would  loose  in  the  mind  and  body  of  a  person  
who  believed  it?  Perhaps  you  do  not  have  a  daughter,  or  you  know  
her  to  be  safely  at  home,  or  you  believe  that  English  jailors  are  
renowned  for  their  congeniality.  Whatever  the  reason,  the  door  to  
belief  has  not  yet  swung  upon  its  hinges.  
The   link  between   belief  and   behavior   raises   the   stakes   con-
siderably.  Some  propositions  are  so  dangerous  that  it  may  even  be  

THE     NATURE     OF    BELIEF            53            
ethical  to  kill  people  for  believing  them. This  may  seem  an  extraor-
dinary  claim,  but  it  merely  enunciates  an  ordinary  fact  about  the  
world  in which we  live.  Certain  beliefs  place their adherents  beyond  
the  reach  of  every  peaceful  means  of  persuasion,  while  inspiring  
them  to  commit  acts  of extraordinary  violence  against  others. There 
is,  in  fact,  no talking  to  some  people.  If they cannot be captured,  and  
they  often  cannot,  otherwise  tolerant  people  may  be  justified  in  
killing   them   in   self-defense.   This   is   what   the   United   States   
attempted in Afghanistan,  and  it is what we  and other Western  pow-
ers  are bound  to  attempt,  at  an  even  greater  cost  to  ourselves  and to 
innocents  abroad,  elsewhere  in  the  Muslim  world. We  will  continue  
to  spill  blood  in what  is,  at bottom,  a war  of ideas.
5  
The    Necessity    for    Logical    Coherence    
The  first  thing  to  notice  about  beliefs  is  that  they  must  suffer  the  
company  of  their  neighbors.  Beliefs  are  both  logically  and  semanti-
cally related. Each constrains, and is in turn constrained by, many oth-
ers. A  belief  like  the  Boeing  747  is  the  world's  best  airplane  logically  
entails  many  other  beliefs  that  are  both  more  basic  (e.g.,  airplanes  
exist)  and more derivative  (e.g., 747s  are  better  than 757s). The belief 
that  some  men  are  husbands  demands  that  the  proposition  some  
women  are  wives also be  endorsed, because the very terms "husband" 
and  "wife" mutually  define one  another.
6
  In  fact,  logical  and semantic 
constraints  appear to be  two  sides  of the  same  coin,  because our need 
to understand what words mean in  each  new context requires that our 
beliefs be  free  from contradiction  (at least locally).  If I  am  to mean the 
same  thing  by  the  word  "mother"  from  one  instance  to  the  next,  I  
cannot  both  believe  my  mother  was  born  in  Rome  and  believe  my  
mother was  born  in  Nevada.  Even  if my mother were born  on  an  air-
plane  flying  at  supersonic  speeds,  these  propositions  cannot  both  be  
true. There are tricks to be played here—perhaps there is a town called 
"Rome"  somewhere  in  the  state  of  Nevada;  or  perhaps  "mother"  

54         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
means  "biological mother"  in  one  sentence  and  "adoptive mother"  in  
another—but  these  exceptions  only  prove  the  rule.  To  know  what  a  
given  belief  is  about,  I  must  know  what  my  words  mean;  to  know  
what my words mean, my beliefs must be generally consistent.
7
 There 
is just  no  escaping  the  fact  that  there  is  a  tight  relationship  between  
the words we use, the type of thoughts we can think, and what we can 
believe  to  be  true  about the world. 
And behavioral  constraints  are just  as  pressing. When  going  to  a  
friend's home  for dinner,  I  cannot both  believe that he  lives  north  of  
Main  Street  and  south  of  Main  Street  and  then  act  on  the  basis  of  
what  I believe. A normal  degree of psychological and bodily integra-
tion  precludes  my  being  motivated  to  head  in  two  opposing  direc-
tions  at  once.  
Personal  identity  itself  requires  such  consistency:  unless  a  per-
son's  beliefs are highly  coherent,  he  will  have  as  many  identities  as  
there  are  mutually  incompatible  sets  of beliefs  careening around  his  
brain. If you doubt this, just try to imagine the subjectivity of a man 
who believes that he spent the entire  day in bed with the  flu, but also 
played  a  round  of  golf;  that  his  name  is  Jim,  and  that  his  name  is  
Tom; that he has a young son, and that he is childless. Multiply these 
incompatible  beliefs  indefinitely,  and any  sense that their  owner  is  a  
single  subject entirely  disappears. There  is  a  degree  of logical  incon-
sistency  that  is  incompatible  with  our  notion  of  personhood.  
So it seems that the value we put on  logical  consistency is neither 
misplaced  nor  mysterious.  In  order  for  my  speech  to  be  intelligible  
to  others—and,  indeed,  to  myself—my  beliefs  about  the  world  must  
largely  cohere.  In  order