======================================================== tomers,	we
have	a	chance	to	continue	to	lead	the	way.	We	can	certainly	keep	providing
better	and	better	software	to	make	the	PC	a	universally	empowering	tool.	I
often	say	I	have	the	best	job	in	the	world,	and	I	mean	it.
I	think	this	is	a	wonderful	time	to	be	alive.	There	have	never	been	so	many
opportunities	to	do	things	that	were	impossible	before.	It's	also	the	best	time
ever	to	start	new	companies,	advance	sciences	such	as	medicine	that	improve
quality	of	life,	and	stay	in	touch	with	friends	and	relatives.	It's	important	that

both	the	good	and	bad	points	of	the	technological	advances	be	discussed
broadly	so	that	society	as	a	whole,	rather	than	just	technologists,	can	guide	its
direction.
Now	it's	back	to	you.	I	explained	in	the	Foreword	that	I	was	writing	this	book
to	help	get	a	dialogue	started	and	to	call	attention	to	a	number	of	the
opportunities	and	issues	that	individuals,	companies,	and	nations	will	face.
My	hope	is	that	after	reading	this	book	you	will	share	some	of	my	optimism,
and	will	join	the	discussion	about	how	we	should	be	shaping	the	future.======================================================== 's	Moore	School	of	Electrical	Engineering	began	developing
an	electronic	computational	machine,	the	Electronic	Numerical	Integrator
And	Calculator,	called	ENIAC.	Its	purpose	was	to	speed	up	the	calculations
for	artillery-aiming	tables.	ENIAC	was	more	like	an	electronic	calculator	than
a	computer,	but	instead	of	representing	a	binary	number	with	on	and	off
settings	on	wheels	the	way	a	mechanical	calculator	did,	it	used	vacuum	tube
"switches."
Soldiers	assigned	by	the	army	to	the	huge	machine	wheeled	around	squeaking
grocery	carts	filled	with	vacuum	tubes.	When	one	burned	out,	ENIAC	shut
down	and	the	race	began	to	locate	and	replace	the	burned-out	tube.	One
explanation,	perhaps	somewhat	apocryphal,	for	why	the	tubes	had	to	be
replaced	so	often	was	that	their	heat	and	light	attracted	moths,	which	would
fly	into	the	huge	machine	and	cause	short	circuits.	If	this	is	true,	it	gives	new
meaning	to	the	term	"bugs"	for	the	little	glitches	that	can	plague	computer
hardware	or	software.
When	all	the	tubes	were	working,	a	staff	of	engineers	could	set	up	ENIAC	to
solve	a	problem	by	laboriously	plugging	in	6,000	cables	by	hand.	To	make	it
perform	another	function,	the	staff	had	to	reconfigure	the	cabling—every
time.	John	von	Neumann,	a	brilliant	Hungarian-born	American,	who	is	known
for	many	things,	including	the	development	of	game	theory	and	his
contributions	to	nuclear	weaponry,	is	credited	with	the	leading	role	in	figuring
out	a	way	around	this	problem.	He	created	the	paradigm	that	all	digital

computers	still	follow.	The	"von	Neumann	architecture,"	as	it	is	known	today,
is	based	on	principles	he	articulated	in	1945—including	the	principle	that	a
computer	could	avoid	cabling	changes	by	storing	instructions	in	its	memory.
As	soon	as	this	idea	was	put	into	practice,	the	modern	computer	was	born.
Today	the	brains	of	most	computers	are	descendants	of	the	microprocessor
Paul	Allen	and	I	were	so	knocked	out	by	in	the	seventies,	and	personal
computers	often	are	rated	according	to	how	many	bits	of	information	(one
switch	in	the	lighting	example)	their	microprocessor	can	process	at	a	time,	or
how	many	bytes	(a	cluster	of	eight	bits)	of	memory	or	disk-based	storage	they
have.	ENIAC	weighed	30	tons	and	filled	a	large	room.	Inside,	the
computational	pulses	raced	among	1,500	electro-mechanical	relays	and
flowed	through	17,000	vacuum	tubes.	Switching	it	on	consumed	150,000
watts	of	energy.	But	ENIAC	stored	only	the	equivalent	of	about	80	characters
of	information.
By	the	early	1960s,	transistors	had	supplanted	vacuum	tubes	in	consumer
electronics.	This	was	more	than	a	decade	after	the	discovery	at	Bell	Labs	that
a	tiny	sliver	of	silicon	could	do	the	same	job	as	a	vacuum	tube.	Like	vacuum
tubes,	transistors	act	as	electrical	switches,	but	they	require	significantly	less
power	to	operate	and	as	a	result	generate	much	less	heat	and	require	less
space.	Multiple	transistor	circuits	could	be	combined	onto	a	single	chip,
creating	an	integrated	circuit.	The	computer	chips	we	use	today	are	integrated
circuits	containing	the	equivalent	of	millions	of	transistors	packed	onto	less
than	a	square	inch	of	silicon.
In	a	1977	Scientific	American	article,	Bob	Noyce,	one	of	the	founders	of	Intel,
compared	the	$300	microprocessor	to	ENIAC,	the	moth-infested	mastodon
from	the	dawn	of	the	computer	age.	The	wee	microprocessor	was	not	only
more	powerful,	but	as	Noyce	noted,	"It	is	twenty	times	faster,	has	a	larger
memory,	is	thousands	of	times	more	reliable,	consumes	the	power	of	a
lightbulb	rather	than	that	of	a	locomotive,	occupies	1/30,000	the	volume	and
costs	1/10,000	as	much.	It	is	available	by	mail	order	or	at	your	local	hobby
shop."

1946:	A	view	inside	a	part	of	the	ENIAC	computer
Of	course,	the	1977	microprocessor	seems	like	a	toy	now.	And,	in	fact,	many
inexpensive	toys	contain	computer	chips	that	are	more	powerful	than	the
1970s	chips	that	started	the	microcomputer	revolution.	But	all	of	today's
computers,	whatever	their	size	or	power,	manipulate	information	stored	as
binary	numbers.
Binary	numbers	are	used	to	store	text	in	a	personal	computer,	music	on	a
compact	disc,	and	money	in	a	bank's	network	of	cash	machines.	Before
information	can	go	into	a	computer	it	has	to	be	converted	into	binary.
Machines,	digital	devices,	convert	the	information	back	into	its	original,
useful	form.	You	can	imagine	each	device	throwing	switches,	controlling	the
flow	of	electrons.	But	the	switches	involved,	which	are	usually	made	of
silicon,	are	extremely	small	and	can	be	thrown	by	applying	electrical	charges
extraordinarily	quickly—to	produce	text	on	the	screen	of	a	personal
computer,	music	from	a	CD	player,	and	the	instructions	to	a	cash	machine	to
dispense	currency.
The	light-switch	example	demonstrated	how	any	number	can	be	represented
in	binary.	Here's	how	text	can	be	expressed	in	binary.	By	convention,	the
number	65	represents	a	capital	A,	the	number	66	represents	a	capital	B,	and
so	forth.	On	a	computer	each	of	these	numbers	is	expressed	in	binary	code:
the	capital	letter	A,	65,	becomes	01000001.	The	capital	B,	66,	becomes
01000010.	A	space	break	is	represented	by	the	number	32,	or	00100000.	So
the	sentence	"Socrates	is	a	man"	becomes	this	136-digit	string	of	ls	and	Os:
01010011	01101111	01100011	01110010	01100101	01110011	00100000
01101001	01100001	00100000	01101101	01100001
01100001	01110011	01101110
01110100	00100000
It's	easy	to	follow	how	a	line	of	text	can	become	a	set	of	binary	numbers.	To
understand	how	other	kinds	of	information	are	digitized,	let's	consider	another
example	of	analog	information.	A	vinyl	record	is	an	analog	representation	of
sound	vibrations.	It	stores	audio	information	in	microscopic	squiggles	that
line	the	record's	long,	spiral	groove.	If	the	music	has	a	loud	passage,	the
squiggles	are	cut	more	deeply	into	the	groove,	and	if	there	is	a	high	note	the
squiggles	are	packed	more	tightly	together.	The	groove's	squiggles	are
analogs	of	the	original	vibrations—sound	waves	captured	by	a	microphone.

When	a	turntable's	needle	travels	down	the	groove,	it	vibrates	in	resonation
with	the	tiny	squiggles.	This	vibration,	still	an	analog	representation	of	the
original	sound,	is	amplified	and	sent	to	loudspeakers	as	music.
Like	any	analog	device	for	storing	information,	a	record	has	drawbacks.	Dust,
fingerprints,	or	scratches	on	the	record's	surface	can	cause	the	needle	to
vibrate	inappropriately	and	create	clicks	or	other	noises.	If	the	record	is	not
turning	at	exactly	the	right	speed,	the	pitch	of	the	music	won't	be	accurate.
Each	time	a	record	is	played,	the	needle	wears	away	some	of	the	subtleties	of
the	squiggles	in	the	groove	and	the	reproduction	of	the	music	deteriorates.	If
you	record	a	song	from	a	vinyl	record	onto	a	cassette	tape,	any	of	the	record's
imperfections	will	be	permanently	transferred	to	the	tape,	and	new
imperfections	will	be	added	because	conventional	tape	machines	are
themselves	analog	devices.	The	information	loses	quality	with	each
generation	of	rerecording	or	retransmission.
On	a	compact	disc,	music	is	stored	as	a	series	of	binary	numbers,	each	bit	(or
switch)	of	which	is	represented	by	a	microscopic	pit	on	the	surface	of	the
disc.	Today's	CDs	have	more	than	5	billion	pits.	The	reflected	laser	light
inside	the	CD	player—a	digital	device—reads	each	of	the	pits	to	determine	if
it	is	switched	to	the	0	or	the	1	position,	and	then	reassembles	that	information
back	into	the	original	music	by	generating	specified	electrical	signals	that	are
converted	by	the	speakers	into	sound	waves.	Each	time	the	disc	is	played,	the
sounds	are	exactly	the	same.
It's	convenient	to	be	able	to	convert	everything	into	digital	representations,
but	the	number	of	bits	can	build	up	quite	quickly.	Too	many	bits	of
information	can	overflow	the	computer's	memory	or	take	a	long	time	to
transmit	between	computers.	This	is	why	a	computer's	capacity	to	compress
digital	data,	store	or	transmit	it,	then	expand	it	back	into	its	original	form	is	so
useful	and	will	become	more	so.
Quickly,	here's	how	the	computer	accomplishes	these	feats.	It	goes	back	to
Claude	Shannon,	the	mathematician	who	in	the	1930s	recognized	how	to
express	information	in	binary	form.	During	World	War	II,	he	began
developing	a	mathematical	description	of	information	and	founded	a	field	that
later	became	known	as	information	theory.	Shannon	defined	information	as
the	reduction	of	uncertainty.	By	this	definition,	if	you	already	know	it	is
Saturday	and	someone	tells	you	it	is	Saturday,	you	haven't	been	given	any
information.	On	the	other	hand,	if	you're	not	sure	of	the	day	and	someone	tells
you	it	is	Saturday,	you've	been	given	information,	because	your	uncertainty
has	been	reduced.

Shannon's	information	theory	eventually	led	to	other	break-throughs.	One	was
effective	data-compression,	vital	to	both	computing	and	communications.	On
the	face	of	it	what	he	said	is	obvious:	Those	parts	of	data	that	don't	provide
unique	information	are	redundant	and	can	be	eliminated.	Headline	writers
leave	out	nonessential	words,	as	do	people	paying	by	the	word	to	send	a
telegraph	message	or	place	a	classified	advertisement.	One	example	Shannon
gave	was	the	letter	u,	redundant	in	English	whenever	it	follows	the	letter	q.
You	know	a	u	will	follow	each	q,	so	the	u	needn't	actually	be	included	in	the
message.
Shannon's	principles	have	been	applied	to	the	compression	of	both	sound	and
pictures.	There	is	a	great	deal	of	redundant	information	in	the	thirty	frames
that	make	up	a	second	of	video.	The	information	can	be	compressed	from
about	27	million	to	about	1	million	bits	for	transmission	and	still	make	sense
and	be	pleasant	to	watch.
However,	there	are	limits	to	compression	and	in	the	near	future	we'll	be
moving	ever-increasing	numbers	of	bits	from	place	to	place.	The	bits	will
travel	through	copper	wires,	through	the	air,	and	through	the	structure	of	the
information	highway,	most	of	which	will	be	fiber-optic	cable	(or	just	"fiber"
for	short).	Fiber	is	cable	made	of	glass	or	plastic	so	smooth	and	pure	that	if
you	loo======================================================== t	appears	that	Windows	has
the	lead	for	the	moment.	However,	in	high	tech	this	is	no	guarantee	we'll	have
it	even	in	the	near	future.
We	have	had	to	improve	our	software	to	keep	up	with	hardware	advances.
Each	subsequent	version	will	only	be	successful	with	new	users	if	current
users	adopt	it.	Microsoft	has	to	do	its	best	to	make	new	versions	so	attractive

in	terms	of	price	and	features	that	people	will	want	to	change.	This	is	hard
because	a	change	involves	a	big	overhead	for	both	developers	and	customers.
Only	a	major	advance	is	able	to	convince	enough	users	it	is	worth	their	while
to	change.	With	enough	innovation	it	can	be	done.	I	expect	major	new
generations	of	Windows	to	come	along	every	two	to	three	years.
The	seeds	of	new	competition	are	being	sown	constantly	in	research
environments	and	garages	around	the	world.	For	instance,	the	Internet	is
becoming	so	important	that	Windows	will	only	thrive	if	it	is	clearly	the	best
way	to	gain	access	to	the	Internet.	All	operating-system	companies	are
rushing	to	find	ways	to	have	a	competitive	edge	in	providing	Internet	support.
When	speech	recognition	becomes	genuinely	reliable,	this	will	cause	another
big	change	in	operating	systems.
In	our	business	things	move	too	fast	to	spend	much	time	looking	back.	I	pay
close	attention	to	our	mistakes,	however,	and	try	to	focus	on	future
opportunity.	It's	important	to	acknowledge	mistakes	and	make	sure	you	draw
some	lesson	from	them.	It's	also	important	to	make	sure	no	one	avoids	trying
something	because	he	thinks	he'll	be	penalized	for	what	happened	or	that
management	is	not	working	to	fix	the	problems.	Almost	no	single	mistake	is
fatal.
Lately,	under	Lou	Gerstner's	leadership,	IBM	has	become	far	more	efficient
and	regained	both	its	profitability	and	its	positive	focus	on	the	future.
Although	the	continuing	decline	in	mainframe	revenues	remains	a	problem
for	IBM,	it	will	clearly	be	one	of	the	major	companies	providing	products	for
businesses	and	the	information	highway.
In	recent	years,	Microsoft	has	deliberately	hired	a	few	managers	with
experience	in	failing	companies.	When	you're	failing	you're	forced	to	be
creative,	to	dig	deep	and	think,	night	and	day.	I	want	some	people	around	who
have	been	through	that.	Microsoft	is	bound	to	have	failures	in	the	future,	and	I
want	people	here	who	have	proved	they	can	do	well	in	tough	situations.
Death	can	come	swiftly	to	a	market	leader.	By	the	time	you	have	lost	the
positive-feedback	cycle	it's	often	too	late	to	change	what	you've	been	doing,
and	all	the	elements	of	a	negative	spiral	come	into	play.	It	is	difficult	to
recognize	that	you're	in	a	crisis	and	react	to	it	when	your	business	appears
extremely	healthy.	That	is	going	to	be	one	of	the	paradoxes	for	companies
building	the	information	highway.	It	keeps	me	alert.	I	never	anticipated
Microsoft's	growing	so	large,	and	now,	at	the	beginning	of	this	new	era,	I
unexpectedly	find	myself	a	part	of	the	establishment.	My	goal	is	to	prove	that

a	successful	corporation	can	renew	itself	and	stay	in	the	forefront.

4
APPLICATIONS
AND	APPLIANCES
When	I	was	a	kid,	The	Ed	Sullivan	Show	aired	at	eight	o'clock	on	Sunday
nights.	Most	Americans	with	television	sets	tried	to	be	home	to	watch	it
because	it	might	be	the	only	time	and	place	to	see	the	Beatles,	Elvis	Presley,
the	Temptations,	or	that	guy	who	could	spin	ten	plates	simultaneously	on	the
noses	of	ten	dogs.	But	if	you	were	driving	back	from	your	grandparents'
house	or	were	on	a	Cub	Scout	camping	trip,	too	bad.	Not	being	home	on
Sundays	at	eight	meant	you	also	missed	out	on	the	Monday-morning
conversations	about	the	previous	night's	broadcast.
Conventional	television	allows	us	to	decide	what	we	watch,	but	not	when	we
watch	it.	The	technical	term	for	this	sort	of	broadcasting	is	"synchronous."
Viewers	must	synchronize	their	schedules	with	the	time	of	a	broadcast	sent	to
everyone.	That's	how	I	watched	The	Ed	Sullivan	Show	three	decades	ago,	and
it's	still	how	most	of	us	will	watch	the	news	tonight.
In	the	early	1980s	the	videocassette	recorder	gave	us	more	flexibility.	If	you
cared	enough	about	a	program	to	fuss	with	timers	and	tapes	in	advance,	you
could	watch	it	whenever	you	liked.	You	could	claim	from	the	broadcasters	the
freedom	and	luxury	to	serve	as	your	own	program	scheduler—and	millions	of
people	do.	A	telephone	conversation	is	also	synchronous,	because	both	parties
must	be	on	the	line	at	the	same	time.	When	you	tape	a	television	show	or	let
an	answering	machine	record	an	incoming	call,	you	are	converting
synchronous	communications	into	a	more	convenient	form:	"asynchronous"
communications.
It	is	human	nature	to	find	ways	to	convert	synchronous	communications	into
asynchronous	forms.	Before	the	invention	of	writing,	5,000	years	ago,	the
only	form	of	communication	was	the	spoken	word	and	audiences	had	to	be	in
the	presence	of	the	speaker	or	they	missed	his	message.	Once	the	message
could	be	written,	it	could	be	stored	and	read	later	by	anyone,	at	his	or	her
convenience.	I	am	writing	these	words	at	home	early	in	1995,	but	I	have	no
idea	when	or	where	you'll	read	them.
One	of	the	benefits	bestowed	by	the	information	highway	will	be	more

control	over	our	schedules.	There	will	be	many	others.	Once	you	make	a	form
of	communication	asynchronous,	you	can	also	increase	the	variety	and
selection	possibilities.	Even	viewers	who	rarely	record	television	programs
routinely	rent	movies.	There	are	thousands	of	choices	available	at	local	video-
rental	stores	for	just	a	few	dollars	each,	so	the	home	viewer	can	spend	any
evening	with	Elvis,	the	Beatles—or	Greta	Garbo.
Television	has	been	around	for	fewer	than	sixty	years,	but	in	that	time	it	has
become	a	major	influence	in	the	life	of	almost	everyone	in	developed	nations.
But	television,	in	some	ways,	was	just	a	replacement	for	commercial	radio,
which	had	been	bringing	electronic	entertainment	into	homes	for	twenty
years.	No	broadcast	medium	is	comparable	to	what	the	highway	will	be	like.
The	highway	will	enable	capabilities	that	seem	magical	when	they	are
described,	but	represent	technology	at	work	to	make	our	lives	easier	and
better.	Because	consumers	already	understand	the	value	of	movies	and	are
used	to	paying	to	watch	them,	video-on-demand	will	be	an	important
application	on	the	information	highway.	It	won't	be	the	first,	however.	We
already	know	that	PCs	will	be	connected	long	before	television	sets	and	that
the	quality	of	movies	shown	on	early	systems	will	not	be	very	high.	The
systems	will	be	able	to	offer	other	applications	such	as	games,	electronic	mail,
and	home	banking.	When	high-quality	video	can	be	transmitted,	there	won't
be	any	intermediary	VCR;	you'll	simply	request	what	you	want	from	a	long
list	of	available	programs.	Limited	video-on-demand	systems	are	already
installed	in	some	higher-priced	hotel	rooms,	replacing	or	complementing
premium	movie	channels.	Hotel	rooms,	airports,	and	even	airplanes	are	great
laboratories	for	all	the	new	highway	services	that	will	come	later	into	homes.
They	offer	a	controlled	environment	and	an	upscale	audience	for
experimentation.
Television	shows	will	continue	to	be	broadcast	as	they	are	today	for
synchronous	consumption.	After	they	air,	these	shows—as	well	as	thousands
of	movies	and	virtually	all	other	kinds	of	video—will	be	available	whenever
you	want	to	view	them.	You'll	be	able	to	watch	the	new	episode	of	Seinfeld	at
9:00	P.M.	on	Thursday	night,	or	at	9:13	P.M.,	or	at	9:45	P.M.,	or	at	11:00
A.M.	on	Saturday.	If	you	don't	care	for	his	brand	of	humor,	there	will	be
thousands	of	other	choices.	Your	request	for	a	specific	movie	or	television
program	episode	will	register	and	the	bits	will	be	routed	to	you	across	the
network.	The	information	highway	will	make	it	feel	as	though	all	the
intermediary	machinery	between	you	and	the	object	of	your	interest	has	been
removed.	You	indicate	what	you	want,	and	presto!	you	get	it.

Movies,	television	programs,	and	all	sorts	of	other	digital	information	will	be
stored	on	"servers,"	which	are	computers	with	capacious	disks.	Servers	will
provide	information	for	use	anywhere	on	the	network.	If	you	ask	to	see	a
particular	movie,	check	a	fact,	or	retrieve	your	electronic	mail,	your	request
will	be	routed	by	switches	to	the	server	or	servers	storing	that	information.
You	won't	know	whether	the	material	that	arrives	at	your	house	is	stored	on	a
server	down	the	road	or	on	the	other	side	of	the	country,	nor	will	it	matter.
The	requested	digital	data	will	be	retrieved	from	the	server	and	routed	by
switches	back	to	your	television,	personal	computer,	or	telephone—your
information	appliances.	These	digital	devices	will	succeed	for	the	same
reason	their	analog	precursors	did—they	will	make	some	aspect	of	life	easier.
Unlike	the	dedicated	word	processors	that	brought	the	first	microprocessors	to
many	offices,	these	information	appliances	will	be	general-purpose,
programmable	computers	connected	to	the	information	highway.
Even	if	a	show	is	being	broadcast	live,	you'll	be	able	to	use	your	infrared
remote	control	to	start,	stop,	or	go	to	any	previous	part	of	the	program,	at	any
time.	If	someone	comes	to	your	door,	you'll	be	able	to	pause	the	program	for
as	long	as	you	like.	You'll	be	in	absolute	control.	Except,	of	course,	you	won't
be	able	to	forward	past	part	of	a	live	show	as	it's	taking	place.
Delivering	movies	and	television	programs	is	technically	one	of	the	simpler
things	to	do.	Most	viewers	can	understand	video-on-demand	and	will
welcome	the	freedom	it	provides.	It	has	the	potential	to	be	what	in	computer
parlance	is	called	the	"killer	application"	for	the	highway.	A	killer	application
(or	just	"killer	app")	is	a	use	of	technology	so	attractive	to	consumers	that	it
fuels	market	forces	and	makes	an	invention	all	but	indispensable,	even	if	it
wasn't	anticipated	by	the	inventor.	Skin-So-Soft	was	just	another	lotion
competing	in	a	crowded	market	until	someone	discovered	its	insect-repelling
qualities.	Now	it	may	still	be	sold	for
its	original	application—to	soften	skin—but======================================================== eramental	monsters	that	resided	in	climate-controlled
cocoons.	After	we	had	used	up	the	money	the	Mothers'	Club	had	provided,
my	school	friend	Paul	Allen,	with	whom	I	later	started	Microsoft,	and	I	spent
a	lot	of	time	trying	to	get	access	to	computers.	They	performed	modestly	by
today's	standards,	but	seemed	awesome	to	us	because	they	were	big	and
complicated	and	cost	as	much	as	millions	of	dollars	each.	They	were
connected	by	phone	lines	to	clackety	Teletype	terminals	so	they	could	be
shared	by	people	at	different	locations.	We	rarely	got	close	to	the	actual
mainframes.	Computer	time	was	very	expensive.	When	I	was	in	high	school,
it	cost	about	$40	an	hour	to	access	a	time-shared	computer	using	a	Teletype—
for	that	$40	an	hour	you	got	a	slice	of	the	computer's	precious	attention.	This
seems	odd	today,	when	some	people	have	more	than	one	PC	and	think
nothing	of	leaving	them	idle	for	most	of	the	day.	Actually,	it	was	possible
even	then	to	own	your	own	computer.	If	you	could	afford	$18,000,	Digital
Equipment	Corporation	(DEC)	made	the	PDP-8.	Although	it	was	called	a
"mini-computer,"	it	was	large	by	today's	standards.	It	occupied	a	rack	about
two	feet	square	and	six	feet	high	and	weighed	250	pounds.	We	had	one	at	our
high	school	for	a	while,	and	I	fooled	around	with	it	a	lot.	The	PDP-8	was	very
limited	compared	to	the	mainframes	we	could	reach	by	phone;	in	fact,	it	had
less	raw	computing	power	than	some	wristwatches	do	today.	But	it	was
programmable	the	same	way	the	big,	expensive	ones	were:	by	giving	it
software	instructions.	Despite	its	limitations,	the	PDP-8	inspired	us	to	indulge
in	the	dream	that	one	day	millions	of	individuals	could	possess	their	own
computers.	With	each	passing	year,	I	became	more	certain	that	computers	and
computing	were	destined	to	be	cheap	and	ubiquitous.	I'm	sure	that	one	of	the
reasons	I	was	so	determined	to	help	develop	the	personal	computer	is	that	I
wanted	one	for	myself.
At	that	time	software,	like	computer	hardware,	was	expensive.	It	had	to	be
written	specifically	for	each	kind	of	computer.	And	each	time	computer
hardware	changed,	which	it	did	regularly,	the	software	for	it	pretty	much	had
to	be	rewritten.	Computer	manufacturers	provided	some	standard	software
program	building	blocks	(for	example,	libraries	of	mathematical	functions)
with	their	machines,	but	most	software	was	written	specifically	to	solve	some
business's	individual	problems.	Some	software	was	shared,	and	a	few
companies	were	selling	general-purpose	software,	but	there	was	very	little
packaged	software	that	you	could	buy	off	the	shelf.
My	parents	paid	my	tuition	at	Lakeside	and	gave	me	money	for	books,	but	I

had	to	take	care	of	my	own	computer-time	bills.	This	is	what	drove	me	to	the
commercial	side	of	the	software	business.	A	bunch	of	us,	including	Paul
Allen,	got	entry-level	software	programming	jobs.	For	high	school	students
the	pay	was	extraordinary—about	$5,000	each	summer,	part	in	cash	and	the
rest	in	computer	time.	We	also	worked	out	deals	with	a	few	companies
whereby	we	could	use	computers	for	free	if	we'd	locate	problems	in	their
software.	One	of	the	programs	I	wrote	was	the	one	that	scheduled	students	in
classes.	I	surreptitiously	added	a	few	instructions	and	found	myself	nearly	the
only	guy	in	a	class	full	of	girls.	As	I	said	before,	it	was	hard	to	tear	myself
away	from	a	machine	at	which	I	could	so	unambiguously	demonstrate
success.	I	was	hooked.
Paul	knew	a	lot	more	than	I	did	about	computer	hardware,	the	machines
themselves.	One	summer	day	in	1972,	when	I	was	sixteen	and	Paul	was
nineteen,	he	showed	me	a	ten-paragraph	article	buried	on	page	143	of
Electronics	magazine.	It	was	announcing	that	a	young	firm	named	Intel	had
released	a	microprocessor	chip	called	the	8008.
A	microprocessor	is	a	simple	chip	that	contains	the	entire	brain	of	a	whole
computer.	Paul	and	I	realized	this	first	microprocessor	was	very	limited,	but
he	was	sure	that	the	chips	would	get	more	powerful	and	computers	on	a	chip
would	improve	very	rapidly.
At	the	time,	the	computer	industry	had	no	idea	of	building	a	real	computer
around	a	microprocessor.	The	Electronics	article,	for	example,	described	the
8008	as	suitable	for	"any	arithmetic,	control,	or	decision-making	system,	such
as	a	smart	terminal"	The	writers	didn't	see	that	a	microprocessor	could	grow
up	to	be	a	general-purpose	computer.	Microprocessors	were	slow	and	limited
in	the	amount	of	information	they	could	handle.	None	of	the	languages
programmers	were	familiar	with	was	available	for	the	8008,	which	made	it
nearly	impossible	to	write	complex	programs	for	it.	Every	application	had	to
be	programmed	with	the	few	dozen	simple	instructions	the	chip	could
understand.	The	8008	was	condemned	to	life	as	a	beast	of	burden,	carrying
out	uncomplicated	and	unchanging	tasks	over	and	over.	It	was	quite	popular
in	elevators	and	calculators.

1972:	Intel's	8088	microprocessor
To	put	it	another	way,	a	simple	microprocessor	in	an	embedded	application,
such	as	an	elevator's	controls,	is	a	single	instrument,	a	drum	or	a	horn,	in	the
hands	of	an	amateur:	good	for	basic	rhythm	or	uncomplicated	tunes.	A
powerful	microprocessor	with	programming	languages,	however,	is	like	an
accomplished	orchestra.	With	the	right	software,	or	sheet	music,	it	can	play
anything.
Paul	and	I	wondered	what	we	could	program	the	8008	to	do.	He	called	up
Intel	to	request	a	manual.	We	were	a	little	surprised	when	they	actually	sent
him	one.	We	both	dug	into	it.	I	had	worked	out	a	version	of	BASIC,	which
ran	on	the	limited	DEC	PDP-8,	and	was	excited	at	the	thought	of	doing	the
same	for	the	little	Intel	chip.	But	as	I	studied	the	8008's	manual,	I	realized	it
was	futile	to	try.	The	8008	just	wasn't	sophisticated	enough,	didn't	have
enough	transistors.
We	did,	however,	figure	out	a	way	to	use	the	little	chip	to	power	a	machine
that	could	analyze	the	information	counted	by	traffic	monitors	on	city	streets.
Many	municipalities	that	measured	traffic	flow	did	so	by	stringing	a	rubber
hose	over	a	selected	street.	When	a	car	crossed	the	hose,	it	punched	a	paper
tape	inside	a	metal	box	at	the	end	of	the	hose.	We	saw	that	we	could	use	the
8008	to	process	these	tapes,	to	print	out	graphs	and	other	statistics.	We
baptized	our	first	company	"Traf-O-Data."	At	the	time	it	sounded	like	poetry.
I	wrote	much	of	the	software	for	the	Traf-O-Data	machine	on	cross-state	bus
trips	from	Seattle	to	Pullman,	Washington,	where	Paul	was	attending	college.
Our	prototype	worked	well,	and	we	envisioned	selling	lots	of	our	new
machines	across	the	country.	We	used	it	to	process	traffic-volume	tapes	for	a
few	customers,	but	no	one	actually	wanted	to	buy	the	machine,	at	least	not
from	a	couple	of	teenagers.
Despite	our	disappointment,	we	still	believed	our	future,	even	if	it	was	not	to

be	in	hardware,	might	have	something	to	do	with	microprocessors.	After	I
started	at	Harvard	College	in	1973,	Paul	somehow	managed	to	coax	his
clunky	old	Chrysler	New	Yorker	cross-country	from	Washington	State	and
took	a	job	in	Boston,	programming	mini-computers	at	Honeywell.	He	drove
over	to	Cambridge	a	lot	so	we	could	continue	our	long	talks	about	future
schemes.
In	the	spring	of	1974,	Electronics	magazine	announced	Intel's	new	8080	chip
—ten	times	the	power	of	the	8008	inside	the	Traf-O-Data	machine.	The	8080
was	not	much	larger	than	the	8008,	but	it	contained	2,700	more	transistors.
All	at	once	we	were	looking	at	the	heart	of	a	real	computer,	and	the	price	was
under	$200.	We	attacked	the	manual.	"DEC	can't	sell	any	more	PDP-8s	now,"
I	told	Paul.	It	seemed	obvious	to	us	that	if	a	tiny	chip	could	get	so	much	more
powerful,	the	end	of	big	unwieldy	machines	was	coming.
Computer	manufacturers,	however,	didn't	see	the	microprocessor	as	a	threat.
They	just	couldn't	imagine	a	puny	chip	taking	on	a	"real"	computer.	Not	even
the	scientists	at	Intel	saw	its	full	potential.	To	them,	the	8080	represented
nothing	more	than	an	improvement	in	chip	technology.	In	the	short	term,	the
computer	establishment	was	right.	The	8080	was	just	another	slight	advance.
But	Paul	and	I	looked	past	the	limits	of	that	new	chip	and	saw	a	different	kind
of	computer	that	would	be	perfect	for	us,	and	for	everyone—personal,
affordable,	and	adaptable.	It	was	absolutely	clear	to	us	that	because	the	new
chips	were	so	cheap,	they	soon	would	be	everywhere.
Computer	hardware,	which	had	once	been	scarce,	would	soon	be	readily
available,	and	access	to	computers	would	no	longer	be	charged	for	at	a	high
hourly	rate.	It	seemed	to	us	people	would	find	all	kinds	of	new	uses	for
computing	if	it	was	cheap.	Then,	software	would	be	the	key	to	delivering	the
full	potential	of	these	machines.	Paul	and	I	speculated	that	Japanese
companies	and	IBM	would	likely	produce	most	of	the	hardware.	We	believed
we	could	come	up	with	new	and	innovative	software.	And	why	not?	The
microprocessor	would	change	the	structure	of	the	industry.	Maybe	there	was	a
place	for	the	two	of	us.
This	kind	of	talk	is	what	college	is	all	about.	You	have	all	kinds	of	new
experiences,	and	dream	crazy	dreams.	We	were	young	and	assumed	we	had
all	the	time	in	the	world.	I	enrolled	for	another	year	at	Harvard	and	kept
thinking	about	how	we	could	get	a	software	company	going.	One	plan	was
pretty	simple.	We	sent	letters	from	my	dorm	room	to	all	the	big	computer
companies,	offering	to	write	them	a	version	of	BASIC	for	the	new	Intel	chip.
We	got	no	takers.	By	December,	we	were	pretty	discouraged.	I	was	planning

to	fly	home	to	Seattle	for	the	holidays,	and	Paul	was	staying	in	Boston.	On	an
achingly	cold	Massachusetts	morning	a	few	days	before	I	left,	Paul	and	I	were
hanging	out	at	the	Harvard	Square	newsstand,	and	Paul	picked	up	the	January
issue	of	Popular	Electronics.	This	is	the	moment	I	described	at	the	beginning
of	the	Foreword.	This	gave	reality	to	our	dreams	about	the	future.
January	1975	issue	of	Popular	Electronics
On	the	magazine's	cover	was	a	photograph	of	a	very	small	computer,	not
much	larger	than	a	toaster	oven.	It	had	a	name	only	slightly	more	dignified
t======================================================== o	ballet
slippers.	Of	course	you	will	still	ask	people	you	know	for	recommendations,
but	efficiently,	by	electronic	mail.
If	you're	thinking	of	doing	business	with	a	company	or	buying	a	product,
you'll	be	able	to	check	what	others	say	about	it.	If	you	want	to	buy	a
refrigerator,	you	will	look	for	the	electronic	bulletin	boards	containing	formal
and	informal	reviews	of	refrigerators	and	their	manufacturers	and	retailers.
You'll	get	into	the	habit	of	checking	these	bulletin	boards	before	you	make
any	significant	purchase.	When	you	have	a	compliment	or	complaint	about	a
record	club,	a	doctor,	or	even	a	computer	chip,	it	will	be	easy	to	find	the	place
on	the	network	where	that	company	or	product	is	discussed	and	add	your
opinion.	Ultimately,	companies	that	don't	serve	their	customers	well	will	see
their	reputations	and	their	sales	decline,	while	those	that	do	a	great	job	will

attract	sizable	followings	through	this	new	form	of	word	of	"mouth."
But	the	various	endorsements	and	especially	the	negative	comments	will	have
to	be	examined	carefully.	They	may	be	motivated	more	by	fanaticism	than	a
genuine	desire	to	share	pertinent	information.
Let's	say	a	company	is	selling	an	air	conditioner	that	99.9	percent	of	its
customers	are	very	happy	with.	One	angry	consumer	in	the	remaining	0.1
percent	can	post	horrible	insults	about	a	brand	of	air	conditioner,	the	company
that	manufactures	it,	and	individuals	in	the	company,	and	keep	sending	the
messages	over	and	over	and	over.	The	effect	could	be	compared	to	sitting	in	a
meeting	where	everyone	has	a	volume	control	that	could	be	set	from	0	to
1,000,	and	the	normal	level	of	conversation	is,	say,	3.	Then	a	few	people
decide	to	crank	their	volume	up	to	1,000	and	start	shouting.	This	means	that	if
I	happen	to	look	in	on	the	bulletin	board	because	I'm	buying	an	air
conditioner,	my	visit	may	be	a	waste	of	time	because	all	I	find	there	is	the
shouting.	It	is	unfair	to	me	and	to	the	company	selling	the	air	conditioners.
Already,	a	network	etiquette,	or	"netiquette,"	is	evolving.	As	the	information
highway	becomes	society's	town	square,	we	will	come	to	expect	it	to	conform
to	our	culture's	mores.	There	are	vast	cultural	differences	around	the	world,	so
the	highway	will	be	divided	into	different	parts,	some	dedicated	to	various
cultures,	and	some	specified	for	global	usage.	So	far,	a	frontier	mentality	has
prevailed,	and	participants	in	electronic	forums	have	been	known	to	lapse	into
behavior	that	is	antisocial	and	even	illegal.	Illegal	copies	of	copyrighted
intellectual	property,	including	articles,	books,	and	software	applications,	are
distributed	freely.	Get-rich-quick	scams	pop	up	here	and	there.	Pornography
flourishes	within	the	easy	reach	of	children.	Single-minded	voices	rant,
sometimes	almost	incessantly,	about	products,	companies,	and	people	they
have	come	to	dislike.	Forum	participants	get	horrible	insults	hurled	at	them
because	of	some	comment	they	have	made.	The	ease	with	which	an
individual,	any	individual,	can	share	his	opinions	with	the	members	of	a	huge
electronic	community	is	unprecedented.	And	the	ones	who	are	yelling	are
able,	because	the	electronic	community	is	so	efficient,	to	take	a	piece	of	hate
mail	and	post	it	on	twenty	bulletin	boards.	I've	seen	bulletin	boards	collapse
into	foolishness	after	people	start	getting	shrill.	Other	participants	in	the
discussion	don't	know	what	to	do.	Some	people	yell	back;	a	few	try	to	say
rational	things.	But	the	shrill	comments	continue,	and	that	destroys	the	sense
of	community.
The	Internet,	true	to	its	roots	as	an	academic	cooperative,	has	relied	on	peer
pressure	for	regulation.	For	example,	if	someone	in	a	discussion	group	posts

an	extraneous	comment	or,	worse,	tries	to	sell	something	in	an	electronic
forum	that	is	seen	by	others	as	a	noncommercial	setting,	the	would-be
diverger	or	merchant	may	get	a	withering	barrage	of	insults.	The	enforcement
so	far	has	been	mostly	by	self-appointed	censors
who	"flame"	those	they	believe	have	crossed	the	line	into	antisocial	behavior.
The	commercial	on-line	services	employ	volunteers	and	professional
moderators	to	monitor	conduct	on	their	bulletin	boards.	Forums	that	have
moderators	can	filter	out	some	antisocial	behavior	by	refusing	to	allow	insults
or	copyrighted	information	to	remain	on	a	system's	servers.	Most	Internet
forums	remain	unmoderated,	however.	Anything	goes,	and	because	people
can	post	messages	and	information	anonymously,	little	accountability	exists.
We	need	a	more	sophisticated	process	to	gather	consensus	opinions	without
depending	on	the	Attorney	General's	Consumer	Complaints	Division	to	act	as
a	filter.	We	will	have	to	find	some	way	to	force	people	to	turn	their	volume
down	so	the	highway	doesn't	become	an	amplifier	for	libel	or	slander	or	an
outlet	for	venting	irritation.
Many	providers	of	Internet	access	are	beginning	to	restrict	entry	to	forums
containing	sexually	explicit	material,	and	there	has	been	a	crackdown	on	the
illegal	traffic	of	copyrighted	materials.	Some	universities	are	getting	students
and	staff	to	remove	objectionable	postings.	This	rubs	some	the	wrong	way,
because	they	see	cyberspace	as	a	place	where	anything	goes.	The	commercial
services	have	had	similar	problems.	There	have	been	complaints	about
restriction	of	free	speech.	And	parents	were	outraged	when	their	family
account	was	closed	after	their	eleven-year-old	made	an	objectionable
comment	to	a	moderator.	Companies	will	create	special	communities	on	the
Internet	and	will	"compete"	by	having	rules	about	how	they	are	going	to	deal
with	these	issues.
Politicians	are	already	wrestling	with	the	question	of	when	an	on-line	service
should	be	treated	as	a	common	carrier	and	when	it	should	be	treated	as	a
publisher.	Telephone	companies	are	legally	considered	common	carriers.
They	transport	messages	without	assuming	any	responsibility	for	them.	If	an
obscene	caller	bothers	you,	the	telephone	company	will	cooperate	with	the
police,	but	nobody	thinks	it	is	the	phone	company's	fault	that	some	creep	is
calling	you	and	talking	dirty.	Magazines	and	newspapers,	on	the	other	hand,
are	publishers.	They	are	legally	responsible	for	their	content	and	can	be	sued
for	libel.	They	also	have	a	strong	interest	in	maintaining	their	reputation	and
editorial	integrity	because	that	is	an	important	part	of	their	business.	Any
responsible	newspaper	checks	very	carefully	before	making	a	previously

unpublished	allegation	about	someone—in	part	because	it	doesn't	want	a	libel
suit,	but	also	because	inaccuracy	would	hurt	its	reputation.
On-line	services	function	simultaneously	as	common	carriers	and	publishers,
which	is	where	the	problem	lies.	When	they	act	as	publishers,	and	offer
content	they	have	acquired,	authored,	or	edited,	it	makes	sense	that	the	rules
of	libel	and	the	self-governing	incentive	of	editorial	reputation	would	apply.
But	we	also	expect	them	to	deliver	our	e-mail	like	a	common	carrier	without
examining	or	taking	responsibility	for	its	contents.	Likewise,	chat	lines,
bulletin	boards,	and	forums	that	encourage	users	to	interact	without	editorial
supervision	are	a	new	means	of	communication,	and	shouldn't	be	treated	the
same	way	as	material	published	on	the	service.	A	New	York	judge,	however,
recently	cleared	the	way	for	a	libel	lawsuit	by	ruling	that	the	on-line	service
involved	was	a	publisher	of	information,	not	just	a	distributor.	Perhaps	by	the
time	you	read	this	things	will	have	been	clarified.	The	stakes	in	the	resolution
of	this	issue	are	high.	If	network	providers	are	treated	entirely	as	publishers,
they	will	have	to	monitor	and	preapprove	the	content	of	all	information	they
transmit.	This	could	create	an	unwelcome	atmosphere	of	censorship	and
curtail	spontaneous	exchange,	so	important	in	the	electronic	world.
Ideally,	the	industry	will	develop	some	standards	so	that	when	you	go	into	a
bulletin	board	or	article,	you	get	an	indication	of	whether	or	not	some
"publisher"	has	looked	it	over,	edited	it,	and	stands	behind	its	content.	The
question	will	be	what	standards	and	who	will	oversee	them?	A	bulletin	board
for	lesbians	should	not	be	forced	to	accept	antilesbian	comments,	nor	should	a
bulletin	board	about	some	product	be	overwhelmed	by	messages	from	a
competitor.	It	would	be	a	shame	to	have	to	keep	children	away	from	all
bulletin	boards,	but	it	would	also	be	unrealistic,	and	possibly	an	abridgment
of	free	expression,	to	force	all	bulletin	boards	to	undergo	review	by	someone
willing	to	accept	liability	for	everything	they	contain.	What	we	will	most
likely	end	up	with	is	a	series	of	categories,	like	the	ratings	given	movies,	that
will	indicate	whether	shrill	voices	have	been	controlled	and	whether	an
"editor"	has	deleted	messages	he	thought	were	out	of	line	with	the	policies	of
the	group	involved.
The	bulletin	boards	I've	been	discussing	are	the	free,	public	ones,	but	there
will	also	be	places	where	professional	information	and	advice	will	be	offered
for	a	fee.	You	might	wonder	why	you	would	need	an	expert	when	so	much
information	will	be	available.	For	the	same	reasons	you	might	need	one	now.
All	sorts	of	consumer	data	can	be	had	now.	Consumer	Reports	offers
objective	evaluations	of	a	lot	of	products,	but	the	reviews	are	aimed	at	a	broad
audience—they	don't	necessarily	discuss	your	particular	requirements.	If	you

can't	find	exactly	the	advice	you	need	on	the	highway,	you	will	be	able	to	hire
a	knowledgeable	sales	consultant,	for	five	minutes	or	an	afternoon,	via
videoconference.	She	will	help	you	choose	products,	which	your	computer
will	then	buy	for	you	from	the	cheapest	reliable	source.
I	expect	the	traditional	binding	together	of	advice	and	sales	to	be	much	less
prevalent,	because	although	the	advice	appears	free	to	the	customer,	it	is	paid
for	by	the	stores	and	services	that	offer	it.	This	cost	then	gets	added	on	to	the
price	of	the	goods.	Stores	that	are	charging	more	because	they	offer	advice
will	have	increasing	difficulty	competing	with	the	discounters	who	will
operate	on	the	information	highway.	The======================================================== ected	to	the	highway	will	help	teachers	monitor,	evaluate,	and
guide	student	performance.	Teachers	will	continue	to	give	homework,	but
soon	their	assignments	will	include	hypertext	references	to	electronic	resource
material.	Students	will	create	their	own	links	and	use	multi-media	elements	in
their	homework,	which	will	then	be	submitted	electronically	on	a	diskette	or
across	the	highway.	Teachers	will	be	able	to	keep	a	cumulative	record	of	a
student's	work,	which	can	be	reviewed	at	any	time	or	shared	with	other
instructors.
Special	software	programs	will	help	summarize	information	on	the	skills,
progress,	interests,	and	expectations	of	students.	Once	teachers	have	enough
information	on	a	student	and	are	relieved	of	a	lot	of	tedious	paperwork,	they
will	have	more	energy	and	time	to	meet	the	revealed	individual	needs	of	that
student.	This	information	will	be	used	to	tailor	classroom	materials	and
homework	assignments.	Teachers	and	parents	will	also	be	able	to	review	and
discuss	the	particulars	of	a	child's	progress	easily.	As	a	result	of	this—and	of
the	common	availability	of	videoconferences—the	potential	for	strong	parent-
teacher	collaboration	will	grow.	Parents	will	be	in	a	better	position	to	help

their	children,	whether	by	creating	informal	study	groups	with	other	parents
or	by	seeking	additional	assistance	for	their	children.
Parents	may	also	help	their	children	at	school	by	teaching	them	to	use	the
software	they	use	in	their	work.	Some	teachers	and	staff	are	already	using
popular	business	software	to	administer	their	activities	and	to	give	students
experience	with	the	tools	of	the	modern	workplace.	Most	college	students	and
an	increasing	number	of	high	schoolers	now	prepare	reports	on	PCs	with
word	processors	instead	of	using	typewriters	or	writing	by	hand.	Spreadsheets
and	charting	applications	are	routinely	used	to	explain	mathematics	and
economic	theories	and	have	become	a	standard	part	of	most	accounting
courses.	Students	and	faculty	have	also	discovered	new	uses	for	popular
business	applications.	For	example,	students	studying	a	foreign	language	can
take	advantage	of	the	major	word-processor	programs'	ability	to	work	in
different	languages.	Such	programs	include	supplemental	tools	for	checking
spellings	and	looking	up	synonyms	in	multilingual	documents.
In	some	families,	children	are	probably	introducing	their	parents	to
computing.	Kids	and	computers	get	along	just	great,	partly	because	kids	aren't
invested	in	established	ways	of	doing	things.	Children	like	to	provoke	a
reaction,	and	computers	are	reactive.	Parents	are	sometimes	surprised	by	how
taken	with	computers	even	their	preschoolers	are,	but	the	fascination	makes
sense	if	you	think	about	how	much	a	young	child	enjoys	interaction—whether
it	is	playing	peek-a-boo	with	a	parent	or	stabbing	at	a	remote	control	and
watching	channels	change.
I	like	to	watch	my	three-year-old	niece	play	with	Just	Grandma	and	Me,	a
Brøderbund	CD-ROM	based	on	a	children's	book.	She	has	memorized	the
dialogue	in	this	cartoon	story	and	talks	along	with	the	characters,	much	as	she
does	when	her	mother	reads	her	a	book.	If	my	niece	uses	the	computer's
mouse	to	click	on	a	mailbox,	the	mailbox	opens	and	a	frog	jumps	out	or
sometimes	a	hand	appears	and	pulls	the	mailbox	door	shut.	Her	ability	to
influence	what	she	sees	on	the	screen—to	answer	the	question	"What	happens
if	I	click	here?"—keeps	her	curiosity	high.	The	interactivity,	combined	with
the	underlying	quality	of	the	storyline,	keeps	her	involved.
I've	always	believed	most	people	have	more	intelligence	and	curiosity	than
current	information	tools	encourage	them	to	use.	Most	people	have	had	the
experience	of	getting	interested	in	a	topic	and	feeling	the	gratifying	sense	of
accomplishment	that	comes	from	finding	good	material	on	it,	and	the	pleasure
of	mastering	the	topic.	But	if	a	search	for	information	brings	you	up	against	a
blank	wall,	you	become	discouraged.	You	begin	to	think	you're	never	going	to

understand	the	subject.	And	if	you	experience	that	natural	reaction	too	often,
especially	when	you're	a	child,	your	impulse	to	try	again	is	diminshed.
I	was	fortunate	to	be	raised	in	a	family	that	encouraged	kids	to	ask	questions.
And	I	was	lucky	in	my	early	teens	to	become	friends	with	Paul	Allen.	Soon
after	I	had	met	Paul,	I	asked	him	where	gasoline	came	from.	I	wanted	to	know
what	it	meant	to	"refine"	gasoline.	I	wanted	to	know	exactly	how	it	was	that
gasoline	could	power	a	car.	I	had	found	a	book	on	the	subject,	but	it	was
confusing.	Gasoline,	however,	was	one	of	the	many	subjects	that	Paul
understood,	and	he	explained	it	in	a	way	that	made	it	interesting	and
understandable	to	me.	You	might	say	my	curiosity	about	gasoline	is	what
fueled	our	friendship.
Paul	had	lots	of	answers	to	things	I	was	curious	about	(and	a	great	collection
of	science	fiction	books	too).	I	was	more	of	a	math	person	than	Paul,	and	I
understood	software	better	than	anyone	he	knew.	We	were	interactive
resources	for	each	other.	We	asked	or	answered	questions,	drew	diagrams,	or
brought	each	other's	attention	to	related	information.	We	liked	to	challenge
and	test	each	other.	This	is	exactly	the	way	the	highway	will	interact	with
users.	Let's	say	another	teenager	wants	to	find	out	about	gasoline—not	in
1970,	but	three	or	four	years	from	now.	He	may	not	be	lucky	enough	to	have
a	Paul	Allen	around,	but	if	his	school	or	library	has	a	computer	linked	to	rich
multi-media	information,	he'll	be	able	to	delve	as	deeply	into	the	topic	as	he
likes.
He'll	see	photos,	videos,	and	animations	explaining	how	oil	is	drilled,
transported,	and	refined.	He'll	learn	the	difference	between	automobile	fuel
and	aviation	fuel—and	if	he	wants	to	know	the	difference	between	a	car's
internal-combustion	engine	and	a	jetliner's	turbine	engine,	all	he'll	have	to	do
is	ask.
He'll	be	able	to	explore	the	complex	molecular	structure	of	gasoline,	which	is
a	combination	of	hundreds	of	distinct	hydrocarbons,	and	learn	about
hydrocarbons	too.	With	all	of	the	links	to	additional	knowledge,	who	knows
what	fascinating	topics	this	exploration	will	lead	him	to.
At	first,	new	information	technology	will	just	provide	incremental
improvements	over	today's	tools.	Wall-mounted	video	white	boards	will
replace	a	teacher's	chalkboard	handwriting	with	readable	fonts	and	colorful
graphics	drawn	from	millions	of	educational	illustrations,	animations,
photographs,	and	videos.	Multi-media	documents	will	assume	some	of	the
roles	now	played	by	textbooks,	movies,	tests,	and	other	educational	materials.

And	because	multi-media	documents	will	be	linked	to	servers	on	the
information	highway,	they	will	be	kept	thoroughly	up-to-date.
CD-ROMs	available	today	offer	a	taste	of	the	interactive	experience.	The
software	responds	to	instructions	by	presenting	information	in	text,	audio,	and
video	forms.	CD-ROMs	are	already	being	used	in	schools	and	by	kids	doing
their	assignments	at	home,	but	they	have	limitations	the	highway	won't.	CD-
ROMs	can	offer	either	a	little	information	about	a	broad	range	of	topics	the
way	an	encyclopedia	does,	or	a	lot	of	information	about	a	single	topic,	such	as
dinosaurs,	but	the	total	amount	of	information	available	at	one	time	is	limited
by	the	capacity	of	the	disc.	And,	of	course,	you	can	use	only	the	discs	you
have	available.	Nevertheless,	they're	a	great	advance	over	just-paper	texts.
Multi-media	encyclopedias	provide	not	only	a	research	tool,	but	all	sorts	of
material	that	can	be	incorporated	into	homework	documents.	These
encyclopedias	are	available	with	teacher's	guides	that	include	suggestions	for
ways	to	use	the	encyclopedias	in	the	classroom	or	as	part	of	assignments.	I
have	been	excited	to	hear	from	teachers	and	students	about	the	ways	they
have	used	our	products—only	a	few	of	which	we	had	anticipated.
CD-ROMs	are	one	clear	precursor	to	the	highway.	The	Internet's	World	Wide
Web	is	another.	The	Web	offers	access	to	interesting,	educational	information,
although	most	of	it	is	still	plain	text.	Creative	teachers	are	already	using	on-
line	services	to	devise	exciting	new	kinds	of	lessons.
Fourth-graders	in	California	have	done	on-line	searches	of	newspapers	to	read
about	the	challenges	Asian	immigrants	face.	Boston	University	has	created
interactive	software	for	high	school	students	that	shows	detailed	visual
simulations	of	chemical	phenomena,	such	as	salt	molecules	dissolving	in
water.
Christopher	Columbus	Middle	School	in	Union	City,	New	Jersey,	was	a
school	created	out	of	crisis.	In	the	late	1980s,	the	state	test	scores	were	so	low
and	the	absentee	and	dropout	rates	were	so	high	among	the	children	of	the
school	district	that	the	state	was	considering	taking	it	over.	The	school
system,	the	teachers,	and	the	parents	(well	over	90	percent	of	whom	were	of
Hispanic	extraction	and	didn't	speak	English	as	a	first	language)	came	up	with
an	innovative	five-year	plan	to	rescue	their	schools.
Bell	Atlantic	(the	local	telephone	company)	agreed	to	help	find	a	special
networked,	multi-media	system	of	PCs	linking	the	students'	homes	with	the
classrooms,	teachers,	and	school	administrators.	The	corporation	initially
provided	140	multi-media	PCs,	enough	for	the	homes	of	the	seventh-graders,

the	homes	of	all	seventh-grade	teachers,	and	at	least	four	per	classroom.	The
computers	were	networked	and	linked	with	high-speed	lines	and	connected	to
the	Internet,	and	the	teachers	were	trained	in	using	the	PCs.	The	teachers	set
up	weekend	training	courses	for	the	parents,	over	half	of	whom	attended,	and
encouraged	the	students	to	use	e-mail	and	the	Internet.
Two	years	later,	parents	are	actively	involved	with	their	children's	use	of	the
home	PCs	and	employ	them	themselves	to	keep	in	touch	with	teachers	and
administrators;	the	dropout	rate	and	absenteeism	are	both	almost	zero,	and	the
students	are	scoring	nearly	three	times	higher	than	the	average	for	all	New
Jersey	inner-city	schools	on	standardized	tests.	And	the	program	has	been
expanded	to	include	the	entire	middle	school.
Raymond	W.	Smith,	chairman======================================================== ighway.	We	are	providing	software	tools	to	a	number	of	hardware	companies
building	new	applications.	Many	media	and	communications	companies	from
around	the	world	will	be	working	with	us	and	observing	the	ways	customers
respond	to	the	applications.	It	will	be	critical	to	listen	to	customer	feedback.
You	too	will	be	able	to	read	about	the	results	of	the	highway	trials.	Are	people
gravitating	toward	new	types	of	multiplayer	games?	Are	they	socializing	in
new	ways?	Are	they	working	together	across	the	network?	Are	they	shopping
in	the	new	marketplace?	Are	exciting	applications	you	never	would	have
imagined	coming	along?	Are	people	willing	to	pay	for	these	new	capabilities?
The	answers	to	these	questions	are	the	key	to	how	the	Information	Age
develops.	Mergers	and	mania	are	fun	to	watch.	But	if	you	want	to	know	how
the	race	to	build	the	information	highway	is	really	going,	keep	your	eye	on
PCs	connected	to	the	Internet,	and	on	the	software	applications	that	are
popular	in	highway	trials.	At	least	that's	what	I'm	going	to	do.

12
CRITICAL	ISSUES
This	is	an	exciting	time	in	the	Information	Age.	It	is	the	very	beginning.
Almost	everywhere	I	go,	whether	to	speak	to	a	group	or	to	have	dinner	with
friends,	questions	come	up	about	how	information	technology	will	change	our
lives.	People	want	to	understand	how	it	will	make	the	future	different.	Will	it
make	our	lives	better	or	worse?
I've	already	said	I'm	an	optimist,	and	I'm	optimistic	about	the	impact	of	the
new	technology.	It	will	enhance	leisure	time	and	enrich	culture	by	expanding
the	distribution	of	information.	It	will	help	relieve	pressures	on	urban	areas	by
enabling	individuals	to	work	from	home	or	remote-site	offices.	It	will	relieve
pressure	on	natural	resources	because	increasing	numbers	of	products	will	be
able	to	take	the	form	of	bits	rather	than	of	manufactured	goods.	It	will	give	us
more	control	over	our	lives	and	allow	experiences	and	products	to	be	custom
tailored	to	our	interests.	Citizens	of	the	information	society	will	enjoy	new
opportunities	for	productivity,	learning,	and	entertainment.	Countries	that
move	boldly	and	in	concert	with	each	other	will	enjoy	economic	rewards.
Whole	new	markets	will	emerge,	and	a	myriad	new	opportunities	for
employment	will	be	created.
When	measured	by	decades,	the	economy	is	always	in	upheaval.	For	the	past
few	hundred	years,	every	generation	has	found	more	efficient	ways	of	getting
work	done,	and	the	cumulative	benefits	have	been	enormous.	The	average
person	today	enjoys	a	much	better	life	than	the	nobility	did	a	few	centuries
ago.	It	would	be	great	to	have	a	king's	land,	but	what	about	his	lice?	Medical
advances	alone	have	greatly	increased	life	spans	and	improved	standards	of
living.
Henry	Ford,	in	the	first	part	of	the	twentieth	century,	was	the	automotive
industry,	but	your	car	is	superior	to	anything	he	ever	drove.	It's	safer,	more
reliable,	and	surely	has	a	better	sound	system.	This	pattern	of	improvement
isn't	going	to	change.	Advancing	productivity	propels	societies	forward,	and	it
is	only	a	matter	of	time	before	the	average	person	in	a	developed	country	will
be	"richer"	in	many	ways	than	anyone	is	today.
Just	because	I'm	optimistic	doesn't	mean	I	don't	have	concerns	about	what	is
going	to	happen	to	all	of	us.	As	with	all	major	changes,	the	benefits	of	the

information	society	will	carry	costs.	There	will	be	dislocations	in	some
business	sectors	that	will	create	a	need	for	worker	retraining.	The	availability
of	virtually	free	communications	and	computing	will	alter	the	relationships	of
nations,	and	of	socioeconomic	groups	within	nations.	The	power	and
versatility	of	digital	technology	will	raise	new	concerns	about	individual
privacy,	commercial	confidentiality,	and	national	security.	There	are,
moreover,	equity	issues	that	will	have	to	be	addressed.	The	information
society	should	serve	all	of	its	citizens,	not	only	the	technically	sophisticated
and	economically	privileged.	In	short,	a	range	of	important	issues	confronts
us.	I	don't	necessarily	have	the	solutions,	but,	as	I	started	off	the	book	saying,
now	is	a	good	time	for	a	broad	discussion.	Technological	progress	will	force
all	of	society	to	confront	tough	new	problems,	only	some	of	which	we	can
foresee.	The	pace	of	technological	change	is	so	fast	that	sometimes	it	seems
the	world	will	be	completely	different	from	one	day	to	the	next.	It	won't.	But
we	should	be	prepared	for	change.	Societies	are	going	to	be	asked	to	make
hard	choices	in	such	areas	as	universal	availability,	investment	in	education,
regulation,	and	the	balance	between	individual	privacy	and	community
security.
While	it	is	important	that	we	start	thinking	about	the	future,	we	should	guard
against	the	impulse	to	take	hasty	action.	We	can	ask	only	the	most	general
kinds	of	questions	today,	so	it	doesn't	make	sense	to	come	up	with	detailed,
specific	regulations.	We've	got	a	good	number	of	years	to	observe	the	course
of	the	coming	revolution,	and	we	should	use	that	time	to	make	intelligent
rather	than	reflexive	decisions.
Perhaps	the	most	widespread	and	personal	anxiety	is,	"How	will	I	fit	into	the
evolving	economy?"	Men	and	women	are	worried	that	their	own	jobs	will
become	obsolete,	that	they	won't	be	able	to	adapt	to	new	ways	of	working,
that	their	children	will	get	into	industries	that	will	cease	to	exist,	or	that
economic	upheaval	will	create	wholesale	unemployment,	especially	among
older	workers.	These	are	legitimate	concerns.	Entire	professions	and
industries	will	fade.	But	new	ones	will	flourish.	This	will	be	happening	over
the	next	two	or	three	decades,	which	is	fast	by	historical	standards,	but	may
turn	out	to	be	no	more	disruptive	than	the	pace	at	which	the	microprocessor
revolution	brought	about	its	changes	in	the	workplace,	or	the	upheavals	in	the
airline,	trucking,	and	banking	industries	over	the	last	decade.
Although	the	microprocessor	and	the	personal	computer	that	it	enabled	have
altered	and	even	eliminated	some	jobs	and	companies,	it	is	hard	to	find	any
large	sector	of	the	economy	that	has	been	negatively	affected.	Mainframe,
mini-computer,	and	typewriter	companies	have	downsized,	but	the	computer

industry	as	a	whole	has	grown,	with	a	substantial	net	increase	in	employment.
As	big	computer	companies	such	as	IBM	or	DEC	have	laid	people	off,	many
of	those	workers	have	found	employment	within	the	industry—usually	at
companies	doing	something	related	to	PCs.
Outside	the	computer	industry	it	is	also	hard	to	find	a	complete	business
sector	hurt	by	the	PC.	There	are	some	typesetters	who	were	displaced	by
desktop-publishing	programs—but	for	every	worker	in	that	situation	there	are
several	whose	jobs	desktop	publishing	created.	All	the	change	hasn't	always
been	good	for	all	the	people,	but	as	revolutions	go,	the	one	set	in	motion	by
the	personal	computer	has	been	remarkably	benign.
Some	people	worry	that	there	are	only	a	finite	number	of	jobs	in	the	world,
and	that	each	time	a	job	goes	away	someone	is	left	stranded	with	no	further
purpose.	Fortunately,	this	is	not	how	the	economy	works.	The	economy	is	a
vast	interconnected	system	in	which	any	resource	that	is	freed	up	becomes
available	to	another	area	of	the	economy	that	finds	it	most	valuable.	Each
time	a	job	is	made	unnecessary,	the	person	who	was	filling	that	job	is	freed	to
do	something	else.	The	net	result	is	that	more	gets	done,	raising	the	overall
standard	of	living	in	the	long	run.	If	there	is	a	general	downturn	across	the
economy—a	recession	or	a	depression—there	is	a	cyclical	loss	of	jobs,	but
the	shifts	that	have	come	about	as	a	result	of	technology	have	tended,	if
anything,	to	create	jobs.
Job	categories	change	constantly	in	an	evolving	economy.	Once	all	telephone
calls	were	made	through	an	operator.	When	I	was	a	child,	long-distance	calls
from	our	home	were	made	by	dialing	"0"	and	giving	an	operator	the	number,
and	when	I	was	a	teenager,	many	companies	still	employed	in-house
telephone	operators	who	routed	calls	by	plugging	cables	into	receptacles.
Today	there	are	comparatively	few	telephone	operators,	even	though	the
volume	of	calls	is	greater	than	ever.	Automation	has	taken	over.
Before	the	Industrial	Revolution,	most	people	lived	or	worked	on	farms.
Growing	food	was	mankind's	main	preoccupation.	If	someone	had	predicted
back	then	that	within	a	couple	of	centuries	only	a	tiny	percentage	of	the
population	would	be	needed	to	produce	food,	all	those	farmers	would	have
worried	about	what	everyone	would	do	for	a	living.	The	great	majority	of	the
501	job	categories	recognized	in	1990	by	the	U.S.	Census	Bureau	didn't	even
exist	fifty	years	earlier.	Although	we	can't	predict	new	job	categories,	most
will	relate	to	unmet	needs	in	education,	social	services,	and	leisure
opportunities.

We	know	that	when	the	highway	connects	buyers	and	sellers	directly,	it	will
put	pressure	on	people	who	are	currently	acting	as	middlemen.	This	is	the
same	sort	of	pressure	that	mass	merchants	such	as	WalMart,	Price-Costco,
and	other	companies	with	particularly	efficient	consumer-merchandising
approaches	have	already	put	on	more	traditional	stores.	When	Wal-Mart
moves	into	a	rural	area,	the	merchants	in	the	local	towns	feel	the	pinch.	Some
survive,	some	do	not,	but	the	net	economic	effect	on	the	region	is	modest.	We
may	regret	the	cultural	ramifications,	but	warehouse	stores	and	fast-food
chains	are	thriving	because	consumers,	who	vote	with	their	dollars,	tend	to
support	outlets	that	pass	their	productivity	savings	along	in	the	form	of	lower
prices.
Reducing	the	number	of	middlemen	is	another	way	of	lowering	costs.	It	will
also	cause	economic	shifts,	but	no	faster	than	the	changes	happened	in
retailing	in	the	last	decade.	It	will	take	many	years	for	the	highway	to	be
utilized	so	widely	for	shopping	that	there	will	be	significantly	fewer
middlemen.	There	is	plenty	of	time	to	prepare.	The	jobs	those	displaced
middlemen	change	to	might	not	even	have	been	thought	of	yet.	We'll	have	to
wait	and	see	what	kinds	of	creative	work	the	new	economy	devises.	But	as======================================================== pler	it	is	to	search
and	navigate	through	them	quickly,	because	their	content	can	be	restructured
so	easily.
The	organizational	structure	of	a	reservation	book	at	a	restaurant	is	by	date
and	time.	A	9:00	P.M.	reservation	is	written	farther	down	the	page	than	an
8:00	P.M.	reservation.	Saturday-night	dinner	reservations	follow	those	for
Saturday	lunch.	A	mâitre	d'	or	anyone	else	can	rapidly	find	out	who	has	a
reservation	on	any	date	for	any	time	because	the	book's	information	is	ordered
that	way.	But	if,	for	whatever	reason,	someone	wants	to	extract	information	in
another	way,	the	simple	chronology	is	useless.
Imagine	the	plight	of	a	restaurant	captain	if	I	called	to	say,	"My	name	is
Gates.	My	wife	made	us	a	reservation	for	some	time	next	month.	Would	you
mind	checking	to	see	when	it	is?"

"I'm	sorry,	sir,	do	you	know	the	date	of	the	reservation?"	the	captain	would	be
likely	to	ask.
"No,	that's	what	I'm	trying	to	find	out."
"Would	that	have	been	on	a	weekend?"	the	captain	asks.
He	knows	he's	going	to	be	paging	through	the	book	by	hand,	and	he's	hoping
to	reduce	the	task	by	focusing	the	dates	in	any	possible	way.
A	restaurant	can	use	a	paper-based	reservation	book	because	the	total	number
of	reservations	isn't	large.	An	airline	reservation	system	is	not	a	book	but	a
database	containing	an	enormous	quantity	of	information—flights,	air	fares,
bookings,	seat	assignments,	and	billing	information—for	hundreds	of	flights	a
day	worldwide.	American	Airlines'	SABRE	reservation	system	stores	the
information—4.4	trillion	bytes	of	it,	which	is	more	than	4	million	million
characters—on	computer	hard	disks.	If	the	information	in	the	SABRE	system
were	copied	into	a	hypothetical	paper	reservation	book,	it	would	require	more
than	2	billion	pages.
For	as	long	as	we've	had	paper	documents	or	collections	of	documents,	we
have	been	ordering	information	linearly,	with	indexes,	tables	of	contents,	and
cross-references	of	various	kinds	to	provide	alternate	means	of	navigation.	In
most	offices	filing	cabinets	are	organized	by	customer,	vendor,	or	project	in
alphabetical	order,	but	to	speed	access,	often	a	duplicate	set	of
correspondence	is	filed	chronologically.	Professional	indexers	add	value	to	a
book	by	building	an	alternative	way	to	find	information.	And	before	library
catalogs	were	computerized,	new	books	were	entered	into	the	paper	catalogs
on	several	different	cards	so	a	reader	could	find	a	book	by	its	title	or	any	one
of	its	authors	or	topics.	This	redundancy	was	to	make	information	easier	to
find.
When	I	was	young	I	loved	my	family's	1960	World	Book	Encyclopedia.	Its
heavy	bound	volumes	contained	just	text	and	pictures.	They	showed	what
Edison's	phonograph	looked	like,	but	didn't	let	me	listen	to	its	scratchy	sound.
The	encyclopedia	had	photographs	of	a	fuzzy	caterpillar	changing	into	a
butterfly,	but	there	was	no	video	to	bring	the	transformation	to	life.	It	also
would	have	been	nice	if	it	had	quizzed	me	on	what	I	had	read,	or	if	the
information	had	always	been	up-to-date.	Naturally	I	wasn't	aware	of	those
drawbacks	then.	When	I	was	eight,	I	began	to	read	the	first	volume.	I	was
determined	to	read	straight	through	every	volume.	I	could	have	absorbed
more	if	it	had	been	easy	to	read	all	the	articles	about	the	sixteenth	century	in
sequence	or	all	the	articles	pertaining	to	medicine.	Instead	I	read	about

"Garter	Snakes"	then	"Gary,	Indiana,"	then	"Gas."	But	I	had	a	great	time
reading	the	encyclopedia	anyway	and	kept	at	it	for	five	years	until	I	reached
the	Ps.	Then	I	discovered	the	Encyclopaedia	Britannica,	with	its	greater
sophistication	and	detail.	I	knew	I	would	never	have	the	patience	to	read	all	of
it.	Also,	by	then,	satisfying	my	enthusiasm	for	computers	was	taking	up	most
of	my	spare	time.
Current	print	encyclopedias	consist	of	nearly	two	dozen	volumes,	with
millions	of	words	of	text	and	thousands	of	illustrations,	and	cost	hundreds	or
thousands	of	dollars.	That's	quite	an	investment,	especially	considering	how
rapidly	the	information	gets	out	of	date.	Microsoft	Encarta,	which	is
outselling	print	and	other	multi-media	encyclopedias,	comes	on	a	single	1-
ounce	CD-ROM	(which	stands	for	Compact	Disc	Read	Only	Memory).
Encarta	includes	26,000	topics	with	9	million	words	of	text,	8	hours	of
sounds,	7,000	photographs	and	illustrations,	800	maps,	250	interactive	charts
and	tables,	and	100	animations	and	video	clips.	It	costs	less	than	$100.	If	you
want	to	know	how	the	Egyptian	"ud"	(a	musical	instrument)	sounds,	hear	the
1936	abdication	speech	of	Great	Britain's	King	Edward	VIII,	or	see	an
animation	explaining	how	a	machine	works,	the	information's	all	there—and
no	paper-based	encyclopedia	will	ever	have	it.
Articles	in	a	print	encyclopedia	often	are	followed	by	a	list	of	articles	on
related	subjects.	To	read	them,	you	have	to	find	the	referenced	article,	which
may	be	in	another	volume.	With	a	CD-ROM	encyclopedia	all	you	have	to	do
is	click	on	the	reference	and	the	article	will	appear.	On	the	information
highway,	encyclopedia	articles	will	include	links	to	related	subjects—not	just
those	covered	in	the	encyclopedia,	but	those	in	other	sources.	There	will	be	no
limit	to	how	much	detail	you	will	be	able	to	explore	on	a	subject	that	interests
you.	In	fact,	an	encyclopedia	on	the	highway	will	be	more	than	just	a	specific
reference	work—it	will	be,	like	the	library	card	catalog,	a	doorway	to	all
knowledge.
1995:	Screen	from	Microsoft	Encarta	electronic	multimedia	encyclopedia

Today,	printed	information	is	hard	to	locate.	It's	almost	impossible	to	find	all
the	best	information—including	books,	news	articles,	and	film	clips—on	a
specific	topic.	It	is	extremely	time-consuming	to	assemble	the	information
you	can	find.	For	example,	if	you	wanted	to	read	biographies	of	all	the	recent
Nobel	Prize	laureates,	compiling	them	could	take	an	entire	day.	Electronic
documents,	however,	will	be	interactive.	Request	a	kind	of	information,	and
the	document	responds.	Indicate	that	you've	changed	your	mind,	and	the
document	responds	again.	Once	you	get	used	to	this	sort	of	system,	you	find
that	being	able	to	look	at	information	in	different	ways	makes	that
information	more	valuable.	The	flexibility	invites	exploration,	and	the
exploration	is	rewarded	with	discovery.
You'll	be	able	to	get	your	daily	news	in	a	similar	way.	You'll	be	able	to	specify
how	long	you	want	your	newscast	to	last.	This	will	be	possible	because	you'll
be	able	to	have	each	of	the	news	stories	selected	individually.	The	newscast
assembled	for	and	delivered	only	to	you	might	include	world	news	from
NBC,	the	BBC,	CNN,	or	the	Los	Angeles	Times,	with	a	weather	report	from	a
favorite	local	TV	meteorologist—or	from	any	private	meteorologist	who
wanted	to	offer	his	or	her	own	service.	You	will	be	able	to	request	longer
stories	on	the	subjects	that	particularly	interest	you	and	just	highlights	on
others.	If,	while	you	are	watching	the	newscast,	you	want	more	than	has	been
put	together,	you	will	easily	be	able	to	request	more	background	or	detail,
either	from	another	news	broadcast	or	from	file	information.
Among	all	the	types	of	paper	documents,	narrative	fiction	is	one	of	the	few
that	will	not	benefit	from	electronic	organization.	Almost	every	reference
book	has	an	index,	but	novels	don't	because	there	is	no	need	to	be	able	to	look
something	up	in	a	novel.	Novels	are	linear.	Likewise,	we'll	continue	to	watch
most	movies	from	start	to	finish.	This	isn't	a	technological	judgment—it	is	an
artistic	one:	Their	linearity	is	intrinsic	to	the	storytelling	process.	New	forms
of	interactive	fiction	are	being	invented	that	take	advantage	of	the	electronic
world,	but	linear	novels	and	movies	will	still	be	popular.
The	highway	will	make	it	easy	to	distribute	digital	documents	cheaply,
whatever	their	form.	Millions	of	people	and	companies	will	be	creating
documents	and	publishing	them	on	the	network.	Some	documents	will	be
aimed	at	paying	audiences	and	some	will	be	free	to	anyone	who	wants	to	pay
attention.	Digital	storage	is	fantastically	inexpensive.	Hard-disk	drives	in
personal	computers	will	soon	cost	about	$0.15	for	a	megabyte	(million	bytes)
of	information.	To	put	this	in	perspective,	1	megabyte	will	hold	about	700
pages	of	text,	so	the	cost	is	something	like	$0.00021	per	page—about	one

two-hundredth	what	the	local	copy	center	would	charge	at	$0.05	a	page.	And
because	there	is	the	option	of	reusing	the	storage	space	for	something	else,	the
cost	is	actually	the	cost	of	storage	per	unit	time—in	other	words,	of	renting
the	space.	If	we	assume	just	a	three-year	average	lifetime	for	the	hard-disk
drive,	the	amortized	price	per	page	per	year	is	$0.00007.	And	storage	is
getting	cheaper	all	the	time.	Hard-disk	prices	have	been	dropping	by	about	50
percent	per	year	for	the	last	several	years.
Text	is	particularly	easy	to	store	because	it	is	very	compact	in	digital	form.
The	old	saying	that	a	picture	is	worth	a	thousand	words	is	more	than	true	in
the	digital	world.	High-quality	photographic	images	take	more	space	than
text,	and	video	(which	you	can	think	of	as	a	sequence	of	up	to	thirty	new
images	appearing	every	second)	takes	even	more.	Nevertheless,	the	cost	of
distribution	for	these	kinds	of	data	is	still	quite	low.	A	feature	film	takes	up
about	4	gigabytes	(4,000	megabytes)	in	compressed	digital	format,	which	is
about	$1,600	worth	of	hard-disk	space.
Sixteen	hundred	dollars	to	store	a	single	film	doesn't	sound	low-cost.
However,	consider	that	the	typical	local	video-rental	store	usually	buys	at
least	eight	copies	of	a	hot	new	movie	for	about	$80	a	copy.	With	these	eight
copies	the	store	can	supply	only	eight	customers	per	day.
Once	the	disk	and	the	computer	that	manages	it	are	connected	up	to	the
highway,	only	one	copy	of	the	information	will	be	necessary	for	everyone	to
have	access.	The	most	popular	documents	will	have	copies	made	on	different
servers	to	avoid	delays	when	an	unusual	number	of	users	want	access.	With
one	investment,	roughly	what	a	single	shop	today	spends	for	a	popular
videotape	title,======================================================== logy.	As	she	scrolls	through	the	document,	the
two	of	you	would	discuss	your	needs.	Then,	if	she	was	particularly	adept,	you
might	even	watch	her	do	the	editing.	However,	if	you	wanted	a	hand	in
editing	the	document	instead	of	just	watching	it	run	on	your	lawyer's
computer,	you	could	join	in	and	work	together.	You	would	be	able	not	only	to
talk	to	each	other	but	also	to	see	the	same	image	on	your	computer	screens.

You	won't	need	to	have	the	same	software.	The	application	just	has	to	run	on
one	end	of	the	connection,	the	lawyer's	end	in	this	case.	On	your	end,	you
would	need	only	an	appropriate	modem	and	DSVD	software.
Another	important	use	of	voice/data	connections	will	be	to	improve	product
support.	Microsoft	has	thousands	of	employees	whose	job	is	to	answer
product-support	questions	about	Microsoft	software.	In	fact,	we	have	as	many
product-support	people	answering	questions	about	our	software	as	we	have
engineers	building	it.	This	is	wonderful,	because	we	log	all	that	feedback	and
use	it	to	improve	our	products.	We	get	lots	of	these	questions	by	e-mail,	but
most	of	our	customers	still	telephone	us.	These	phone	conversations	are
inefficient.	A	customer	calls	in	to	say	his	particular	computer	is	configured	in
a	specific	way	and	is	giving	a	certain	error	message.	The	product-support
specialist	listens	to	this	description,	and	then	suggests	something,	which	it
takes	the	caller	a	few	minutes	to	do.	Then	the	conversation	resumes.	The
average	call	takes	fifteen	minutes,	and	some	take	an	hour.	But	once	everyone
is	using	DSVD,	the	product-support	specialist	will	be	able	to	see	what's	on	the
caller's	computer	screen	(with	the	caller's	explicit	permission,	of	course)	and
examine	the	caller's	computer	directly	rather	than	having	to	rely	on	the	caller
to	explain	what	he	is	seeing.	This	will	have	to	be	done	carefully,	to	ensure	that
no	one's	privacy	is	invaded.	The	process	will	reduce	the	length	of	the	average
call	by	30	or	40	percent,	which	will	make	customers	a	lot	happier	and	will	cut
costs	and	product	prices.
The	picture	transmitted	during	a	DSVD	(or	ISDN)	telephone	connection
won't	necessarily	have	to	be	of	a	document.	One	or	both	people	participating
will	also	be	able	to	transmit	still	images	of	themselves.	If	you	are	calling	in	to
buy	a	product,	you	might	expect	the	company's	service	representative	to	be
there,	smiling.	But	you,	as	the	customer,	might	choose	to	transmit	only	your
voice.	You	can	select	images	of	yourself	dressed	appropriately	for	the
occasion,	so	it	won't	matter	what	you	are	actually	wearing.	Or	you	might
decide	to	have	available	several	pictures	of	yourself,	one	smiling,	one
laughing,	one	contemplative,	and	maybe	one	that	is	angry.	During	the	course
of	the	conversation,	you	could	change	the	image	to	suit	your	mood	or	the
point	you	were	making.
Electronic	mail	and	shared	screens	will	eliminate	the	need	for	many	meetings.
Presentation	meetings,	called	primarily	so	participants	can	listen	and	learn,
can	be	replaced	with	e-mail	messages	with	spreadsheets	and	other	exhibits
enclosed	as	attachments.	When	face-to-face	meetings	do	take	place,	they	will
be	more	efficient	because	participants	will	already	have	exchanged
background	information	by	e-mail.

It	will	also	be	easier	to	schedule	meetings	because	software	will	handle	it.	For
example,	if	you	want	to	sit	down	face-to-face	with	your	lawyer,	your
scheduling	program	and	hers	will	be	able	to	communicate	across	the	network
—even	the	phone	network—and	pick	a	date	and	time	that	you	both	have	free.
Then	the	appointment	would	just	show	up	on	your	respective	electronic
calendars.
This	will	also	be	an	efficient	way	to	schedule	restaurant	or	theater
reservations,	but	it	raises	an	interesting	issue.	Let's	say	a	restaurant	isn't
getting	much	business,	or	tickets	to	a	show	aren't	selling	well,	or	your	lawyer
doesn't	want	you	to	know	that	you're	her	only	client.	Such	companies	and
individuals	might	instruct	their	scheduling	programs	just	to	respond	to
meeting	requests.	Your	scheduling	program	wouldn't	be	able	to	ask	your
lawyer's	program	to	list	all	the	times	she	is	free.	However,	if	it	asked	for	a
specific	two-hour	block,	the	response	would	be:	"Yes,	we	can	schedule	you
for	Tuesday	at	eleven	o'clock."
Clients	will	expect	their	lawyers,	dentists,	accountants,	and	other
professionals	to	be	able	to	schedule	appointments	and	exchange	documents
electronically.	You	might	have	a	quick	follow-up	question	for	your	doctor—
for	instance,	whether	a	generic	version	of	a	drug	is	acceptable.	It	is	hard	to
interrupt	a	doctor,	but	you'll	expect	to	be	able	to	trade	e-mail	with	all	of	the
professionals	you	work	with.	We're	going	to	see	competition	based	on	how
effectively	one	professional	group	has	adopted	these	communications	tools
and	how	much	more	accessible	and	efficient	this	makes	them.	I'm	sure	we'll
then	begin	seeing	ads	in	which	a	firm	will	tout	how	much	more	advanced	it
has	become	in	the	use	of	PC	communications.
When	the	information	highway	is	available,	people	won't	be	limited	to	audio
and	still	images,	because	the	highway	will	also	transmit	high-quality	video.
The	meetings	they	schedule	will	more	and	more	often	be	conducted
electronically,	using	shared-screen	videoconferencing.	Each	electronic
participant,	wherever	he	or	she	is,	will	look	at	a	different	physical	screen:	a
video	white	board,	a	television	set,	or	a	PC,	but	each	screen	will	show	much
the	same	image.	Part	of	the	screen	might	show	someone's	face,	while	another
part	might	display	a	document.	If	anyone	modifies	the	document,	the	change
will	appear	almost	immediately	on	all	the	screens.	Geographically	distant
collaborators	will	be	able	to	work	together	in	rich	ways.	This	is	synchronous
or	real-time	sharing,	which	means	that	the	computer	screens	will	keep	up	with
the	people	using	them.
If	a	group	were	to	meet	electronically	to	collaborate	on	a	press	release,	each

member	would	be	able	to	use	his	or	her	PC	or	notebook	computer	to	move
paragraphs	around	and	drop	in	a	photograph	or	a	video.	The	rest	of	the	group
would	be	able	to	look	at	the	result	on	their	individual	screens	and	see	each
contributor's	work	as	it	is	actually	happening.
We're	already	accustomed	to	watching	video	meetings.	Anyone	who	tunes	in
to	television	news	shows,	such	as	Nightline,	which	feature	long-distance
debates,	is	seeing	a	videoconference.	The	host	and	guests	may	be	separated
by	continents,	yet	they	engage	in	give-and-take	as	if	they	were	in	the	same
room,	and	to	viewers	it	almost	appears	that	they	are.
Today,	in	order	to	videoconference,	it	is	necessary	to	go	to	a	specially
equipped	facility	with	special	phone	lines.	Microsoft	has	at	least	one
dedicated	videoconference	room	in	each	of	its	sales	offices	around	the	world.
They're	used	quite	a	bit,	but	the	setting	is	fairly	formal.	These	facilities	have
saved	us	lots	of	traveling.	Employees	in	other	offices	"sit	in"	on	staff
meetings,	and	customers	and	vendors	have	"visited"	us	without	traveling	to
our	headquarters	outside	Seattle.	Such	meetings	will	become	very	popular
because	they	save	time	and	money	and	are	often	more	productive	than	audio-
only	phone	conferences	or	even	face-to-face	meetings,	because	people	seem
to	be	more	attentive	if	they	know	they	are	on-camera.
I've	noticed	that	it	does	take	some	getting	used	to,	though.	If	one	person	is	on
a	videoconference	screen,	he	or	she	tends	to	get	much	more	attention	than
others	in	the	meeting.	I	first	noticed	this	when	a	bunch	of	us	in	Seattle	were
videoconferencing	with	Steve	Ballmer,	who	was	in	Europe.	It	was	as	if	we
were	all	glued	to	The	Steve	Ballmer	Show.	If	Steve	took	off	his	shoes,	we'd
all	look	at	each	other's	reactions.	When	the	meeting	was	over	I	could	have
told	you	all	about	Steve's	new	haircut	but	I	might	not	have	been	able	to	name
the	other	people	who'd	been	in	the
room	with	me.	I	think	this	distortion	will	go	away	as	videoconferences
become	commonplace.
It's	currently	fairly	expensive	to	set	up	a	videoconference	room—it	costs	at
least	$40,000.	However,	desktop	systems	that	attach	to	PCs	are	coming,	and
they	will	reduce	the	cost—and	the	formality—dramatically.	Our	facilities	are
generally	connected	with	ISDN	lines	operating	at	384,000	bits	per	second,
which	provide	reasonable	picture	and	sound	quality	for	about	$20	to	$35	an
hour	for	connections	within	the	United	States	and	about	$250	to	$300	an	hour
for	an	international	connection.
The	cost	of	videoconferencing,	like	that	of	almost	every	other	computer-

driven	service,	is	going	to	drop	as	technology	and	communications	costs	do.
Small	video	devices	using	cameras	attached	to	personal	computers	or
television	sets	will	allow	us	to	meet	readily	across	the	information	highway
with	much	higher	quality	pictures	and	sound	for	lower	prices.	As	ISDN
connected	to	PCs	becomes	popular,	videoconferences	will	be	as	standard	a
business	procedure	as	using	a	copier	to	duplicate	a	document	for	distribution
is	now.
Some	people	worry	that,	by	eliminating	the	subtlety	of	human	dynamics	in	a
meeting,	videoconferences	and	shared	screens	will	give	corporate	gatherings
all	the	spontaneity	of	a	congressional	photo	opportunity.	How	will	people
whisper,	roll	their	eyes	at	a	tedious	speaker,	or	pass	notes?	Actually,
clandestine	communication	will	be	simpler	at	a	video	meeting	because	the
network	will	facilitate	individual	communications	on	the	side.	Meetings	have
always	had	unwritten	rules,	but	when	the	network	is	mediating
videoconferences,	some	rules	will	have	to	become	explicit.	Will	people	be
able	to	signal,	publicly	or	privately,	individually	or	collectively,	that	they	are
bored?	To	what	degree	should	a	participant	be	allowed	to	block	his	or	her
video	or	audio	from	others?	Should	private	side	conversations,	one	PC	to
another,	be	permitted?	Over	time,	as	we	use	these	facilities,	new	rules	of
meeting	etiquette	will	emerge.
Home	videoconferences	will	naturally	be	somewhat	different.	If	the
conference	has	only	two	participants,	it	will	amount	to	a	video	phone	call.
That	will	be	great	for	saying	hello	to	y======================================================== t	leaving	your	house.	Flexibility	is	going	to	be	increasingly
important	as	everyone	tries	to	balance	family	life	with	work	life.	You	won't
always	have	to	travel	to	see	friends	and	family	or	to	play	games.	Cultural
attractions	will	be	available	via	the	information	highway,	although	I'm	not
suggesting	that	a	Broadway	or	West	End	musical	will	be	the	same	experience
in	your	living	room	as	it	is	in	a	New	York	or	London	theater.	However,
improvements	in	screen	sizes	and	resolutions	will	enhance	all	video,
including	movies,	in	the	home.	Educational	programming	will	be	extensive.
All	of	this	will	liberate	those	who	would	like	to	abandon	city	living.
The	opening	of	the	interstate	highway	system	had	a	substantial	effect	on
where	in	the	United	States	people	chose	to	settle.	It	made	new	suburbs
accessible	and	contributed	to	the	culture	of	the	automobile.	There	will	be
significant	implications	for	city	planners,	real	estate	developers,	and	school
districts	if	the	opening	of	the	information	highway	also	encourages	people	to
move	away	from	city	centers.	If	large	pools	of	talent	disperse,	companies	will
feel	even	more	pressure	to	be	creative	about	how	to	work	with	consultants
and	employees	not	located	near	their	operations.	This	could	set	off	a	positive-
feedback	cycle,	encouraging	rural	living.
If	the	population	of	a	city	were	reduced	by	even	10	percent,	the	result	would
be	a	major	difference	in	property	values	and	wear	and	tear	on	transportation
and	other	urban	systems.	If	the	average	office	worker	in	any	major	city	stayed
home	one	or	two	days	a	week,	the	decreases	in	gasoline	consumption,	air
pollution,	and	traffic	congestion	would	be	significant.	The	net	effect,
however,	is	hard	to	foresee.	If	those	who	moved	out	of	cities	were	mostly	the
affluent	knowledge	workers,	the	urban	tax	base	would	be	reduced.	This	would
aggravate	the	inner	city's	woes	and	encourage	other	affluent	people	to	leave.
But	at	the	same	time,	the	urban	infrastructure	might	be	less	heavily	loaded.
Rents	would	fall,	creating	opportunities	for	a	better	standard	of	living	for
some	of	those	remaining	in	the	cities.

It	will	take	decades	to	implement	all	the	major	changes,	because	most	people
remain	comfortable	with	whatever	they	learn	early	and	are	reluctant	to	alter
familiar	patterns.	However,	new	generations	will	bring	new	perspectives.	Our
children	will	grow	up	comfortable	with	the	idea	of	working	with	information
tools	across	distances.	These	tools	will	be	as	natural	to	them	as	a	telephone	or
a	ballpoint	pen	is	to	us.	But	technology	isn't	going	to	wait	until	people	are
ready	for	it.	Within	the	next	ten	years	we	will	start	to	see	substantial	shifts	in
how	and	where	we	work,	the	companies	we	work	for,	and	the	places	we
choose	to	live.	My	advice	is	to	try	to	find	out	as	much	as	possible	about	the
technology	that	will	touch	you.	The	more	you	know	about	it,	the	less
disconcerting	it	will	seem.	Technology's	role	is	to	provide	more	flexibility	and
efficiency.	Forward-looking	business	managers	will	have	lots	of	opportunities
to	perform	better	in	the	years	ahead.

8
FRICTION-FREE
CAPITALISM
When	Adam	Smith	described	the	concept	of	markets	in	The	Wealth	of	Nations
in	1776,	he	theorized	that	if	every	buyer	knew	every	seller's	price,	and	every
seller	knew	what	every	buyer	was	willing	to	pay,	everyone	in	the	"market"
would	be	able	to	make	fully	informed	decisions	and	society's	resources	would
be	distributed	efficiently.	To	date	we	haven't	achieved	Smith's	ideal	because
would-be	buyers	and	would-be	sellers	seldom	have	complete	information
about	one	another.
Not	many	consumers	looking	to	buy	a	car	stereo	have	the	time	or	patience	to
canvass	every	dealer	and	thus	are	acting	on	imperfect	and	limited
information.	If	you've	bought	a	product	for	$500	and	see	it	advertised	in	the
paper	for	$300	a	week	or	two	later,	you	feel	foolish	for	overpaying.	But	you
feel	a	lot	worse	if	you	end	up	in	the	wrong	job	because	you	haven't	done
thorough	enough	research.
A	few	markets	are	already	working	fairly	close	to	Smith's	ideal.	Investors
buying	and	selling	currency	and	certain	other	commodities	participate	in
efficient	electronic	markets	that	provide	nearly	complete	instantaneous
information	about	worldwide	supply,	demand,	and	prices.	Everyone	gets
pretty	much	the	same	deal	because	news	about	all	offers,	bids,	and
transactions	speeds	across	wires	to	trading	desks	everywhere.	However,	most
marketplaces	are	very	inefficient.	For	instance,	if	you	are	trying	to	find	a
doctor,	lawyer,	accountant,	or	similar	professional,	or	are	buying	a	house,
information	is	incomplete	and	comparisons	are	difficult	to	make.
The	information	highway	will	extend	the	electronic	marketplace	and	make	it
the	ultimate	go-between,	the	universal	middleman.	Often	the	only	humans
involved	in	a	transaction	will	be	the	actual	buyer	and	seller.	All	the	goods	for
sale	in	the	world	will	be	available	for	you	to	examine,	compare,	and,	often,
customize.	When	you	want	to	buy	something	you'll	be	able	to	tell	your
computer	to	find	it	for	you	at	the	best	price	offered	by	any	acceptable	source
or	ask	your	computer	to	"haggle"	with	the	computers	of	various	sellers.
Information	about	vendors	and	their	products	and	services	will	be	available	to
any	computer	connected	to	the	highway.	Servers	distributed	worldwide	will

accept	bids,	resolve	offers	into	completed	transactions,	control	authentication
and	security,	and	handle	all	other	aspects	of	the	marketplace,	including	the
transfer	of	funds.	This	will	carry	us	into	a	new	world	of	low-friction,	low-
overhead	capitalism,	in	which	market	information	will	be	plentiful	and
transaction	costs	low.	It	will	be	a	shopper's	heaven.
Every	market,	from	a	bazaar	to	the	highway,	facilitates	competitive	pricing
and	allows	goods	to	move	from	seller	to	buyer	efficiently	with	modest
friction.	This	is	thanks	to	the	market	makers—those	whose	job	it	is	to	bring
buyers	and	sellers	together.	As	the	information	highway	assumes	the	role	of
market	maker	in	realm	after	realm,	traditional	middlemen	will	have	to
contribute	real	value	to	a	transaction	to	justify	a	commission.	For	example,
stores	and	services	that	until	now	have	profited	just	because	they	are
"there"—in	a	particular	geographic	location	may	find	they	have	lost	that
advantage.	But	those	who	provide	added	value	will	not	only	survive,	they	will
thrive,	because	the	information	highway	will	let	them	make	their	services
available	to	customers	everywhere.
This	idea	will	scare	a	lot	of	people.	Most	change	feels	a	bit	threatening,	and	I
expect	dramatic	changes	in	the	business	of	retailing	as	commerce	flows	across
the	highway.	But,	as	with	so	many	changes,	I	think	once	we	get	used	to	it
we'll	wonder	how	we	did	without	it.	The	consumer	will	get	not	only
competitive	cost	savings,	but	also	a	much	wider	variety	of	products	and
services	to	choose	from.	Although	there	may	be	fewer	stores,	if	people
continue	to	enjoy	shopping	in	today's	outlets,	as	many	stores	as	their	demand
justifies	will	remain	available.	And	because	the	highway	will	simplify	and
standardize	shopping,	it	will	also	save	time.	If	you	are	buying	a	gift	for	a
loved	one,	you	will	be	able	to	consider	more	choices	and	often	you	will	find
something	more	imaginative.	You	could	use	the	time	saved	from	shopping	to
think	up	a	fun	clue	to	put	on	the	package,	or	create	a	personalized	card.	Or
you	could	spend	the	time	you	save	with	the	recipient.
We	all	recognize	the	value	of	a	knowledgeable	salesperson	when	we	are
shopping	for	insurance,	clothes,	investments,	jewelry,	a	camera,	a	home
appliance,	or	a	home.	We	also	know	the	salesperson's	advice	is	sometimes
biased	because	he	or	she	is	ultimately	hoping	to	make	a	sale	from	a	particular
inventory.
On	the	information	highway	lots	of	product	information	will	be	available
directly	from	manufacturers.	As	they	do	today,	vendors	will	use	a	variety	of
entertaining	and	provocative	techniques	to	attract	us.	Advertising	will	evolve
into	a	hybrid,	combining	today's	television	commercials,	magazine	ads,	and	a

detailed	sales	brochure.	If	an	ad	catches	your	attention,	you'll	be	able	to
request	additional	information	directly	and	very	easily.	Links	will	let	you
navigate	through	whatever	information	the	advertiser	has	made	available,
which	might	be	product	manuals	consisting	of	video,	audio,	and	text.	Vendors
will	make	getting	information	about	their	products	as	simple	as	possible.
At	Microsoft,	we're	looking	forward	to	using	the	highway	to	get	information
out	about	our	products.	Today	we	print	millions	of	pages	of	product	brochures
and	data	sheets,	and	mail	them	out	to	people	who	ask	for	them.	But	we	never
know	how	much	information	to	put	onto	a	data	sheet;	we	don't	want	to
intimidate	casual	inquirers,	and	yet	there	are	people	out	there	who	want	to
know	all	the	detailed	product	specifications.	Also,	since	the	information
changes	fairly	rapidly,	we	are	often	in	the	position	of	having	just	printed	tens
of	thousands	of	copies	of	some	brochure,	and	then	having	to	throw	them	out
because	they	describe	a	version	of	a	product	we're	replacing.	We	expect	a
high	percentage	of	our	information	dissemination	will	shift	to	electronic
inquiry,	particularly	because	we	serve	computer	users.	We	have	already
eliminated	the	printing	of	millions	of	pages	of	paper	by	sending	quarterly	CD-
ROMs	and	using	on-line	services	to	reach	professional	software	developers,
some	of	Microsoft's	most	sophisticated	customers.
But	you	won't	have	to	depend	only	on	what	we	or	any	other	manufacturer
tells	you.	You'll	be	able	to	examine	product	reviews	in	search	of	less	biased
information.	After	you've	seen	the	advertising,	reviews,	and	multi-media
manuals,	you	might	ask	for	relevant	government	regulatory	data.	You'll	check
to	see	if	the	vendor	has	surveyed	owners.	Then	you	might	dig	deeper	into	one
area	of	particular	interest	to	you—for	instance,	durability.	Or	you	could	seek
the	advice	of	sales	consultants,	human	or	electronic,	who	will	create	and
publish	specialized	reviews	for	all	kinds	of	products,	from	drill	bits	t======================================================== to	a	large	monitor	and	to	the	corporate	network	in	the	office.
Notebook	computers	will	continue	to	get	thinner	until	they	are	nearly	the	size
of	a	tablet	of	paper.	Notebooks	are	the	smallest	and	most	portable	real
computers	today,	but	soon	there	will	be	pocket-size	computers	with	snapshot-

size	color	screens.	When	you	whip	one	out,	no	one	will	say,	"Wow!	You've
got	a	computer!"
1995:	Multimedia	notebook	computer	by	Digital	Equipment	Corporation
What	do	you	carry	on	your	person	now?	Probably	at	least	keys,	identification,
money,	and	a	watch.	Quite	possibly	you	also	carry	credit	cards,	a	checkbook,
traveler's	checks,	an	address	book,	an	appointment	book,	a	notepad,	reading
material,	a	camera,	a	pocket	tape	recorder,	a	cellular	phone,	a	pager,	concert
tickets,	a	map,	a	compass,	a	calculator,	an	electronic	entry	card,	photographs,
and	perhaps	a	loud	whistle	to	summon	help.
You'll	be	able	to	keep	all	these	and	more	in	another	information	appliance	we
call	the	wallet	PC.	It	will	be	about	the	same	size	as	a	wallet,	which	means
you'll	be	able	to	carry	it	in	your	pocket	or	purse.	It	will	display	messages	and
schedules	and	also	let	you	read	or	send	electronic	mail	and	faxes,	monitor
weather	and	stock	reports,	and	play	both	simple	and	sophisticated	games.	At	a
meeting	you	might	take	notes,	check	your	appointments,	browse	information
if	you're	bored,	or	choose	from	among	thousands	of	easy-to-call-up	photos	of
your	kids.
Rather	than	holding	paper	currency,	the	new	wallet	will	store	unforgeable
digital	money.	Today	when	you	hand	someone	a	dollar	bill,	check,	gift
certificate,	or	other	negotiable	instrument,	the	transfer	of	paper	represents	a
transfer	of	funds.	But	money	does	not	have	to	be	expressed	on	paper.	Credit
card	charges	and	wired	funds	are	exchanges	of	digital	financial	information.
Tomorrow	the	wallet	PC	will	make	it	easy	for	anyone	to	spend	and	accept
digital	funds.	Your	wallet	will	link	into	a	store's	computer	to	allow	money	to
be	transferred	without	any	physical	exchange	at	a	cash	register.	Digital	cash
will	be	used	in	interpersonal	transactions,	too.	If	your	son	needs	money,	you
might	digitally	slip	five	bucks	from	your	wallet	PC	to	his.

Prototype	of	a	wallet	PC
When	wallet	PCs	are	ubiquitous,	we	can	eliminate	the	bottlenecks	that	now
plague	airport	terminals,	theaters,	and	other	locations	where	people	queue	to
show	identification	or	a	ticket.	As	you	pass	through	an	airport	gate,	for
example,	your	wallet	PC	will	connect	to	the	airport's	computers	and	verify
that	you	have	paid	for	a	ticket.	You	won't	need	a	key	or	magnetic	card	key	to
get	through	doors	either.	Your	wallet	PC	will	identify	you	to	the	computer
controlling	the	lock.
As	cash	and	credit	cards	begin	to	disappear,	criminals	may	target	the	wallet
PC,	so	there	will	have	to	be	safeguards	to	prevent	a	wallet	PC	from	being
used	in	the	same	manner	as	a	stolen	charge	card.	The	wallet	PC	will	store	the
"keys"	you'll	use	to	identify	yourself.	You	will	be	able	to	invalidate	your	keys
easily,	and	they	will	be	changed	regularly.	For	some	important	transactions,
just	having	the	key	in	your	wallet	PC	won't	be	enough.	One	solution	is	to
have	you	enter	a	password	at	the	time	of	the	transaction.	Automatic	teller
machines	ask	you	to	provide	a	personal	identification	number,	which	is	just	a
very	short	password.	Another	option,	which	would	eliminate	the	need	for	you
to	remember	a	password,	is	the	use	of	biometric	measurements.	Individual
biometric	measurements	are	more	secure	and	almost	certainly	will	be
included	eventually	in	some	wallet	PCs.
A	biometric	security	system	records	a	physical	trait,	such	as	a	voiceprint	or	a
fingerprint.	For	example,	your	wallet	PC	might	demand	that	you	read	aloud	a
random	word	that	it	flashes	on	its	screen	or	that	you	press	your	thumb	against
the	side	of	the	device	whenever	you	are	about	to	conduct	a	transaction	with
significant	financial	implications.	The	wallet	will	compare	what	it	"heard"	or
"felt"	with	its	digital	record	of	your	voice-	or	thumbprint.
Wallet	PCs	with	the	proper	equipment	will	be	able	to	tell	you	exactly	where
you	are	anyplace	on	the	face	of	Earth.	The	Global	Positioning	System	(GPS)
satellites	in	an	orbit	around	Earth	broadcast	signals	that	permit	jetliners,
oceangoing	boats,	and	cruise	missiles,	or	hikers	with	handheld	GPS	receivers,
to	know	their	exact	location	to	within	a	few	hundred	feet.	Such	devices	are

currently	available	for	a	few	hundred	dollars,	and	they	will	be	built	into	many
wallet	PCs.
The	wallet	PC	will	connect	you	to	the	information	highway	while	you	travel	a
real	highway,	and	tell	you	where	you	are.	Its	built-in	speaker	will	be	able	to
dictate	directions	to	let	you	know	that	a	freeway	exit	is	coming	up	or	that	the
next	intersection	has	frequent	accidents.	It	will	monitor	digital	traffic	reports
and	warn	you	that	you'd	better	leave	for	an	airport	early,	or	suggest	an
alternate	route.	The	wallet	PC's	color	maps	will	overlay	your	location	with
whatever	kinds	of	information	you	desire—road	and	weather	conditions,
campgrounds,	scenic	spots,	even	fast-food	outlets.	You	might	ask,	"Where's
the	nearest	Chinese	restaurant	that	is	still	open?"	and	the	information
requested	will	be	transmitted	to	the	wallet	by	wireless	network.	Off	the	roads,
on	a	hike	in	the	woods,	it	will	be	your	compass	and	as	useful	as	your	Swiss
Army	knife.
In	fact,	I	think	of	the	wallet	PC	as	the	new	Swiss	Army	knife.	I	had	one	of
those	knives	when	I	was	a	kid.	Mine	was	neither	the	most	basic	with	just	two
blades	nor	the	one	with	a	workshop's	worth	of	equipment.	It	had	the	classic
shiny	red	handle	with	the	white	cross	and	lots	of	blades	and	attachments,
including	a	screwdriver,	a	tiny	pair	of	scissors,	and	even	a	corkscrew
(although	at	the	time	I	had	no	use	for	that	particular	accessory).	Some	wallet
PCs	will	be	simple	and	elegant	and	offer	only	the	essentials,	such	as	a	small
screen,	a	microphone,	a	secure	way	to	transact	business	with	digital	money,
and	the	capability	to	read	or	otherwise	use	basic	information.	Others	will
bristle	with	all	kinds	of	gadgets,	including	cameras,	scanners	that	will	be	able
to	read	printed	text	or	handwriting,	and	receivers	with	the	global-positioning
capability.	Most	will	have	a	panic	button	for	you	to	press	if	you	need
emergency	help.	Some	models	will	include	thermometers,	barometers,
altimeters,	and	heart-rate	sensors.
Prices	will	vary	accordingly,	but	generally	wallet	PCs	will	be	priced	about	the
way	cameras	are	today.	Simple,	single-purpose	"smart	cards"	for	digital
currency	will	cost	about	what	a	disposable	camera	does	now,	whereas,	like	an
elaborate	camera,	a	really	sophisticated	wallet	PC	might	cost	$1,000	or	more,
but	it	will	outperform	the	most	exotic	computer	of	just	a	decade	ago.	Smart
cards,	the	most	basic	form	of	the	wallet	PC,	look	like	credit	cards	and	are
popular	now	in	Europe.	Their	microprocessors	are	embedded	within	the
plastic.	The	smart	card	of	the	future	will	identify	its	owner	and	store	digital
money,	tickets,	and	medical	information.	It	won't	have	a	screen,	audio
capabilities,	or	any	of	the	more	elaborate	options	of	the	more	expensive	wallet
PCs.	It	will	be	handy	for	travel	or	as	a	backup,	and	may	be	sufficient	by	itself

for	some	people's	uses.
If	you	aren't	carrying	a	wallet	PC,	you'll	still	have	access	to	the	highway	by
using	kiosks—some	free,	some	requiring	payment	of	a	fee—which	will	be
found	in	office	buildings,	shopping	malls,	and	airports	in	much	the	same	spirit
as	drinking	fountains,	rest	rooms,	and	pay	phones.	In	fact,	they	will	replace
not	only	pay	phones	but	also	banking	machines,	because	they	will	offer	their
capabilities	as	well	as	all	the	other	highway	applications,	from	sending	and
receiving	messages	to	scanning	maps	and	buying	tickets.	Access	to	kiosks
will	be	essential,	and	available	everywhere.	Some	kiosks	will	display
advertising	links	to	specific	services	when	you	first	log	on—a	bit	like	the
phones	in	airports	that	connect	right	to	hotel	and	rental-car	reservations.	Like
the	cash	machines	we	find	in	airports	today,	they	will	look	like	rugged
devices,	but	inside	they	will	also	be	PCs.
No	matter	what	form	the	PC	takes,	users	will	still	have	to	be	able	to	navigate
their	way	through	its	applications.	Think	of	the	way	you	use	your	television
remote	control	today	to	choose	what	you	want	to	watch.	Future	systems	with
more	choices	will	have	to	do	better.	They'll	have	to	avoid	making	you	go
step-by-step	through	all	the	options.	Instead	of	having	to	remember	which
channel	number	to	use	to	find	a	program,	you	will	be	shown	a	graphical	menu
and	be	able	to	select	what	you	want	by	pointing	to	an	easy-to-understand
image.
You	won't	necessarily	have	to	point	to	make	your	point.	Eventually	we'll	also
be	able	to	speak	to	our	televisions,	personal	computers,	or	other	information
appliances.	At	first	we'll	have	to	keep	to	a	limited	vocabulary,	but	eventually
our	exchanges	will	become	quite	conversational.	This	capability	requires
powerful	hardware	and	software,	because	conversation	that	a	human	can
understand	effortlessly	is	very	hard	for	a	computer	to	interpret.	Already,	voice
recognition	works	fine	for	a	small	set	of	predefined	commands,	such	as	"Call
my	sister."	It's	much	more	difficult	for	a	computer	to	decipher	an	arbitrary
sentence,	but	in	the	next	ten	years	this	too	will	become	possible.
Some	users	will	find	it	convenient	to	handwrite	instructions	to	a	computer,
rather	than	speaking	or	typing	them.	Many	companies,	including	Microsoft,
have	spent	some	years	working	on	what	we	call	"pen-based	computers"
capable	of	reading	handwriting.	I	was	overly	optimistic	about	how	quickly	we
would	be	able	to	create	software	that	would	recognize	the	handwriting	of	a
broad	range	of	people.	The	difficulties	turned	out	to	be	quite	subtle.	When	we
tested	the	system	ourselves	it	worked	well,	but	new	users	continued	to	have
trouble	with	it.	We	discovered	we	were	unconsciously	making	our

handwriting	neater	and	more	recognizable	than	usual.	We	were	adapting	to
the	machine	rather	than	the	other	way======================================================== rted	by	posts	of	Douglas	fir.	The	house	has	lots	of	exposed
horizontal	beams	and	vertical	supports.	You'll	have	a	great	view	of	the	lake.
My	hope	is	that	the	view	and	the	Douglas	fir,	rather	than	the	electronic	pin,

will	be	what	interest	you	most	as	you	descend	toward	the	ground	floor.	Most
of	the	wood	came	from	an	eighty-year-old	Weyerhaeuser	lumber	mill	that	was
being	torn	down	out	on	the	Columbia	River.	This	wood,	harvested	nearly	a
hundred	years	ago,	came	from	trees	that	were	as	much	as	350	feet	tall,
between	8	and	15	feet	in	diameter.	Douglas	fir	is	one	of	the	strongest	woods
in	the	world	for	its	weight.	Unfortunately,	new-growth	Douglas	fir	tends	to
split	if	you	try	to	mill	it	into	beams,	because	the	grain	is	not	as	tight	in	a
seventy-year-old	tree	as	it	is	in	a	five-hundred-year-old	one.	Almost	all	of	the
old-growth	Douglas	fir	has	been	harvested	now,	and	any	that	remains	should
be	preserved.	I	was	lucky	to	find	old-growth	timbers	that	could	be	reused.
The	fir	beams	support	the	two	floors	of	private	living	spaces	you'll	be
descending	past.	Privacy	is	important.	I	want	a	house	that	will	still	feel	like
home	even	when	guests	are	enjoying	other	parts	of	it.
At	the	bottom	of	the	stairs,	the	theater	will	be	on	the	right,	and	to	the	left,	on
the	south	side,	will	be	the	reception	hall.	As	you	step	into	the	reception	hall,
on	your	right	will	be	a	series	of	sliding	glass	doors	that	open	onto	a	terrace
leading	to	the	lake.	Recessed	into	the	east	wall	will	be	twenty-four	video
monitors,	each	with	a	40-inch	picture	tube,	stacked	four	high	and	six	across.
These	monitors	will	work	cooperatively	to	display	large	images	for	artistic,
entertainment,	or	business	purposes.	I	had	hoped	that	when	the	monitors
weren't	in	use	they	could	literally	disappear	into	the	woodwork.	I	wanted	the
screens	to	display	woodgrain	patterns	that	matched	their	surroundings.
Unfortunately	I	could	never	achieve	anything	convincing	with	current
technology,	because	a	monitor	emits	light	while	real	wood	reflects	it.	So	I
settled	for	having	the	monitors	disappear	behind	wood	panels	when	they're
not	in	use.
The	electronic	pin	you	wear	will	tell	the	house	who	and	where	you	are,	and
the	house	will	use	this	information	to	try	to	meet	and	even	anticipate	your
needs—all	as	unobtrusively	as	possible.	Someday,	instead	of	needing	the	pin,
it	might	be	possible	to	have	a	camera	system	with	visual-recognition
capabilities,	but	that's	beyond	current	technology.	When	it's	dark	outside,	the
pin	will	cause	a	moving	zone	of	light	to	accompany	you	through	the	house.
Unoccupied	rooms	will	be	unlit.	As	you	walk	down	a	hallway,	you	might	not
notice	the	lights	ahead	of	you	gradually	coming	up	to	full	brightness	and	the
lights	behind	you	fading.	Music	will	move	with	you,	too.	It	will	seem	to	be
everywhere,	although,	in	fact,	other	people	in	the	house	will	be	hearing
entirely	different	music	or	nothing	at	all.	A	movie	or	the	news	will	be	able	to
follow	you	around	the	house,	too.	If	you	get	a	phone	call,	only	the	handset

nearest	you	will	ring.
Computer	rendering	of	the	Gateses'	future	home,	showing	the	staircase	and
formal	dining	room
You	won't	be	confronted	by	the	technology,	but	it	will	be	readily	and	easily
available.	Handheld	remote	controls	will	put	you	in	charge	of	your	immediate
environment	and	of	the	house's	entertainment	system.	The	remote	will	extend
the	capabilities	of	the	pin.	It	will	not	only	let	the	house	identify	and	locate
you,	it	will	also	allow	you	to	give	instructions.	You'll	use	the	controls	to	tell
the	monitors	in	a	room	to	become	visible	and	what	to	display.	You'll	be	able
to	choose	from	among	thousands	of	pictures,	recordings,	movies,	and
television	programs,	and	you'll	have	all	sorts	of	options	available	for	selecting
information.
A	console,	which	will	be	the	equivalent	of	a	keyboard	that	lets	you	give	very
specific	instructions,	will	be	discreetly	visible	in	each	room.	I	want	consoles
that	are	noticeable	to	those	who	need	them,	but	that	don't	invite	attention.	A
characteristic,	easy-to-identify	feature	will	alert	the	user	to	the	identity	and
whereabouts	of	the	consoles.	The	telephone	has	already	made	this	transition.
It	doesn't	attract	particular	attention	to	itself;	most	of	us	are	comfortable
putting	a	nondescript	phone	on	an	end	table.
Every	computerized	system	should	be	made	so	simple	and	natural	to	use	that
people	don't	give	it	a	second	thought.	But	simple	is	difficult.	Still,	computers
get	easier	to	use	every	year,	and	trial-and-error	in	my	house	will	help	us	learn
how	to	create	a	really	simple	system.	You	will	be	able	to	be	indirect	about
your	instructions	and	requests.	For	example,	you	won't	have	to	ask	for	a	song
by	name.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	the	house	to	play	the	latest	hits,	or	songs	by
a	particular	artist,	or	songs	that	were	performed	at	Woodstock,	or	music
composed	in	eighteenth-century	Vienna,	or	songs	with	the	word	"yellow"	in
their	titles.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	for	songs	that	you	have	categorized	with	a
certain	adjective,	or	songs	that	haven't	been	played	before	when	a	particular

person	was	visiting	the	house.	I	might	program	classical	music	as	background
for	contemplating	and	something	more	modern	and	energetic	to	play	while
I'm	exercising.	If	you	want	to	watch	the	movie	that	won	the	1957	Academy
Award	for	best	picture,	you	can	ask	for	it	that	way—and	see	The	Bridge	on
the	River	Kwai.	You	could	find	the	same	movie	by	asking	for	films	starring
Alec	Guinness	or	William	Holden	or	ones	about	prison	camps.
Prototype	of	a	home	control	console
If	you're	planning	to	visit	Hong	Kong	soon,	you	might	ask	the	screen	in	your
room	to	show	you	pictures	of	the	city.	It	will	seem	to	you	as	if	the
photographs	are	displayed	everywhere,	although	actually	the	images	will
materialize	on	the	walls	of	rooms	just	before	you	walk	in	and	vanish	after	you
leave.	If	you	and	I	are	enjoying	different	things	and	one	of	us	walks	into	a
room	where	the	other	is	sitting,	the	house	will	follow	predetermined	rules
about	what	to	do.	For	example,	the	house	might	continue	the	audio	and	visual
imagery	for	the	person	who	was	in	the	room	first,	or	it	might	change
programming	to	something	it	knows	both	of	us	like.
A	house	that	tracks	its	occupants	in	order	to	meet	their	particular	needs
combines	two	traditions.	The	first	is	the	tradition	of	unobtrusive	service,	and
the	other	is	that	an	object	we	carry	entitles	us	to	be	treated	in	a	certain	way.
You're	already	used	to	the	idea	that	an	object	can	authenticate	you.	It	can
inform	people	or	machinery	that	you	have	permission	to	do	something	such	as
open	a	locked	door,	get	on	an	airplane,	or	use	a	specific	line	of	credit—yours
—to	make	a	purchase.	Keys,	electronic	entry	cards,	driver's	licenses,
passports,	name	badges,	credit	cards,	and	tickets	are	all	forms	of
authentication.	If	I	give	you	the	key	to	my	car,	the	car	allows	you	to	get	in,
start	the	engine,	and	drive	away.	You	might	say	that	the	car	trusts	you	because
you	carry	its	keys.	If	I	give	a	parking	attendant	a	key	that	fits	my	automobile's
ignition	but	not	its	trunk,	the	car	lets	him	drive	but	not	open	the	trunk.	It's	no
different	with	my	house,	which	will	make	various	amenities	available	to	you
based	on	the	electronic	key	you	carry.

None	of	this	is	really	so	radical.	Some	visionaries	are	predicting	that	within
the	next	ten	years	there	will	be	lots	of	robots	wandering	around	helping	us	out
with	various	household	chores.	I	am	certainly	not	preparing	for	that,	because	I
think	it	will	be	many	decades	before	robots	are	practical.	The	only	ones	I
expect	to	see	in	widespread	use	soon	are	intelligent	toys.	Kids	will	be	able	to
program	them	to	respond	to	different	situations	and	even	to	speak	in	the
voices	of	favorite	characters.	These	toy	robots	will	be	able	to	be	programmed
in	a	limited	number	of	ways.	They	will	have	limited	vision,	know	the	distance
to	the	wall	in	each	direction,	the	time,	the	lighting	conditions,	and	accept
limited	speech	input.	I	think	it	would	have	been	cool	to	have	had	a	toy-size
car	I	could	have	talked	to	and	programmed	to	respond	to	my	instructions.
Other	than	toys,	the	other	major	uses	for	robotic	devices	I	see	are	for	military
applications.	The	reason	I	doubt	intelligent	robots	will	provide	much	help	in
actual	housework	in	the	foreseeable	future	is	that	it	takes	a	great	deal	of	visual
intelligence	and	dexterity	to	prepare	food	or	change	diapers.	Pool	cleaning,
lawn	mowing,	and	perhaps	even	vacuum	cleaning	can	be	done	with	a
relatively	dumb	system,	but	once	we	get	beyond	tasks	where	you	just	push
something	around,	it	is	very	hard	to	design	a	machine	that	would	be	able	to
recognize	and	respond	to	all	of	the	contingencies	that	come	along.
The	systems	I	am	building	into	the	house	are	designed	to	make	it	easier	to	live
in,	but	I	won't	know	for	sure	if	they	are	worthwhile	until	I	move	in.	I'm
experimenting	and	learning	all	the	time.	The	design	team	used	my	guest
cottage,	which	was	built	before	the	house,	as	a	sort	of	test	laboratory	for	home
instrumentation.	Because	some	people	like	the	temperature	warmer	than
others	do,	the	cottage's	software	sets	its	temperature	in	reaction	to	who	is
inside,	and	the	time	of	day.	The	cottage	knows	to	make	the	temperature	toasty
on	a	cold	morning	before	a	guest	is	out	of	bed.	In	the	evening,	when	it's	dark
outside,	the	cottage's	lights	dim	if	a	television	is	on.	If	someone	is	in	the
cottage	during	the	day,	the	cottage	matches	its	inside	brightness	to	that	of	the
outdoors.	Of	course	the	occupant	can	always	give	explicit	directions	to
overrule	the	settings.
This	sort	of	instrumentation	can	provide	significant	energy	savings.	A	number
of	electric	utilities	are	testing	a	network	to	monitor	the	use	of	energy	in
individual	homes.	This	would	end	the	expensive	practice	of	having	meter
readers	come	to	each	home	every	month	or	two,	but	more	important,
computers	in	the	home	and	at	the	utility	company	will	be	able	to	manage	the
minute-by-minute	demand	for	power	at	various	times	of	the	day.	Energy-
demand	management	can	save	a	lot======================================================== The	Road	Ahead
by	Bill	Gates
with	Nathon	Myhrvold
and	Peter	Rinearson

To	my	parents

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Bringing	a	major	software	project	to	market	can	require	the	combined	talents
of	hundreds	of	people.	Not	quite	that	many	helped	me	with	this	book,	but	I
certainly	couldn't	have	done	it	alone.	If	I've	inadvertently	left	someone	out
below,	I'm	really	sorry,	and	thank	you	too.
For	everything	from	conception	to	marketing,	and	lots	of	stops	along	the	way,
thanks	to	Jonathan	Lazarus	and	his	team:	Kelli	Jerome,	Mary	Engstrom,
Wendy	Langen,	and	Debbie	Walker.	Without	Jonathan's	guidance	and
persistence	this	book	never	would	have	happened.
For	their	helpful	suggestions	throughout	the	project,	special	thanks	to	Tren
Griffin,	Roger	McNamee,	Melissa	Waggener,	and	Ann	Winblad.
For	their	incisive	review	comments,	thanks	to	Stephen	Arnold,	Steve	Ballmer,
Harvey	Berger,	Paul	Carroll,	Mike	Delman,	Kimberly	Ellwanger,	Brian
Fleming,	Bill	Gates,	Sr.,	Melinda	Gates,	Bernie	Gifford,	Bob	Gomulkiewicz,
Meg	Greenfield,	Collins	Hemingway,	Jack	Hitt,	Rita	Jacobs,	Erik	Lacitis,
Mich	Matthews,	Scott	Miller,	Craig	Mundie,	Rick	Rashid,	Jon	Shirley,	Mike
Timpane,	Wendy	Wolf,	Min	Yee,	and	Mark	Zbikowski.
For	help	with	research,	transcription,	and	resource	material,	my	gratitude	to
Kerry	Carnahan,	Ina	Chang,	Peggy	Gunnoe,	Christine	Shannon,	Sean
Sheridan,	and	Amy	Dunn	Stephenson.	I'm	also	grateful	to	Elton	Welke	and
his	able	staff	at	Microsoft	Press,	including	Chris	Banks,	Judith	Bioch,	Jim
Brown,	Sally	Brunsman,	Mary	DeJong,	Jim	Fuchs,	Dail	Magee,	Jr.,	Erin
O'Connor,	JoAnne	Woodcock,	and	Mark	Young.
I'm	also	grateful	to	those	at	my	English-language	publisher,	Viking	Penguin,
for	their	help	and	patience.	In	particular,	I'd	like	to	thank	Peter	Mayer,	Marvin
Brown,	Barbara	Grossman,	Pamela	Dorman,	Cindy	Achar,	Kate	Griggs,
Theodora	Rosenbaum,	Susan	Hans	O'Connor,	and	Michael	Hardart.
Thanks,	too,	for	editorial	help,	go	to	Nancy	Nicholas	and	Nan	Graham.
My	special	gratitude	to	my	collaborators,	Peter	Rinearson	and	Nathan
Myhrvold.

FOREWORD
The	past	twenty	years	have	been	an	incredible	adventure	for	me.	It	started	on
a	day	when,	as	a	college	sophomore,	I	stood	in	Harvard	Square	with	my
friend	Paul	Allen	and	pored	over	the	description	of	a	kit	computer	in	Popular
Electronics	magazine.	As	we	read	excitedly	about	the	first	truly	personal
computer,	Paul	and	I	didn't	know	exactly	how	it	would	be	used,	but	we	were
sure	it	would	change	us	and	the	world	of	computing.	We	were	right.	The
personal-computer	revolution	happened	and	it	has	affected	millions	of	lives.	It
has	led	us	to	places	we	had	barely	imagined.
We	are	all	beginning	another	great	journey.	We	aren't	sure	where	this	one	will
lead	us	either,	but	again	I	am	certain	this	revolution	will	touch	even	more
lives	and	take	us	all	farther.	The	major	changes	coming	will	be	in	the	way
people	communicate	with	each	other.	The	benefits	and	problems	arising	from
this	upcoming	communications	revolution	will	be	much	greater	than	those
brought	about	by	the	PC	revolution.
There	is	never	a	reliable	map	for	unexplored	territory,	but	we	can
learn	important	lessons	from	the	creation	and	evolution	of	the	$120-billion
personal-computer	industry.	The	PC—its	evolving	hardware,	business
applications,	on-line	systems,	Internet	connections,	electronic	mail,	multi-
media	titles,	authoring	tools,	and	games—is	the	foundation	for	the	next
revolution.
During	the	PC	industry's	infancy,	the	mass	media	paid	little	attention	to	what
was	going	on	in	the	brand-new	business.	Those	of	us	who	were	enthralled	by
computers	and	the	possibilities	they	promised	were	unnoticed	outside	our
own	circles	and	definitely	not	considered	trendy.
But	this	next	journey,	to	the	so-called	information	highway,	is	the	topic	of
endless	newspaper	and	magazine	articles,	television	and	radio	broadcasts,
conferences,	and	rampant	speculation.	There	has	been	an	unbelievable
amount	of	interest	in	this	subject	during	the	last	few	years,	both	inside	and
outside	the	computer	industry.	The	interest	is	not	confined	only	to	developed
countries,	and	it	goes	well	beyond	even	the	very	large	numbers	of	personal-
computer	users.
Thousands	of	informed	and	uninformed	people	are	now	speculating	publicly

about	the	information	highway.	The	amount	of	misunderstanding	about	the
technology	and	its	possible	pitfalls	surprises	me.	Some	people	think	the
highway—also	called	the	network—is	simply	today's	Internet	or	the	delivery
of	500	simultaneous	channels	of	television.	Others	hope	or	fear	it	will	create
computers	as	smart	as	human	beings.	Those	developments	will	come,	but	they
are	not	the	highway.
The	revolution	in	communications	is	just	beginning.	It	will	take	place	over
several	decades,	and	will	be	driven	by	new	"applications"—new	tools,	often
meeting	currently	unforeseen	needs.	During	the	next	few	years,	major
decisions	will	have	to	be	made	by	governments,	companies,	and	individuals.
These	decisions	will	have	an	impact	on	the	way	the	highway	will	roll	out	and
how	much	benefit	those	deciding	will	realize.	It	is	crucial	that	a	broad	set	of
people—not	just	technologists	or	those	who	happen	to	be	in	the	computer
industry—participate	in	the	debate	about	how	this	technology	should	be
shaped.	If	that	can	be	done,	the	highway	will	serve	the	purposes	users	want.
Then	it	will	gain	broad	acceptance	and	become	a	reality.
I'm	writing	this	book	now	as	part	of	my	contribution	to	the	debate	and,
although	it's	a	tall	order,	I	hope	it	can	serve	as	a	travel	guide	for	the
forthcoming	journey.	I	do	this	with	some	trepidation.	We've	all	smiled	at
predictions	from	the	past	that	look	silly	today.	You	can	flip	through	old
Popular	Science	magazines	and	read	about	conveniences	to	come,	such	as	the
family	helicopter	and	nuclear	power	"too	cheap	to	meter."	History	is	full	of
now	ironic	examples—the	Oxford	professor	who	in	1878	dismissed	the
electric	light	as	a	gimmick;	the	commissioner	of	U.S.	patents	who	in	1899
asked	that	his	office	be	abolished	because	"everything	that	can	be	invented
has	been	invented."	This	is	meant	to	be	a	serious	book,	although	ten	years
from	now	it	may	not	appear	that	way.	What	I've	said	that	turned	out	to	be
right	will	be	considered	obvious	and	what	was	wrong	will	be	humorous.
I	believe	the	course	of	the	creation	of	the	highway	will	mirror,	in	many	ways,
the	history	of	the	personal-computer	industry.	I'm	including	a	bit	of	my
history—yes,	I	too	talk	about	the	house—and	that	of	computing	in	general,	to
help	explain	some	concepts	and	lessons	from	the	past.	Anyone	expecting	an
autobiography	or	a	treatise	on	what	it's	like	to	have	been	as	lucky	as	I	have
been	will	be	disappointed.	Perhaps	when	I've	retired	I	will	get	around	to
writing	that	book.	This	book	looks	primarily	to	the	future.
Anyone	hoping	for	a	technological	treatise	will	be	disappointed,	too.
Everyone	will	be	touched	by	the	information	highway,	and	everyone	ought	to
be	able	to	understand	its	implications.	That's	why	my	goal	from	the	very

beginning	was	to	write	a	book	that	as	many	people	as	possible	could
understand.
The	process	of	thinking	about	and	writing	The	Road	Ahead	took	longer	than	I
expected.	Indeed,	estimating	the	time	it	would	take	proved	to	be	as	difficult	as
projecting	the	development	schedule	of	a	major	software	project.	Even	with
able	help	from	Peter	Rinearson	and	Nathan	Myhrvold,	this	book	was	a	major
undertaking.	The	only	part	that	was	easy	was	the	cover	photo	by	Annie
Leibovitz,	which	we	finished	well	ahead	of	schedule.	I	enjoy	writing	speeches
and	had	thought	writing	a	book	would	be	like	writing	them.	I	innocently
imagined	writing	a	chapter	would	be	the	equivalent	of	writing	a	speech.	The
fallacy	in	my	thinking	was	similar	to	the	one	software	developers	often	run
into	a	program	ten	times	as	long	is	about	one	hundred	times	more	complicated
to	write.	I	should	have	known	better.	To	complete	the	book,	I	had	to	take	time
off	and	isolate	myself	in	my	summer	cabin	with	my	PC.
And	here	it	is.	I	hope	it	stimulates	understanding,	debate,	and	creative	ideas
about	how	we	can	take	advantage	of	all	that's	sure	to	be	happening	in	the
decade	ahead.

THE
ROAD
AHEAD

1
A	REVOLUTION
BEGINS
I	wrote	my	first	software	program	when	I	was	thirteen	years	old.	It	was	for
playing	tic-tac-toe.	The	computer	I	was	using	was	huge	and	cumbersome	and
slow	and	absolutely	compelling.
Letting	a	bunch	of	teenagers	loose	on	a	computer	was	the	idea	of	the	Mothers'
Club	at	Lakeside,	the	private	school	I	attended.	The	mothers	decided	that	the
proceeds	from	a	rummage	sale	should	be	used	to	install	a	terminal	and	buy
computer	time	for	students.	Letting	students	use	a	computer	in	the	late	1960s
was	a	pretty	amazing	choice	at	the	time	in	Seattle—and	one	I'll	always	be
grateful	for.
This	computer	terminal	didn't	have	a	screen.	To	play,	we	typed	in	our	moves
on	a	typewriter-style	keyboard	and	then	sat	around	until	the	results	came
chug-chugging	out	of	a	loud	printing	device	on	paper.	Then	we'd	rush	over	to
take	a	look	and	see	who'd	won	or	decide	our	next	move.	A	game	of	tic-tac-
toe,	which	would	take	thirty	seconds	with	a	pencil	and	paper,	might	consume
most	of	a	lunch	period.	But	who	cared?	There	was	just	something	neat	about
the	machine.
I	realized	later	part	of	the	appeal	was	that	here	was	an	enormous,	expensive,
grown-up	machine	and	we,	the	kids,	could	control	it.	We	were	too	young	to
drive	or	to	do	any	of	the	other	fun-seeming	adult	activities,	but	we	could	give
this	big	machine	orders	and	it	would	always	obey.	Computers	are	great
because	when	you're	working	with	them	you	get	immediate	results	that	let
you	know	if	your	program	works.	It's	feedback	you	don't	get	from	many	other
things.	That	was	the	beginning	of	my	fascination	with	software.	The	feedback
from	simple	programs	is	particularly	unambiguous.	And	to	this	day	it	still
thrills	me	to	know	that	if	I	can	get	the	program	right	it	will	always	work
perfectly,	every	time,	just	the	way	I	told	it	to.
As	my	friends	and	I	gained	confidence,	we	began	to	mess	around	with	the
computer,	speeding	things======================================================== ked	through	a	wall	of	it	70	miles	thick,	you'd	be	able	to	see	a	candle
burning	on	the	other	side.	Binary	signals,	in	the	form	of	modulated	light,
carry	for	long	distances	through	these	optic	fibers.	A	signal	doesn't	move	any
faster	through	fiber-optic	cable	than	it	does	in	copper	wire;	both	go	at	the
speed	of	light.	The	enormous	advantage	fiber-optic	cable	has	over	wire	is	the
bandwidth	it	can	carry.	Bandwidth	is	a	measure	of	the	number	of	bits	that	can
be	moved	through	a	circuit	in	a	second.	This	really	is	like	a	highway.	An
eight-lane	interstate	has	more	room	for	vehicles	than	a	narrow	dirt	road.	The
greater	the	bandwidth,	the	more	lanes	available—thus,	that	many	more	cars,
or	bits	of	information,	can	pass	in	a	second.	Cables	with	limited	bandwidth,
used	for	text	or	voice	transmissions,	are	called	narrow-band	circuit.	Cables
with	more	capacity,	which	carry	images	and	limited	animation,	are	"midband
capable."	Those	with	a	high	bandwidth,	which	can	carry	multiple	video	and
audio	signals,	are	said	to	have	broadband	capacity.
The	information	highway	will	use	compression,	but	there	will	still	have	to	be
a	great	deal	of	bandwidth.	One	of	the	main	reasons	we	don't	already	have	a
working	highway	is	that	there	isn't	sufficient	bandwidth	in	today's
communications	networks	for	all	the	new	applications.	And	there	won't	be
until	fiber-optic	cable	is	brought	into	enough	neighborhoods.

Fiber-optic	cable	is	an	example	of	technology	that	goes	beyond	what	Babbage
or	even	Eckert	and	Mauchly	could	have	predicted.	So	is	the	speed	at	which
the	performance	and	capacity	of	chips	have	improved.
In	1965,	Gordon	Moore,	who	later	cofounded	Intel	with	Bob	Noyce,
predicted	that	the	capacity	of	a	computer	chip	would	double	every	year.	He
said	this	on	the	basis	of	having	examined	the	price/performance	ratio	of
computer	chips	over	the	previous	three	years	and	projecting	it	forward.	In
truth,	Moore	didn't	believe	that	this	rate	of	improvement	would	last	long.	But
ten	years	later,	his	forecast	proved	true,	and	he	then	predicted	the	capacity
would	double	every	two	years.	To	this	day	his	predictions	have	held	up,	and
the	average—a	doubling	every	eighteen	months—is	referred	to	among
engineers	as	Moore's	Law.
No	experience	in	our	everyday	life	prepares	us	for	the	implications	of	a
number	that	doubles	a	great	number	of	times—exponential	improvements.
One	way	to	understand	it	is	with	a	fable.
King	Shirham	of	India	was	so	pleased	when	one	of	his	ministers	invented	the
game	of	chess	that	he	asked	the	man	to	name	any	reward.
"Your	Majesty,"	said	the	minister,	"I	ask	that	you	give	me	one	grain	of	wheat
for	the	first	square	of	the	chessboard,	two	grains	for	the	second	square,	four
grains	for	the	third,	and	so	on,	doubling	the	number	of	grains	each	time	until
all	sixty-four	squares	are	accounted	for."	The	king	was	moved	by	the	modesty
of	the	request	and	called	for	a	bag	of	wheat.
The	king	asked	that	the	promised	grains	be	counted	out	onto	the	chessboard.
On	the	first	square	of	the	first	row	was	placed	one	small	grain.	On	the	second
square	were	two	specks	of	wheat.	On	the	third	square	there	were	4,	then	8,	16,
32,	64,	128.	By	square	eight	at	the	end	of	the	first	row,	King	Shirham's	supply
master	had	counted	out	a	total	of	255	grains.

Intel	microprocessors	have	doubled	in	transister	count	approximately	every
eighteen	months,	in	accordance	with	Moore's	Law.
The	king	probably	registered	no	concern.	Maybe	a	little	more	wheat	was	on
the	board	than	he	had	expected,	but	nothing	surprising	had	happened.
Assuming	it	would	take	one	second	to	count	each	grain,	the	counting	so	far
had	taken	only	about	four	minutes.	If	one	row	was	done	in	four	minutes,	try	to
guess	how	long	it	would	take	to	count	out	the	wheat	for	all	sixty-four	squares
of	the	board.	Four	hours?	Four	days?	Four	years?
By	the	time	the	second	row	was	complete,	the	supply	master	had	worked	for
about	eighteen	hours	just	counting	out	65,535	grains.	By	the	end	of	the	third
of	the	eight	rows,	it	took	194	days	to	count	the	16.8	million	grains	for	the
twenty-fourth	square.	And	there	were	still	forty	empty	squares	to	go.
It	is	safe	to	say	that	the	king	broke	his	promise	to	the	minister.	The	final
square	would	have	gotten	18,446,744,073,709,551,615	grains	of	wheat	on	the
board,	and	required	584	billion	years	of	counting.	Current	estimates	of	the	age
of	the	earth	are	around	4.5	billion	years.	According	to	most	versions	of	the
legend,	King	Shirham	realized	at	some	point	in	the	counting	that	he	had	been
tricked	and	had	his	clever	minister	beheaded.
Exponential	growth,	even	when	explained,	seems	like	a	trick.
Moore's	Law	is	likely	to	hold	for	another	twenty	years.	If	it	does,	a
computation	that	now	takes	a	day	will	be	more	than	10,000	times	faster,	and
thus	take	fewer	than	ten	seconds.

Laboratories	are	already	operating	"ballistic"	transistors	that	have	switching
times	on	the	order	of	a	femtosecond.	That	is	1/1,000,000,000,000,000	of	a
second,	which	is	about	10	million	times	faster	than	the	transistors	in	today's
microprocessors.	The	trick	is	to	reduce	the	size	of	the	chip	circuitry	and	the
current	flow	so	that	moving	electrons	don't	bump	into	anything,	including
each	other.	The	next	stage	is	the	"single-electron	transistor,"	in	which	a	single
bit	of	information	is	represented	by	a	lone	electron.	This	will	be	the	ultimate
in	low-power	computing,	at	least	according	to	our	current	understanding	of
physics.	In	order	to	make	use	of	the	incredible	speed	advantages	at	the
molecular	level,	computers	will	have	to	be	very	small,	even	microscopic.	We
already	understand	the	science	that	would	allow	us	to	build	these	superfast
computers.	What	we	need	is	an	engineering	breakthrough,	and	these	are	often
quick	in	coming.
By	the	time	we	have	the	speed,	storing	all	those	bits	won't	be	a	problem.	In
the	spring	of	1983,	IBM	released	its	PC/XT,	the	company's	first	personal
computer	with	an	interior	hard	disk.	The	disk	served	as	a	built-in	storage
device	and	held	10	megabytes,	or	"megs,"	of	information,	about	10	million
characters	or	80	million	bits.	Existing	customers	who	wanted	to	add	these	10
megs	to	their	original	computers	could,	for	a	price.	IBM	offered	a	$3,000	kit,
complete	with	separate	power	supply,	to	expand	the	computer's	storage.	That's
$300	per	megabyte.	Today,	thanks	to	the	exponential	growth	described	by
Moore's	Law,	personal-computer	hard	drives	that	can	hold	1.2	gigabytes—1.2
billion	characters	of	information—are	priced	at	$250.	That's	21	cents	per
megabyte!	And	we	look	toward	an	exotic	improvement	called	a	holographic
memory,	which	can	hold	terabytes	of	characters	in	less	than	a	cubic	inch	of
volume.	With	such	capability,	a	holographic	memory	the	size	of	your	fist
could	hold	the	contents	of	the	Library	of	Congress.
As	communications	technology	goes	digital,	it	becomes	subject	to	the	same
exponential	improvements	that	have	made	today's	$2,000	laptop	computer
more	powerful	than	a	$10	million	IBM	mainframe	computer	of	twenty	years
ago.
At	some	point	not	far	in	the	future,	a	single	wire	running	into	each	home	will
be	able	to	deliver	all	of	a	household's	digital	data.	The	wire	will	either	be
fiber,	which	is	what	long-distance	telephone	calls	are	carried	on	now,	or
coaxial	cable,	which	currently	brings	us	cable	television	signals.	If	the	bits	are
interpreted	as	voice	calls,	the	phone	will	ring.	If	there	are	video	images,	they
will	show	up	on	the	television	set.	If	they	are	on-line	news	services,	they	will
arrive	as	written	text	and	pictures	on	a	computer	screen.

That	single	wire	bringing	the	network	will	certainly	carry	much	more	than
phone	calls,	movies,	news.	But	we	can	no	more	imagine	what	the	information
highway	will	carry	in	twenty-five	years	than	a	Stone	Age	man	using	a	crude
knife	could	have	envisioned	Ghiberti's	Baptistery	doors	in	Florence.	Only
when	the	highway	arrives	will	all	its	possibilities	be	understood.	However,	the
last	twenty	years	of	experience	with	digital	breakthroughs	allow	us	to
understand	some	of	the	key	principles	and	possibilities	for	the	future.

3
LESSONS	FROM	THE
COMPUTER	INDUSTRY
Success	is	a	lousy	teacher.	It	seduces	smart	people	into	thinking	they	can't
lose.	And	it's	an	unreliable	guide	to	the	future.	What	seems	the	perfect
business	plan	or	latest	technology	today	may	soon	be	as	out-of-date	as	the
eight-track	tape	player,	the	vacuum-tube	television,	or	the	mainframe
computer.	I've	watched	it	happen.	Careful	observation	of	many	companies
over	a	long	period	of	time	can	teach	you	principles	that	will	help	with
strategies	for	the	years	ahead.
Companies	investing	in	the	highway	will	try	to	avoid	repeating	the	mistakes
made	in	the	computer	industry	over	the	past	twenty	years.	I	think	most	of
these	mistakes	can	be	understood	by	looking	at	a	few	critical	factors.	Among
them	are	negative	and	positive	spirals,	the	necessity	of	initiating	rather	than
following	trends,	the	importance	of	software	as	opposed	to	hardware,	and	the
role	of	compatibility	and	the	positive	feedback	it	can	generate.
You	can't	count	on	conventional	wisdom.	That	only	makes	sense	in
conventional	markets.	For	the	last	three	decades	the	market	for	computer
hardware	and	software	has	definitely	been	unconventional.	Large	established
companies	that	one	day	had	hundreds	of	millions	of	dollars	in	sales	and	lots
of	satisfied	customers	had	disappeared	in	a	short	time.	New	companies,	such
as	Apple,	Compaq,	Lotus,	Oracle,	Sun,	and	Microsoft,	appeared	to	go	from
nothing	to	a	billion	dollars	of	revenue	in	a	flash.	These	successes	were	driven,
in	part,	by	what	I	call	the	"positive	spiral"
When	you	have	a	hot	product,	investors	pay	attention	to	you	and	are	willing
to	put	their	money	into	your	company.	Smart	kids	think,	Hey,	everybody's
talking	about	this	company.	I'd	like	to	work	there.	When	one	smart	person
comes	to	a	company,	soon	another	does,	because	talented	people	like	to	work
with	each	other.	This	creates	a	sense	of	excitement.	Potential	partners	and
customers	pay	more	attention,	and	the	spiral	continues,	making	the	next
success	easi======================================================== re	limited,
Minitel's	success	has	fostered	innovations	and	provided	lessons.	France
Telecom	is	investing	in	a	packet	switch	data	network.
In	Germany,	Deutsche	Telekom	lowered	the	price	of	ISDN	service
dramatically	in	1995.	This	has	led	to	a	significant	increase	in	the	number	of
users	connecting	personal	computers.	Bringing	down	ISDN	prices	was	clever,
because	lower	prices	will	foster	the	development	of	applications	that	will	help
hasten	the	arrival	of	a	broadband	system.
The	level	of	PC	penetration	in	business	is	even	higher	in	the	Nordic	countries
than	in	the	United	States.	These	countries	understand	that	their	highly
educated	workforces	will	benefit	from	having	high-speed	connections	to	the
rest	of	the	world.
Although	the	interest	in	high-tech	communications	systems	is	probably
greater	in	Japan	than	in	any	other	country,	it	is	very	difficult	to	predict	the	fate
of	the	information	highway	there.	The	use	of	personal	computers	in
businesses,	schools,	and	homes	is	significantly	less	widespread	in	Japan	than
in	other	developed	countries.	This	is	partly	because	of	the	difficulty	of
entering	kanji	characters	on	a	keyboard,	but	also	because	of	Japan's	large	and
entrenched	market	for	dedicated	word-processing	machines.
Japan	is	second	only	to	the	United	States	in	the	number	of	companies
investing	in	developing	both	highway	building	blocks	and	the	highway's
content.	Many	large	Japanese	companies	have	excellent	technology	and	a
record	of	taking	long-term	approaches	to	their	investments.	Sony	owns	Sony
Music	and	Sony	Pictures,	which	includes	Columbia	Records	and	Columbia
Studios.	Toshiba	has	a	large	investment	in	Time	Warner.	NEC's	corporate
slogan,	"Computers	&	Communication,"	coined	in	1984,	anticipating	the
highway,	is	an	indication	of	its	commitment.
The	cable	industry	in	Japan	was	overregulated	until	quite	recently,	but	the	rate
of	change	is	impressive.	The	Japanese	phone	company,	NTT,	has	the	largest
valuation	of	any	public	company	in	the	world	and	will	play	a	leadership	role
in	every	aspect	of	the	highway	system.
In	South	Korea,	although	significantly	fewer	PCs	per	capita	are	being	sold
there	than	in	the	United	States,	more	than	25	percent	of	the	machines	are
going	into	homes.	This	statistic	demonstrates	how	countries	with	a	strong
family	structure	that	put	great	emphasis	on	getting	ahead	by	educating

children	will	be	fertile	ground	for	products	that	provide	educational
advantages.	One	appropriate	use	of	governmental	authority	will	be	the
creation	of	incentives	to	encourage	low-cost	connections	for	schools	and	to
ensure	that	the	highway	reaches	rural	areas	and	low-income	areas	too.
Australia	and	New	Zealand	are	also	interested	in	the	highway,	partly	because
of	the	great	geographic	distance	between	them	and	other	developed	countries.
The	phone	companies	in	Australia	are	being	privatized	and	the	market	opened
to	competitors,	encouraging	forward-looking	plans.	New	Zealand	has	the
most	open	telecommunications	market	in	the	world,	and	its	newly	privatized
phone	company	has	set	an	example	of	how	effective	privatization	can	be.
I	doubt	that	any	of	the	developed	countries,	including	all	of	Western	Europe,
North	America,	Australia,	New	Zealand,	and	Japan,	will	end	up	more	than	a
year	or	two	ahead	of	or	behind	the	others	unless	poor	political	decisions	are
made.	Within	each	country	some	communities	will	get	service	earlier	than
others	because	of	their	economic	demographics.	Networks	will	go	into	richer
neighborhoods	first	because	that's	where	residents	are	likely	to	spend	more.
Local	regulators	may	even	find	themselves	competing	to	create	favorable
environments	for	the	early	deployment	of	the	highway.	No	taxpayer	money
will	be	needed	to	build	the	highway	in	industrialized	countries	with	pro-
competition	regulations.	The	speed	with	which	the	highway	is	brought
directly	into	homes	will	correlate	in	large	part	with	the	per	capita	gross
domestic	product	(GDP)	of	a	country.	Despite	this,	even	in	developing
countries	the	connections	into	businesses	and	schools	will	have	a	huge	impact
and	reduce	the	income	gap	between	these	countries	and	developed	ones.
Areas	such	as	Bangalore	in	India,	or	Shanghai	and	Guangzhou	in	China,	will
install	highway	connections	to	businesses	that	they	will	use	to	offer	the
services	of	their	highly	educated	workers	to	the	global	market.
In	many	countries	nowadays,	the	top	political	leaders	are	making	plans	to
encourage	highway	investment.	The	competition	among	nations	trying	either
to	take	the	lead	in	development	or	to	make	sure	they	don't	fall	behind	is
creating	a	very	positive	dynamic.	As	different	countries	try	different
approaches,	everyone	will	watch	to	see	what	works	best.	Some	national
governments	may	rationalize	that	if	they	decide	they	must	have	a	network
right	away	and	private	enterprise	is	not	willing	to	build	it,	they	will	have	to
help	build	or	fund	pieces	of	their	information	highway.	A	government
bootstrap	could,	in	principle,	cause	an	information	highway	to	be	built	sooner
than	might	happen	otherwise,	but	the	very	real	possibility	of	an	unattractive
outcome	has	to	be	considered	carefully.	Such	a	country	might	end	up	with	a
boondoggle,	white-elephant	information	highway	built	by	engineers	out	of

touch	with	the	rapid	pace	of	technological	development.
Something	like	this	happened	in	Japan	with	the	Hi-Vision	high-definition
television	project.	MITI,	the	powerful	Ministry	of	International	Trade	and
Industry,	and	broadcasting	company,	and	NHK,	the	government-run	TV
broadcasting	company,	coordinated	an	effort	among	Japanese	consumer-
electronics	companies	to	build	a	new	analog	HDTV	system.	NHK	committed
to	broadcasting	shows	a	few	hours	a	day	in	the	new	format.	Unfortunately,	the
system	was	rendered	obsolete	before	it	was	ever	deployed,	when	it	became
clear	that	digital	technology	was	superior.	Many	Japanese	companies	found
themselves	in	a	difficult	position.	Privately,	they	knew	the	system	was	not	a
good	investment,	but	they	had	to	maintain	their	public	commitments	to	the
government-sponsored	format.	As	I	write	this,	the	"plan	of	record"	in	Japan
remains	to	move	to	this	analog	system,	although	nobody	actually	expects	it	to
happen.	Japan	will,	however,	benefit	from	the	investment	in	developing	high-
definition	cameras	and	displays	that	the	Hi-Vision	project	encouraged.
Building	the	information	highway	will	not	be	as	simple	as	saying	"Run	fiber
everywhere."	Any	government	or	company	getting	involved	will	need	to	track
new	developments	and	be	prepared	to	shift	directions.	Such	flexibility
requires	technological	expertise	that,	with	the	attendant	risks,	is	better
covered	by	industry.
Competition	in	the	private	sector	will	be	fierce	on	many	fronts.	Cable,	phone,
and	other	companies	will	compete	to	provide	the	fiber,	wireless,	and	satellite
infrastructure.	Hardware	companies	will	fight	to	sell	servers,	ATM	switches,
and	set-top	boxes	to	network	companies,	and	PCs,	digital	TVs,	telephones,
and	other	information	appliances	to	consumers.	At	the	same	time	companies
in	the	software	business,	including	Apple,	AT&T,	IBM,	Microsoft,	Oracle,
and	Sun	Microsystems,	will	be	offering	software	components	to	network
providers.	Eventually,	millions	of	companies	and	individuals	will	be	selling
software	applications	and	information,	including	entertainment,	across	the
network	that	springs	up.
I've	discussed	at	some	length	how	critical	it	is	that	the	physical	infrastructure
be	built	out	to	provide	broadband	connections	to	homes.	I	described	the
competition	in	the	United	States,	and	the	strategies	of	the	telephone	and	cable
industries,	the	major	players.	The	cable	companies	are	younger	and	smaller
than	the	big	telephone	companies	and	tend	to	be	more	entrepreneurial.	Cable
television	networks	provide	customers	with	one-way	broadband	video
through	a	web	of	coaxial,	and	sometimes	fiber-optic,	cable.	Although	the
penetration	rate	worldwide	is	quite	low—189	million	subscribers—cable

systems	run	past	nearly	70	percent	of	all	American	homes,	and	into	63	million
of	them.	Already,	cable	systems	are	gradually	being	converted	to	carry	a
digital	signal,	and	a	number	of	cable	companies	are	working	to	provide	PC
users	with	connections	to	the	Internet	and	on-line	services.	They're	gambling
that	many	PC	users	accustomed	to	downloading	information	on	a	telephone
line	at	28,800	bits	per	second	will	be	willing	to	pay	more	to	download
information	through	their	television	cable	at	3	million	bits	per	second.
As	for	the	phone	companies,	they	are	much	stronger	financially.	The
American	telephone	system	is	the	world's	largest	switched-distributed
network	providing	point-to-point	connections.	The	combined	local	telephone
exchange	market,	with	annual	revenues	of	about	$100	billion,	is	far	more
profitable	than	the	$20	billion	U.S.	cable	business.	The	seven	regional	Bell
operating	companies	(RBOCs)	will	compete	with	their	former	parent,	AT&T,
to	provide	long-distance,	cellular,	and	new	services.	But,	like	phone
companies	around	the	world,	the	RBOCs	are	new	to	the	competitive	world,
just	emerging	from	their	heritage	as	heavily	regulated	utilities.
The	local	phone	companies	will	be	motivated	by	increased	competition.	They
are	in	a	defensive	position.	Other	phone	companies	and	cable	companies	are
going	to	want	to	offer	telephone	as	well	as	other	communications	services	in
their	areas.	New	regulations	will	unleash	this	competition	and,	as	I've	already
noted,	the	cost	of	long-distance	voice-telephone	service	will	drop
dramatically.	If	that	happens,	phone	companies	will	be	deprived	of	much	of
their	current	profitable	revenue.
The	companies	providing	local	service	have	slowly	been	introducing
advanced	digital	transmission	capabilities	into	their	networks.	They	haven't
felt	pressure	to	hurry,	because	until	now	it	seemed	they	were	protected	from
competition	by	the	large	financial	barriers	to	market	entry.	They	knew	a
potential	rival	would	have	to	make	a	duplicate	investment	of,	say,	$100
million	in	equipment	in	order	to	compete	in	a	given	community.	But======================================================== The	Road	Ahead
by	Bill	Gates
with	Nathon	Myhrvold
and	Peter	Rinearson

To	my	parents

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Bringing	a	major	software	project	to	market	can	require	the	combined	talents
of	hundreds	of	people.	Not	quite	that	many	helped	me	with	this	book,	but	I
certainly	couldn't	have	done	it	alone.	If	I've	inadvertently	left	someone	out
below,	I'm	really	sorry,	and	thank	you	too.
For	everything	from	conception	to	marketing,	and	lots	of	stops	along	the	way,
thanks	to	Jonathan	Lazarus	and	his	team:	Kelli	Jerome,	Mary	Engstrom,
Wendy	Langen,	and	Debbie	Walker.	Without	Jonathan's	guidance	and
persistence	this	book	never	would	have	happened.
For	their	helpful	suggestions	throughout	the	project,	special	thanks	to	Tren
Griffin,	Roger	McNamee,	Melissa	Waggener,	and	Ann	Winblad.
For	their	incisive	review	comments,	thanks	to	Stephen	Arnold,	Steve	Ballmer,
Harvey	Berger,	Paul	Carroll,	Mike	Delman,	Kimberly	Ellwanger,	Brian
Fleming,	Bill	Gates,	Sr.,	Melinda	Gates,	Bernie	Gifford,	Bob	Gomulkiewicz,
Meg	Greenfield,	Collins	Hemingway,	Jack	Hitt,	Rita	Jacobs,	Erik	Lacitis,
Mich	Matthews,	Scott	Miller,	Craig	Mundie,	Rick	Rashid,	Jon	Shirley,	Mike
Timpane,	Wendy	Wolf,	Min	Yee,	and	Mark	Zbikowski.
For	help	with	research,	transcription,	and	resource	material,	my	gratitude	to
Kerry	Carnahan,	Ina	Chang,	Peggy	Gunnoe,	Christine	Shannon,	Sean
Sheridan,	and	Amy	Dunn	Stephenson.	I'm	also	grateful	to	Elton	Welke	and
his	able	staff	at	Microsoft	Press,	including	Chris	Banks,	Judith	Bioch,	Jim
Brown,	Sally	Brunsman,	Mary	DeJong,	Jim	Fuchs,	Dail	Magee,	Jr.,	Erin
O'Connor,	JoAnne	Woodcock,	and	Mark	Young.
I'm	also	grateful	to	those	at	my	English-language	publisher,	Viking	Penguin,
for	their	help	and	patience.	In	particular,	I'd	like	to	thank	Peter	Mayer,	Marvin
Brown,	Barbara	Grossman,	Pamela	Dorman,	Cindy	Achar,	Kate	Griggs,
Theodora	Rosenbaum,	Susan	Hans	O'Connor,	and	Michael	Hardart.
Thanks,	too,	for	editorial	help,	go	to	Nancy	Nicholas	and	Nan	Graham.
My	special	gratitude	to	my	collaborators,	Peter	Rinearson	and	Nathan
Myhrvold.

FOREWORD
The	past	twenty	years	have	been	an	incredible	adventure	for	me.	It	started	on
a	day	when,	as	a	college	sophomore,	I	stood	in	Harvard	Square	with	my
friend	Paul	Allen	and	pored	over	the	description	of	a	kit	computer	in	Popular
Electronics	magazine.	As	we	read	excitedly	about	the	first	truly	personal
computer,	Paul	and	I	didn't	know	exactly	how	it	would	be	used,	but	we	were
sure	it	would	change	us	and	the	world	of	computing.	We	were	right.	The
personal-computer	revolution	happened	and	it	has	affected	millions	of	lives.	It
has	led	us	to	places	we	had	barely	imagined.
We	are	all	beginning	another	great	journey.	We	aren't	sure	where	this	one	will
lead	us	either,	but	again	I	am	certain	this	revolution	will	touch	even	more
lives	and	take	us	all	farther.	The	major	changes	coming	will	be	in	the	way
people	communicate	with	each	other.	The	benefits	and	problems	arising	from
this	upcoming	communications	revolution	will	be	much	greater	than	those
brought	about	by	the	PC	revolution.
There	is	never	a	reliable	map	for	unexplored	territory,	but	we	can
learn	important	lessons	from	the	creation	and	evolution	of	the	$120-billion
personal-computer	industry.	The	PC—its	evolving	hardware,	business
applications,	on-line	systems,	Internet	connections,	electronic	mail,	multi-
media	titles,	authoring	tools,	and	games—is	the	foundation	for	the	next
revolution.
During	the	PC	industry's	infancy,	the	mass	media	paid	little	attention	to	what
was	going	on	in	the	brand-new	business.	Those	of	us	who	were	enthralled	by
computers	and	the	possibilities	they	promised	were	unnoticed	outside	our
own	circles	and	definitely	not	considered	trendy.
But	this	next	journey,	to	the	so-called	information	highway,	is	the	topic	of
endless	newspaper	and	magazine	articles,	television	and	radio	broadcasts,
conferences,	and	rampant	speculation.	There	has	been	an	unbelievable
amount	of	interest	in	this	subject	during	the	last	few	years,	both	inside	and
outside	the	computer	industry.	The	interest	is	not	confined	only	to	developed
countries,	and	it	goes	well	beyond	even	the	very	large	numbers	of	personal-
computer	users.
Thousands	of	informed	and	uninformed	people	are	now	speculating	publicly

about	the	information	highway.	The	amount	of	misunderstanding	about	the
technology	and	its	possible	pitfalls	surprises	me.	Some	people	think	the
highway—also	called	the	network—is	simply	today's	Internet	or	the	delivery
of	500	simultaneous	channels	of	television.	Others	hope	or	fear	it	will	create
computers	as	smart	as	human	beings.	Those	developments	will	come,	but	they
are	not	the	highway.
The	revolution	in	communications	is	just	beginning.	It	will	take	place	over
several	decades,	and	will	be	driven	by	new	"applications"—new	tools,	often
meeting	currently	unforeseen	needs.	During	the	next	few	years,	major
decisions	will	have	to	be	made	by	governments,	companies,	and	individuals.
These	decisions	will	have	an	impact	on	the	way	the	highway	will	roll	out	and
how	much	benefit	those	deciding	will	realize.	It	is	crucial	that	a	broad	set	of
people—not	just	technologists	or	those	who	happen	to	be	in	the	computer
industry—participate	in	the	debate	about	how	this	technology	should	be
shaped.	If	that	can	be	done,	the	highway	will	serve	the	purposes	users	want.
Then	it	will	gain	broad	acceptance	and	become	a	reality.
I'm	writing	this	book	now	as	part	of	my	contribution	to	the	debate	and,
although	it's	a	tall	order,	I	hope	it	can	serve	as	a	travel	guide	for	the
forthcoming	journey.	I	do	this	with	some	trepidation.	We've	all	smiled	at
predictions	from	the	past	that	look	silly	today.	You	can	flip	through	old
Popular	Science	magazines	and	read	about	conveniences	to	come,	such	as	the
family	helicopter	and	nuclear	power	"too	cheap	to	meter."	History	is	full	of
now	ironic	examples—the	Oxford	professor	who	in	1878	dismissed	the
electric	light	as	a	gimmick;	the	commissioner	of	U.S.	patents	who	in	1899
asked	that	his	office	be	abolished	because	"everything	that	can	be	invented
has	been	invented."	This	is	meant	to	be	a	serious	book,	although	ten	years
from	now	it	may	not	appear	that	way.	What	I've	said	that	turned	out	to	be
right	will	be	considered	obvious	and	what	was	wrong	will	be	humorous.
I	believe	the	course	of	the	creation	of	the	highway	will	mirror,	in	many	ways,
the	history	of	the	personal-computer	industry.	I'm	including	a	bit	of	my
history—yes,	I	too	talk	about	the	house—and	that	of	computing	in	general,	to
help	explain	some	concepts	and	lessons	from	the	past.	Anyone	expecting	an
autobiography	or	a	treatise	on	what	it's	like	to	have	been	as	lucky	as	I	have
been	will	be	disappointed.	Perhaps	when	I've	retired	I	will	get	around	to
writing	that	book.	This	book	looks	primarily	to	the	future.
Anyone	hoping	for	a	technological	treatise	will	be	disappointed,	too.
Everyone	will	be	touched	by	the	information	highway,	and	everyone	ought	to
be	able	to	understand	its	implications.	That's	why	my	goal	from	the	very

beginning	was	to	write	a	book	that	as	many	people	as	possible	could
understand.
The	process	of	thinking	about	and	writing	The	Road	Ahead	took	longer	than	I
expected.	Indeed,	estimating	the	time	it	would	take	proved	to	be	as	difficult	as
projecting	the	development	schedule	of	a	major	software	project.	Even	with
able	help	from	Peter	Rinearson	and	Nathan	Myhrvold,	this	book	was	a	major
undertaking.	The	only	part	that	was	easy	was	the	cover	photo	by	Annie
Leibovitz,	which	we	finished	well	ahead	of	schedule.	I	enjoy	writing	speeches
and	had	thought	writing	a	book	would	be	like	writing	them.	I	innocently
imagined	writing	a	chapter	would	be	the	equivalent	of	writing	a	speech.	The
fallacy	in	my	thinking	was	similar	to	the	one	software	developers	often	run
into	a	program	ten	times	as	long	is	about	one	hundred	times	more	complicated
to	write.	I	should	have	known	better.	To	complete	the	book,	I	had	to	take	time
off	and	isolate	myself	in	my	summer	cabin	with	my	PC.
And	here	it	is.	I	hope	it	stimulates	understanding,	debate,	and	creative	ideas
about	how	we	can	take	advantage	of	all	that's	sure	to	be	happening	in	the
decade	ahead.

THE
ROAD
AHEAD

1
A	REVOLUTION
BEGINS
I	wrote	my	first	software	program	when	I	was	thirteen	years	old.	It	was	for
playing	tic-tac-toe.	The	computer	I	was	using	was	huge	and	cumbersome	and
slow	and	absolutely	compelling.
Letting	a	bunch	of	teenagers	loose	on	a	computer	was	the	idea	of	the	Mothers'
Club	at	Lakeside,	the	private	school	I	attended.	The	mothers	decided	that	the
proceeds	from	a	rummage	sale	should	be	used	to	install	a	terminal	and	buy
computer	time	for	students.	Letting	students	use	a	computer	in	the	late	1960s
was	a	pretty	amazing	choice	at	the	time	in	Seattle—and	one	I'll	always	be
grateful	for.
This	computer	terminal	didn't	have	a	screen.	To	play,	we	typed	in	our	moves
on	a	typewriter-style	keyboard	and	then	sat	around	until	the	results	came
chug-chugging	out	of	a	loud	printing	device	on	paper.	Then	we'd	rush	over	to
take	a	look	and	see	who'd	won	or	decide	our	next	move.	A	game	of	tic-tac-
toe,	which	would	take	thirty	seconds	with	a	pencil	and	paper,	might	consume
most	of	a	lunch	period.	But	who	cared?	There	was	just	something	neat	about
the	machine.
I	realized	later	part	of	the	appeal	was	that	here	was	an	enormous,	expensive,
grown-up	machine	and	we,	the	kids,	could	control	it.	We	were	too	young	to
drive	or	to	do	any	of	the	other	fun-seeming	adult	activities,	but	we	could	give
this	big	machine	orders	and	it	would	always	obey.	Computers	are	great
because	when	you're	working	with	them	you	get	immediate	results	that	let
you	know	if	your	program	works.	It's	feedback	you	don't	get	from	many	other
things.	That	was	the	beginning	of	my	fascination	with	software.	The	feedback
from	simple	programs	is	particularly	unambiguous.	And	to	this	day	it	still
thrills	me	to	know	that	if	I	can	get	the	program	right	it	will	always	work
perfectly,	every	time,	just	the	way	I	told	it	to.
As	my	friends	and	I	gained	confidence,	we	began	to	mess	around	with	the
computer,	speeding	things======================================================== t	leaving	your	house.	Flexibility	is	going	to	be	increasingly
important	as	everyone	tries	to	balance	family	life	with	work	life.	You	won't
always	have	to	travel	to	see	friends	and	family	or	to	play	games.	Cultural
attractions	will	be	available	via	the	information	highway,	although	I'm	not
suggesting	that	a	Broadway	or	West	End	musical	will	be	the	same	experience
in	your	living	room	as	it	is	in	a	New	York	or	London	theater.	However,
improvements	in	screen	sizes	and	resolutions	will	enhance	all	video,
including	movies,	in	the	home.	Educational	programming	will	be	extensive.
All	of	this	will	liberate	those	who	would	like	to	abandon	city	living.
The	opening	of	the	interstate	highway	system	had	a	substantial	effect	on
where	in	the	United	States	people	chose	to	settle.	It	made	new	suburbs
accessible	and	contributed	to	the	culture	of	the	automobile.	There	will	be
significant	implications	for	city	planners,	real	estate	developers,	and	school
districts	if	the	opening	of	the	information	highway	also	encourages	people	to
move	away	from	city	centers.	If	large	pools	of	talent	disperse,	companies	will
feel	even	more	pressure	to	be	creative	about	how	to	work	with	consultants
and	employees	not	located	near	their	operations.	This	could	set	off	a	positive-
feedback	cycle,	encouraging	rural	living.
If	the	population	of	a	city	were	reduced	by	even	10	percent,	the	result	would
be	a	major	difference	in	property	values	and	wear	and	tear	on	transportation
and	other	urban	systems.	If	the	average	office	worker	in	any	major	city	stayed
home	one	or	two	days	a	week,	the	decreases	in	gasoline	consumption,	air
pollution,	and	traffic	congestion	would	be	significant.	The	net	effect,
however,	is	hard	to	foresee.	If	those	who	moved	out	of	cities	were	mostly	the
affluent	knowledge	workers,	the	urban	tax	base	would	be	reduced.	This	would
aggravate	the	inner	city's	woes	and	encourage	other	affluent	people	to	leave.
But	at	the	same	time,	the	urban	infrastructure	might	be	less	heavily	loaded.
Rents	would	fall,	creating	opportunities	for	a	better	standard	of	living	for
some	of	those	remaining	in	the	cities.

It	will	take	decades	to	implement	all	the	major	changes,	because	most	people
remain	comfortable	with	whatever	they	learn	early	and	are	reluctant	to	alter
familiar	patterns.	However,	new	generations	will	bring	new	perspectives.	Our
children	will	grow	up	comfortable	with	the	idea	of	working	with	information
tools	across	distances.	These	tools	will	be	as	natural	to	them	as	a	telephone	or
a	ballpoint	pen	is	to	us.	But	technology	isn't	going	to	wait	until	people	are
ready	for	it.	Within	the	next	ten	years	we	will	start	to	see	substantial	shifts	in
how	and	where	we	work,	the	companies	we	work	for,	and	the	places	we
choose	to	live.	My	advice	is	to	try	to	find	out	as	much	as	possible	about	the
technology	that	will	touch	you.	The	more	you	know	about	it,	the	less
disconcerting	it	will	seem.	Technology's	role	is	to	provide	more	flexibility	and
efficiency.	Forward-looking	business	managers	will	have	lots	of	opportunities
to	perform	better	in	the	years	ahead.

8
FRICTION-FREE
CAPITALISM
When	Adam	Smith	described	the	concept	of	markets	in	The	Wealth	of	Nations
in	1776,	he	theorized	that	if	every	buyer	knew	every	seller's	price,	and	every
seller	knew	what	every	buyer	was	willing	to	pay,	everyone	in	the	"market"
would	be	able	to	make	fully	informed	decisions	and	society's	resources	would
be	distributed	efficiently.	To	date	we	haven't	achieved	Smith's	ideal	because
would-be	buyers	and	would-be	sellers	seldom	have	complete	information
about	one	another.
Not	many	consumers	looking	to	buy	a	car	stereo	have	the	time	or	patience	to
canvass	every	dealer	and	thus	are	acting	on	imperfect	and	limited
information.	If	you've	bought	a	product	for	$500	and	see	it	advertised	in	the
paper	for	$300	a	week	or	two	later,	you	feel	foolish	for	overpaying.	But	you
feel	a	lot	worse	if	you	end	up	in	the	wrong	job	because	you	haven't	done
thorough	enough	research.
A	few	markets	are	already	working	fairly	close	to	Smith's	ideal.	Investors
buying	and	selling	currency	and	certain	other	commodities	participate	in
efficient	electronic	markets	that	provide	nearly	complete	instantaneous
information	about	worldwide	supply,	demand,	and	prices.	Everyone	gets
pretty	much	the	same	deal	because	news	about	all	offers,	bids,	and
transactions	speeds	across	wires	to	trading	desks	everywhere.	However,	most
marketplaces	are	very	inefficient.	For	instance,	if	you	are	trying	to	find	a
doctor,	lawyer,	accountant,	or	similar	professional,	or	are	buying	a	house,
information	is	incomplete	and	comparisons	are	difficult	to	make.
The	information	highway	will	extend	the	electronic	marketplace	and	make	it
the	ultimate	go-between,	the	universal	middleman.	Often	the	only	humans
involved	in	a	transaction	will	be	the	actual	buyer	and	seller.	All	the	goods	for
sale	in	the	world	will	be	available	for	you	to	examine,	compare,	and,	often,
customize.	When	you	want	to	buy	something	you'll	be	able	to	tell	your
computer	to	find	it	for	you	at	the	best	price	offered	by	any	acceptable	source
or	ask	your	computer	to	"haggle"	with	the	computers	of	various	sellers.
Information	about	vendors	and	their	products	and	services	will	be	available	to
any	computer	connected	to	the	highway.	Servers	distributed	worldwide	will

accept	bids,	resolve	offers	into	completed	transactions,	control	authentication
and	security,	and	handle	all	other	aspects	of	the	marketplace,	including	the
transfer	of	funds.	This	will	carry	us	into	a	new	world	of	low-friction,	low-
overhead	capitalism,	in	which	market	information	will	be	plentiful	and
transaction	costs	low.	It	will	be	a	shopper's	heaven.
Every	market,	from	a	bazaar	to	the	highway,	facilitates	competitive	pricing
and	allows	goods	to	move	from	seller	to	buyer	efficiently	with	modest
friction.	This	is	thanks	to	the	market	makers—those	whose	job	it	is	to	bring
buyers	and	sellers	together.	As	the	information	highway	assumes	the	role	of
market	maker	in	realm	after	realm,	traditional	middlemen	will	have	to
contribute	real	value	to	a	transaction	to	justify	a	commission.	For	example,
stores	and	services	that	until	now	have	profited	just	because	they	are
"there"—in	a	particular	geographic	location	may	find	they	have	lost	that
advantage.	But	those	who	provide	added	value	will	not	only	survive,	they	will
thrive,	because	the	information	highway	will	let	them	make	their	services
available	to	customers	everywhere.
This	idea	will	scare	a	lot	of	people.	Most	change	feels	a	bit	threatening,	and	I
expect	dramatic	changes	in	the	business	of	retailing	as	commerce	flows	across
the	highway.	But,	as	with	so	many	changes,	I	think	once	we	get	used	to	it
we'll	wonder	how	we	did	without	it.	The	consumer	will	get	not	only
competitive	cost	savings,	but	also	a	much	wider	variety	of	products	and
services	to	choose	from.	Although	there	may	be	fewer	stores,	if	people
continue	to	enjoy	shopping	in	today's	outlets,	as	many	stores	as	their	demand
justifies	will	remain	available.	And	because	the	highway	will	simplify	and
standardize	shopping,	it	will	also	save	time.	If	you	are	buying	a	gift	for	a
loved	one,	you	will	be	able	to	consider	more	choices	and	often	you	will	find
something	more	imaginative.	You	could	use	the	time	saved	from	shopping	to
think	up	a	fun	clue	to	put	on	the	package,	or	create	a	personalized	card.	Or
you	could	spend	the	time	you	save	with	the	recipient.
We	all	recognize	the	value	of	a	knowledgeable	salesperson	when	we	are
shopping	for	insurance,	clothes,	investments,	jewelry,	a	camera,	a	home
appliance,	or	a	home.	We	also	know	the	salesperson's	advice	is	sometimes
biased	because	he	or	she	is	ultimately	hoping	to	make	a	sale	from	a	particular
inventory.
On	the	information	highway	lots	of	product	information	will	be	available
directly	from	manufacturers.	As	they	do	today,	vendors	will	use	a	variety	of
entertaining	and	provocative	techniques	to	attract	us.	Advertising	will	evolve
into	a	hybrid,	combining	today's	television	commercials,	magazine	ads,	and	a

detailed	sales	brochure.	If	an	ad	catches	your	attention,	you'll	be	able	to
request	additional	information	directly	and	very	easily.	Links	will	let	you
navigate	through	whatever	information	the	advertiser	has	made	available,
which	might	be	product	manuals	consisting	of	video,	audio,	and	text.	Vendors
will	make	getting	information	about	their	products	as	simple	as	possible.
At	Microsoft,	we're	looking	forward	to	using	the	highway	to	get	information
out	about	our	products.	Today	we	print	millions	of	pages	of	product	brochures
and	data	sheets,	and	mail	them	out	to	people	who	ask	for	them.	But	we	never
know	how	much	information	to	put	onto	a	data	sheet;	we	don't	want	to
intimidate	casual	inquirers,	and	yet	there	are	people	out	there	who	want	to
know	all	the	detailed	product	specifications.	Also,	since	the	information
changes	fairly	rapidly,	we	are	often	in	the	position	of	having	just	printed	tens
of	thousands	of	copies	of	some	brochure,	and	then	having	to	throw	them	out
because	they	describe	a	version	of	a	product	we're	replacing.	We	expect	a
high	percentage	of	our	information	dissemination	will	shift	to	electronic
inquiry,	particularly	because	we	serve	computer	users.	We	have	already
eliminated	the	printing	of	millions	of	pages	of	paper	by	sending	quarterly	CD-
ROMs	and	using	on-line	services	to	reach	professional	software	developers,
some	of	Microsoft's	most	sophisticated	customers.
But	you	won't	have	to	depend	only	on	what	we	or	any	other	manufacturer
tells	you.	You'll	be	able	to	examine	product	reviews	in	search	of	less	biased
information.	After	you've	seen	the	advertising,	reviews,	and	multi-media
manuals,	you	might	ask	for	relevant	government	regulatory	data.	You'll	check
to	see	if	the	vendor	has	surveyed	owners.	Then	you	might	dig	deeper	into	one
area	of	particular	interest	to	you—for	instance,	durability.	Or	you	could	seek
the	advice	of	sales	consultants,	human	or	electronic,	who	will	create	and
publish	specialized	reviews	for	all	kinds	of	products,	from	drill	bits	t======================================================== r	car.	With	modern	technology	you	have	to	decide
when	and	where	you	want	to	be	available.	In	the	future,	when	you	will	be	able
to	work	anywhere,	reach	anyone	from	anywhere,	and	be	reached	anywhere,
you	will	be	able	to	determine	easily	who	and	what	can	intrude.	By	explicitly
indicating	allowable	interruptions,	you	will	be	able	to	reestablish	your	home
—or	anywhere	you	choose	—as	your	sanctuary.
The	information	highway	will	help	by	prescreening	all	incoming
communications,	whether	live	phone	calls,	multi-media	documents,	e-mail,
advertisements,	or	even	news	flashes.	Anyone	who	has	been	approved	by	you
will	be	able	to	get	through	to	your	electronic	in-box	or	ring	your	phone.	You
might	allow	some	people	to	send	you	mail	but	not	to	telephone.	You	might	let
others	call	when	you	have	indicated	you're	not	busy	and	let	still	others	get
through	anytime.	You	won't	want	to	receive	thousands	of	unsolicited
advertisements	every	day,	but	if	you	are	looking	for	tickets	to	a	sold-out
concert,	you'll	want	to	get	responses	to	your	solicitations	right	away.
Incoming	communications	will	be	tagged	by	source	and	type—for	instance,
ads,	greetings,	inquiries,	publications,	work-related	documents,	or	bills.	You'll
set	explicit	delivery	policies.	You'll	decide	who	can	make	your	phone	ring
during	dinner,	who	can	reach	you	in	your	car,	or	when	you're	on	vacation,	and
which	kinds	of	calls	or	messages	are	worth	waking	you	for	in	the	middle	of
the	night.	You'll	be	able	to	make	as	many	distinctions	as	you	need	and	to
change	the	criteria	whenever	you	want.	Instead	of	giving	out	your	telephone
number,	which	can	be	passed	around	and	used	indefinitely,	you	will	add	a
welcome	caller's	name	to	a	constantly	updated	list	indicating	your	level	of
interest	in	receiving	his	messages.	If	someone	not	on	any	of	your	lists	wants
to	get	to	you,	he'll	have	to	have	someone	who	is	listed	forward	the	message.
You'll	always	be	able	to	demote	someone	to	a	lower	level	or	delete	a	name
altogether	from	all	level	lists.	If	you	do	that,	to	get	your	attention	the	caller
will	have	to	send	you	a	paid	message,	as	discussed	in	chapter	8.
The	changes	in	technology	will	start	to	influence	architecture.	As	the	ways	in
which	homes	are	used	change,	the	buildings	will	evolve.	Computer-controlled
displays	of	various	sizes	will	be	built	into	the	design	of	the	house.	Wires	to
connect	components	will	be	installed	during	construction,	and	thought	will	be
given	to	the	placement	of	screens	in	relation	to	windows	to	minimize
reflection	and	glare.	When	information	appliances	are	connected	to	the
highway,	there	will	be	less	need	for	many	physical	things—reference	books,
stereo	receivers,	compact	discs,	fax	machines,	file	drawers,	and	storage	boxes
for	records	and	receipts.	A	lot	of	space-consuming	clutter	will	collapse	into

digital	information	that	can	be	recalled	at	will.	Even	old	photographs	will	be
able	to	be	stored	digitally	and	called	up	on	a	screen	instead	of	having	to	sit	in
a	frame.
I've	been	giving	these	details	a	lot	of	thought	because	I'm	building	a	house
now,	and	in	it	I'm	trying	to	anticipate	the	near	future.	My	house	is	being
designed	and	constructed	so	that	it's	a	bit	ahead	of	its	time,	but	perhaps	it
suggests	things	about	the	future	of	homes.	When	I	describe	the	plans,	people
sometimes	give	me	a	look	that	says,	"You're	sure	you	really	want	to	do	this?"
Like	almost	anyone	who	contemplates	building	a	house,	I	want	mine	to	be	in
harmony	with	its	surroundings	and	with	the	needs	of	the	people	who	will
occupy	it.	I	want	it	to	be	architecturally	appealing.	Mostly,	though,	I	want	it	to
be	comfortable.	It's	where	my	family	and	I	will	live.	A	house	is	an	intimate
companion	or,	in	the	words	of	the	great	twentieth-century	architect	Le
Corbusier,	"a	machine	for	living	in."
My	house	is	made	of	wood,	glass,	concrete,	and	stone.	It's	built	into	a	hillside
and	most	of	the	glass	faces	west	over	Lake	Washington	to	Seattle	to	take
advantage	of	the	sunset	and	Olympic	mountain	views.
My	house	is	also	made	of	silicon	and	software.	The	installation	of	silicon
microprocessors	and	memory	chips,	and	the	software	that	makes	them	useful,
will	let	the	house	approximate	some	of	the	features	the	information	highway
will,	in	a	few	years,	bring	to	millions	of	houses.	The	technology	I'll	use	is
experimental	today,	but	over	time	portions	of	what	I'm	doing	could	become
widely	accepted	and	will	get	less	expensive.	The	entertainment	system	will	be
a	close	enough	simulation	of	how	media	usage	will	work	that	I	will	be	able	to
get	a	sense	of	what	it	will	be	like	to	live	with	various	technologies.
It	won't,	of	course,	be	possible	to	simulate	the	highway's	applications,	which
require	that	a	lot	of	people	be	connected.	A	private	information	highway	is	a
little	like	only	one	person	having	a	telephone.	The	really	interesting	highway
applications	will	grow	out	of	the	participation	of	tens	or	hundreds	of	millions
of	people,	who	will	not	just	consume	entertainment	and	other	information,	but
will	create	it,	too.	Until	millions	of	people	are	communicating	with	one
another,	exploring	subjects	of	common	interest	and	making	all	sorts	of	multi-
media	contributions,	including	high-quality	video,	there	won't	be	an
information	highway.
The	cutting-edge	technology	in	the	house	I'm	building	won't	just	be	for
previewing	entertainment	applications.	It	will	also	help	meet	the	usual
domestic	needs:	for	heat,	light,	comfort,	convenience,	pleasure,	and	security.

This	technology	will	be	replacing	older	forms	that	we	take	for	granted	now.	It
wasn't	that	long	ago	that	the	public	would	have	been	amazed	at	the	idea	of	a
house	with	electric	lights,	flush	toilets,	telephones,	and	air-conditioning.	My
goal	is	a	house	that	offers	entertainment	and	stimulates	creativity	in	a	relaxed,
pleasant,	welcoming	atmosphere.	These	desires	aren't	very	different	from
those	of	people	who	could	afford	adventurous	houses	in	the	past.	I'm
experimenting	to	find	out	what	works	best,	but	there's	a	long	tradition	of	that,
too.
In	1925,	when	William	Randolph	Hearst,	the	newspaper	magnate,	moved	into
his	California	castle,	San	Simeon,	he	wanted	the	best	in	modern	technology.
In	those	days	it	was	awkward	and	time-consuming	to	tune	radio	receivers	to
stations,	so	he	had	several	radios	installed	in	the	basement	of	San	Simeon,
each	tuned	to	a	different	station.	The	speaker	wires	ran	to	Hearst's	private
suite	on	the	third	floor,	where	they	were	routed	into	a	fifteenth-century	oak
cabinet.	At	the	push	of	a	button,	Hearst	could	listen	to	the	station	of	his
choice.	It	was	a	marvel	in	its	day.	Today	this	is	a	standard	feature	on	every	car
radio.
I	am	certainly	in	no	way	comparing	my	house	with	San	Simeon,	one	of	the
West	Coast's	monuments	to	excess.	The	only	connection	I'm	making	is	that
the	technological	innovations	I	have	in	mind	for	my	house	are	not	really
different	in	spirit	from	those	Hearst	wanted	in	his.	He	wanted	news	and
entertainment,	all	at	a	touch.	So	do	I.
I	began	thinking	about	building	a	new	house	in	the	late	1980s.	I	wanted
craftsmanship	but	nothing	ostentatious.	I	wanted	a	house	that	would
accommodate	sophisticated,	changing	technology,	but	in	an	unobtrusive	way
that	made	it	clear	that	technology	was	the	servant,	not	the	master.	I	didn't
want	the	house	to	be	defined	by	its	use	of	technology.	Originally	the	house
was	designed	as	a	bachelor	pad,	but	when	Melinda	and	I	got	married	we
changed	the	plan	to	make	it	more	suitable	for	a	family.	For	instance,	the
kitchen	was	improved	so	it	could	better	accommodate	a	family.	However,	the
appliances	have	no	more	advanced	technology	than	you'd	find	in	any	other
well-appointed	kitchen.	Melinda	also	pointed	out	and	corrected	the	fact	that	I
had	a	great	study	but	there	was	no	place	designated	for	her	to	work.
I	found	some	property	on	the	shore	of	Lake	Washington	within	easy
commuting	distance	of	Microsoft.	In	1990,	work	on	a	guest	cottage	began.
Then,	in	1992,	we	began	excavating	and	laying	the	foundation	for	the	main
residence.	This	was	a	big	job,	requiring	a	lot	of	concrete,	because	Seattle	is	an
earthquake	zone	at	least	as	perilous	as	California.

Living	space	will	be	about	average	for	a	large	house.	The	family	living	room
will	be	about	fourteen	by	twenty-eight	feet,	including	an	area	for	watching
television	or	listening	to	music.	And	there	will	be	cozy	spaces	for	one	or	two
people,	although	there	will	also	be	a	reception	hall	to	entertain	one	hundred
comfortably	for	dinner.	I	enjoy	having	get-togethers	for	new	Microsoft
employees	and	summer	hires.	The	house	will	also	have	a	small	movie	theater,
a	pool,	and	a	trampoline	room.	A	sport	court	will	sit	amid	some	trees	near	the
water's	edge,	behind	a	dock	for	water-skiing,	one	of	my	favorite	sports.	A
small	estuary,	to	be	fed	with	groundwater	from	the	hill	behind	the	house,	is
planned.	We'll	seed	the	estuary	with	sea-run	cutthroat	trout,	and	I'm	told	to
expect	river	otters.
Computer	rendering	of	the	Gateses'	future	home,	showing	the	view	from	the
northwest	across	Lake	Washington
If	you	come	to	visit,	you'll	drive	down	a	gently	winding	driveway	that
approaches	the	house	through	an	emergent	forest	of	maple	and	alder,
punctuated	with	Douglas	fir.	Several	years	ago,	decomposing	duff	from	the
forest	floor	of	a	logging	area	was	gathered	and	spread	across	the	back	of	the
property.	All	kinds	of	interesting	things	are	growing	now.	After	a	few
decades,	as	the	forest	matures,	Douglas	fir	will	dominate	the	site,	just	as	the
big	trees	did	before	the	area	was	logged	for	the	first	time	at	the	turn	of	the
twentieth	century.
When	you	stop	your	car	in	the	semicircular	turnaround,	although	you	will	be
at	the	front	door	you	won't	see	much	of	the	house.	That's	because	you'll	be
entering	onto	the	top	floor.	First	thing,	as	you	come	in,	you'll	be	presented
with	an	electronic	pin	to	clip	to	your	clothes.	This	pin	will	connect	you	to	the
electronic	services	of	the	house.	Next,	you	will	descend	either	by	elevator	or
down	a	staircase	that	runs	straight	toward	the	water	under	a	sloping	glass
ceiling	suppo======================================================== their	vacations.	However,	to	edit
video	you	have	to	be	a	professional	with	expensive	equipment.	This	will
change.	Advances	in	PC	word	processors	and	desktop-publishing	software
have	already	made	professional-quality	tools	for	creating	simple	paper
documents	available	relatively	inexpensively	to	millions.	Desktop-publishing
software	has	progressed	to	the	point	that	many	magazines	and	newspapers	are
produced	with	the	same	sort	of	PC	and	software	package	you	can	buy	at	any
local	computer	store	and	use	to	design	an	invitation	to	your	daughter's
birthday	party.	PC	software	for	editing	film	and	creating	special	effects	will
become	as	commonplace	as	desktop-publishing	software.	Then	the	difference
between	professionals	and	amateurs	will	be	one	of	talent	rather	than	access	to
tools.
Georges	Méliès	created	one	of	the	first	special	effects	in	movies	when,	in
1899,	he	turned	a	woman	into	feathers	on	the	screen	in	The	Conjurer,	and
moviemakers	have	been	playing	cinematic	tricks	ever	since.	Recently,
special-effects	technology	has	improved	dramatically	through	the	use	of	the
digital	manipulation	of	images.	First	a	photograph	is	converted	into	binary
information,	which,	as	we	have	seen,	software	applications	are	able	to
manipulate	easily.	Then	the	digital	information	is	altered	and	finally	returned
to	photographic	form,	as	a	frame	in	a	movie.	The	alterations	are	nearly
undetectable	if	well	done,	and	the	results	can	be	spectacular.	Computer
software	gave	life	to	the	dinosaurs	in	Jurassic	Park,	the	thundering
wildebeest	herd	in	The	Lion	King,	and	the	crazy	cartoon	effects	in	The	Mask.
As	Moore's	Law	increases	hardware	speed,	and	software	becomes
increasingly	sophisticated,	there	is	virtually	no	limit	to	what	can	be	achieved.
Hollywood	will	continue	to	push	the	state	of	the	art	and	create	amazing	new
effects.
It	will	be	possible	for	a	software	program	to	fabricate	scenes	that	will	look	as
real	as	anything	created	with	a	camera.	Audiences	watching	Forrest	Gump
could	recognize	that	the	scenes	with	Presidents	Kennedy,	Johnson,	and	Nixon
were	fabricated.	Everyone	knew	Tom	Hanks	hadn't	really	been	there.	It	was	a
lot	harder	to	spot	the	digital	processing	that	removed	Gary	Sinise's	two	good
legs	for	his	role	as	an	amputee.	Synthesized	figures	and	digital	editing	are
being	used	to	make	movie	stunts	safer.	You'll	soon	be	able	to	use	a	standard
PC	to	make	the	software	to	create	the	effects.	The	ease	with	which	PCs	and
photo-editing	software	already	manipulate	complex	images	will	make	it	easy
to	counterfeit	photographic	documents	or	alter	photographs	undetectably.	And

as	synthesis	gets	cheaper	it	will	be	used	more	and	more;	if	we	can	bring
Tyrannosaurus	rex	back	to	life,	can	Elvis	be	far	behind?
Even	those	who	don't	aspire	to	becoming	the	next	C.	B.	DeMille	or	Lina
Wertmuller	will	routinely	include	multi-media	in	the	documents	they
construct	every	day.	Someone	might	start	by	typing,	handwriting,	or	speaking
an	electronic	mail	message:	"Lunch	in	the	park	may	not	be	such	a	great	idea.
Look	at	the	forecast."	To	make	the	message	more	informative,	he	could	then
point	his	cursor	at	an	icon	representing	a	local	television	weather	forecast	and
drag	it	across	his	screen	to	move	the	icon	inside	his	document.	When	his
friends	get	the	message,	they	will	be	able	to	look	at	the	forecast	right	on	their
screens—a	professional-looking	communication.
Kids	in	school	will	be	able	to	produce	their	own	albums	or	movies	and	make
them	available	to	friends	and	family	on	the	information	highway.	When	I
have	time,	I	enjoy	making	special	greeting	cards	and	invitations.	If	I'm
making	a	birthday	card	for	my	sister,	for	instance,	to	personalize	it	I
sometimes	add	pictures	reminding	her	of	fun	events	of	the	past	year.	In	the
future	I'll	be	able	to	include	movie	clips	that	I've
customized	with	only	a	few	minutes'	work.	It	will	be	simple	to	create	an
interactive	"album"	of	photographs,	videos,	or	conversations.	Businesses	of
all	types	and	sizes	will	communicate	using	multi-media.	Lovers	will	use
special	effects	to	blend	some	text,	a	video	clip	from	an	old	movie,	and	a
favorite	song	to	create	a	personal	valentine.
As	the	fidelity	of	visual	and	audio	elements	improves,	reality	in	all	its	aspects
will	be	more	closely	simulated.	This	"virtual	reality,"	or	VR,	will	allow	us	to
"go"	places	and	"do"	things	we	never	would	be	able	to	otherwise.
Vehicle	simulators	for	airplanes,	race	cars,	and	spacecraft	already	provide	a
taste	of	virtual	reality.	Some	of	the	most	popular	rides	at	Disneyland	are
simulated	voyages.	Software	vehicle	simulators,	such	as	Microsoft	Flight
Simulator,	are	among	the	most	popular	games	ever	created	for	PCs,	but	they
force	you	to	use	your	imagination.	Multimillion-dollar	flight	simulators	at
companies	such	as	Boeing	give	you	a	much	better	ride.	Viewed	from	the
outside,	they're	boxy,	stilt-legged	mechanical	creatures	that	would	look	at
home	in	a	Star	Wars	movie.	Inside,	the	cockpit	video	displays	offer
sophisticated	data.	Flight	and	maintenance	instruments	are	linked	to	a
computer	that	simulates	flight	characteristics—including	emergencies—with
an	accuracy	pilots	say	is	remarkable.
A	couple	of	friends	and	I	"flew"	a	747	simulator	a	couple	years	ago.	You	sit

down	to	a	control	panel	in	a	cockpit	identical	to	one	in	a	real	plane.	Outside
the	windows,	you	see	computer-generated	color	video	images.	When	you
"take	off"	in	the	simulator,	you	see	an	identifiable	airport	and	its
surroundings.	The	simulation	of	Boeing	Field,	for	instance,	might	show	a	fuel
truck	on	the	runway	and	Mount	Rainier	in	the	distance.	You	hear	the	rush	of
air	around	wings	that	aren't	there,	the	clunk	of	nonexistent	landing	gear
retracting.	Six	hydraulic	systems	under	the	simulator	tilt	and	shake	the
cockpit.	It's	pretty	convincing.
The	main	purpose	of	these	simulators	is	to	give	pilots	a	chance	to	gain
experience	in	handling	emergencies.	When	I	was	using	the	simulator	my
friends	decided	to	give	me	a	surprise	by	having	a	small	plane	fly	by.	While	I
sat	in	the	pilot's	seat	the	all-too-real-looking	image	of	a	Cessna	flashed	into
view.	I	wasn't	prepared	for	the	"emergency"	and	I	crashed	into	it.
A	number	of	companies,	from	entertainment	giants	to	small	start-ups,	are
planning	to	put	smaller-scale	simulator	rides	into	shopping	malls	and	urban
sites.	As	the	price	of	technology	comes	down,	entertainment	simulators	may
become	as	common	as	movie	theaters	are	today.	And	it	won't	be	too	many
years	until	you'll	be	able	to	have	a	high-quality	simulation	in	your	own	living
room.
Want	to	explore	the	surface	of	Mars?	It's	a	lot	safer	to	do	it	via	VR.	How
about	visiting	somewhere	humans	never	will	be	able	to	go?	A	cardiologist
might	be	able	to	swim	through	the	heart	of	a	patient	to	examine	it	in	a	way
she	never	would	have	been	able	to	with	conventional	instrumentation.	A
surgeon	could	practice	a	tricky	operation	many	times,	including	simulated
catastrophes,	before	she	ever	touches	a	scalpel	to	a	real	patient.	Or	you	could
use	VR	to	wander	through	a	fantasy	of	your	own	design.
In	order	to	work,	VR	needs	two	different	sets	of	technology—software	that
creates	the	scene	and	makes	it	respond	to	new	information,	and	devices	that
allow	the	computer	to	transmit	the	information	to	our	senses.	The	software
will	have	to	figure	out	how	to	describe	the	look,	sound,	and	feel	of	the
artificial	world	down	to	the	smallest	detail.	That	might	sound	overwhelmingly
difficult,	but	actually	it's	the	easy	part.	We	could	write	the	software	for	VR
today,	but	we	need	a	lot	more	computer	power	to	make	it	truly	believable.	At
the	pace	technology	is	moving,	though,	that	power	will	be	available	soon.	The
really	hard	part	about	VR	is	getting	the	information	to	convince	the	user's
senses.
Hearing	is	the	easiest	sense	to	fool;	all	you	have	to	do	is	wear	headphones.	In

real	life,	your	two	ears	hear	slightly	different	things	because	of	their	location
on	your	head	and	the	directions	they	point.	Subconsciously	you	use	those
differences	to	tell	where	a	sound	is	coming	from.	Software	can	re-create	this
by	calculating	for	a	given	sound	what	each	ear	would	be	hearing.	This	works
amazingly	well.	You	can	put	on	a	set	of	headphones	connected	to	a	computer
and	hear	a	whisper	in	your	left	ear	or	footsteps	walking	up	behind	you.
Your	eyes	are	harder	to	fool	than	your	ears,	but	vision	is	still	pretty
straightforward	to	simulate.	VR	equipment	almost	always	includes	a	special
set	of	goggles	with	lenses	that	focus	each	eye	on	its	own	small	computer
display.	A	head-tracking	sensor	allows	the	computer	to	figure	out	which
direction	your	head	is	facing,	so	the	computer	can	synthesize	what	you	would
be	seeing.	Turn	your	head	to	the	right,	and	the	scene	portrayed	by	the	goggles
is	farther	to	the	right.	Lift	your	face,	and	the	goggles	show	the	ceiling	or	sky.
Today's	VR	goggles	are	too	heavy,	too	expensive,	and	don't	have	enough
resolution.	The	computer	systems	that	drive	them	are	still	a	bit	too	slow.	If
you	turn	your	head	quickly,	the	scene	lags	somewhat	behind.	This	is	very
disorienting	and	after	a	short	period	of	time	causes	most	people	to	get
headaches.	The	good	news	is	that	size,	speed,	weight,	and	cost	are	precisely
the	kinds	of	things	that	technology	following	Moore's	Law	will	correct	soon.
Other	senses	are	much	more	difficult	to	fool,	because	there	are	no	good	ways
of	connecting	a	computer	to	your	nose	or	tongue,	or	to	the	surface	of	your
skin.	In	the	case	of	touch,	the	prevailing	idea	is	that	a	full	bodysuit	could	be
made	lined	with	tiny	sensor	and	force	feedback	devices	that	would	be	in
contact	with	the	whole	surface	of	your	skin.	I	don't	think	bodysuits	will	be
common,	but	they'll	be	feasible.
There	are	between	72	and	120	tiny	points	of	color	(called	pixels)	per	inch	on	a
typical	computer	monitor,	for	a	total	of	between	300,000	and	1	million.	A	full
bodysuit	would	presumably	be	lined	with	little	touch	sensor	points—each	of
which	could	poke	one	specific	tiny	spot.	Let's	call	these	little	touch	elements
"tactels."
If	the	suit	had	enough	of	these	tactel======================================================== for	it,	but	also	because	we	wanted	the	public	to	accept	graphical
computing.
Mistakes	such	as	Apple's	decision	to	limit	the	sale	of	its	operating-system
software	for	its	own	hardware	will	be	repeated	often	in	the	years	ahead.	Some

telephone	and	cable	companies	are	already	talking	about	communicating	only
with	the	software	they	control.
1984:	the	Apple	macintosh	computer
It's	increasingly	important	to	be	able	to	compete	and	cooperate	at	the	same
time,	but	that	calls	for	a	lot	of	maturity.
The	separation	of	hardware	and	software	was	a	major	issue	in	the
collaboration	between	IBM	and	Microsoft	to	create	OS/2.	The	separation	of
hardware	and	software	standards	is	still	an	issue	today.	Software	standards
create	a	level	playing	field	for	the	hardware	companies,	but	many
manufacturers	use	the	tie	between	their	hardware	and	their	software	to
distinguish	their	systems.	Some	companies	treat	hardware	and	software	as
separate	businesses	and	some	don't.	These	different	approaches	will	be	played
out	again	on	the	highway.
Throughout	the	1980s,	IBM	was	awesome	by	every	measure	capitalism
knows.	In	1984,	it	set	the	record	for	the	most	money	ever	made	by	any	firm	in
a	single	year—$6.6	billion	of	profit.	In	that	banner	year	IBM	introduced	its
second-generation	personal	computer,	a	high-performance	machine	called	the
PC	AT,	which	incorporated	Intel's	80286	microprocessor	(colloquially	known
as	the	"286").	It	was	three	times	faster	than	the	original	IBM	PC.	The	AT	was
a	great	success,	and	within	a	year	had	more	than	70	percent	of	all	business	PC
sales.
When	IBM	launched	the	original	PC,	it	never	expected	the	machine	to
challenge	sales	of	the	company's	business	systems,	although	a	significant
percentage	of	the	PCs	were	bought	by	IBM's	traditional	customers.	Company
executives	thought	the	smaller	machines	would	find	their	place	only	at	the
low	end	of	the	market.	As	PCs	became	more	powerful,	to	avoid	having	them
cannibalize	its	higher-end	products,	IBM	held	back	on	PC	development.

In	its	mainframe	business,	IBM	had	always	been	able	to	control	the	adoption
of	new	standards.	For	example,	the	company	would	limit	the
price/performance	of	a	new	line	of	hardware	so	it	wouldn't	steal	business
from	existing,	more	expensive	products.	It	would	encourage	the	adoption	of
new	versions	of	its	operating	systems	by	releasing	hardware	that	required	the
new	software	or	vice	versa.	That	kind	of	strategy	might	have	worked	well	for
mainframes,	but	it	was	a	disaster	in	the	fast-moving	personal-computer
market.	IBM	could	still	command	somewhat	higher	prices	for	equivalent
performance,	but	the	world	had	discovered	that	lots	of	companies	made
compatible	hardware,	and	that	if	IBM	couldn't	deliver	the	right	value,
someone	else	would.
Three	engineers	who	appreciated	the	potential	offered	by	IBM's	entry	into	the
personal-computer	business	left	their	jobs	at	Texas	Instruments	and	formed	a
new	company—Compaq	Computer.	They	built	hardware	that	would	accept
the	same	accessory	cards	as	the	IBM	PC	and	licensed	MS-DOS	so	their
computers	were	able	to	run	the	same	applications	as	the	IBM	PC.	The
company	produced	machines	that	did	everything	the	IBM	PCs	did	and	were
more	portable.	Compaq	quickly	became	one	of	the	all-time	success	stories	in
American	business,	selling	more	than	$100	million	worth	of	computers	its
first	year	in	business.	IBM	was	able	to	collect	royalties	by	licensing	its	patent
portfolio,	but	its	share	of	market	declined	as	compatible	systems	came	to
market	and	IBM's	hardware	was	not	competitive.
The	company	delayed	the	release	of	its	PCs	with	the	powerful	Intel	386	chip,
Intel's	successor	to	the	286.	This	was	done	to	protect	the	sales	of	its	low-end
minicomputers,	which	weren't	much	more	powerful	than	a	386-based	PC.
IBM's	delay	allowed	Compaq	to	become	the	first	company	to	introduce	a
386-based	computer	in	1986.	This	gave	Compaq	an	aura	of	prestige	and
leadership	that	previously	had	been	IBM's	alone.
IBM	planned	to	recover	with	a	one-two	punch,	the	first	in	hardware	and	the
second	in	software.	It	wanted	to	build	computers	and	write	operating	systems,
each	of	which	would	depend	exclusively	on	the	other	for	its	new	features	so
competitors	would	either	be	frozen	out	or	forced	to	pay	hefty	licensing	fees.
The	strategy	was	to	make	everyone	else's	"IBM-compatible"	personal
computer	obsolete.
The	IBM	strategy	included	some	good	ideas.	One	was	to	simplify	the	design
of	the	PC	by	taking	many	applications	that	had	formerly	been	selectable
options	and	building	them	into	the	machine.	This	would	both	reduce	costs	and
increase	the	percentage	of	IBM	components	in	the	ultimate	sale.	The	plan	also

called	for	substantial	changes	in	the	hardware	architecture:	new	connectors
and	standards	for	accessory	cards,	keyboards,	mice,	and	even	displays.	To
give	itself	a	further	advantage	IBM	didn't	release	specifications	on	any	of
these	connectors	until	it	had	shipped	the	first	systems.	This	was	supposed	to
redefine	compatibility	standards.	Other	PC	manufacturers	and	the	makers	of
peripherals	would	have	to	start	over—IBM	would	have	the	lead	again.
By	1984,	a	significant	part	of	Microsoft's	business	was	providing	MS-DOS	to
manufacturers	that	built	PCs	compatible	with	IBM's	systems.	We	began
working	with	IBM	on	a	replacement	for	MS-DOS,	eventually	named	OS/2.
Our	agreement	allowed	Microsoft	to	sell	other	manufacturers	the	same
operating	system	that	IBM	was	shipping	with	its	machines.	We	each	were
allowed	to	extend	the	operating	system	beyond	what	we	developed	together.
This	time	it	wasn't	like	when	we	did	MS-DOS.	IBM	wanted	to	control	the
standard	to	help	its	PC	hardware	and	mainframe	businesses.	IBM	became
directly	involved	in	the	design	and	implementation	of	OS/2.
OS/2	was	central	to	IBM's	corporate	software	plans.	It	was	to	be	the	first
implementation	of	IBM's	Systems	Application	Architecture,	which	the
company	ultimately	intended	to	have	as	a	common	development	environment
across	its	full	line	of	computers	from	mainframe	to	midrange	to	PC.	IBM
executives	believed	that	using	the	company's	mainframe	technology	on	the
PC	would	prove	irresistible	to	corporate	customers	who	were	moving	more
and	more	capabilities	from	mainframe	and	mini-computers	to	PCs.	They	also
thought	that	it	would	give	IBM	a	huge	advantage	over	PC	competitors	who
would	not	have	access	to	mainframe	technology.	IBM's	proprietary	extensions
of	OS/2—called	Extended	Edition—included	communications	and	database
services.	And	it	planned	to	build	a	full	set	of	office	applications—to	be	called
OfficeVision—to	work	on	top	of	Extended	Edition.	The	plan	predicted	these
applications,	including	word	processing,	would	allow	IBM	to	become	a	major
player	in	PC-application	software,	and	compete	with	Lotus	and	WordPerfect.
The	development	of	OfficeVision	required	another	team	of	thousands.	OS/2
was	not	just	an	operating	system,	it	was	part	of	a	corporate	crusade.
The	development	work	was	burdened	by	demands	that	the	project	meet	a
variety	of	conflicting	feature	requirements	as	well	as	by	IBM's	schedule
commitments	for	Extended	Edition	and	OfficeVision.	Microsoft	went	ahead
and	developed	OS/2	applications	to	help	get	the	market	going,	but	as	time
went	on,	our	confidence	in	OS/2	eroded.	We	had	entered	into	the	project	with
the	belief	that	IBM	would	allow	OS/2	to	be	enough	like	Windows	that	a
software	developer	would	have	to	make	at	most	only	minor	modifications	to
get	an	application	running	on	both	platforms.	But	after	IBM's	insistence	that

the	applications	be	compatible	with	its	mainframe	and	midrange	systems,
what	we	were	left	with	was	more	like	an	unwieldy	mainframe	operating
system	than	a	PC	one.
Our	business	relationship	with	IBM	was	vital	to	us.	That	year,	1986,	we	had
taken	Microsoft	public	to	provide	liquidity	for	the	employees	who	had	been
given	stock	options.	It	was	about	that	time	Steve	Ballmer	and	I	proposed	to
IBM	that	they	buy	up	to	30	percent	of	Microsoft—at	a	bargain	price—so	it
would	share	in	our	fortune,	good	or	bad.	We	thought	this	might	help	the
companies	work	together	more	amicably	and	productively.	IBM	was	not
interested.
We	worked	extremely	hard	to	make	sure	our	operating-system	work	with
IBM	succeeded.	I	felt	the	project	would	be	a	ticket	to	the	future	for	both
companies.	Instead,	it	eventually	created	an	enormous	rift	between	us.	A	new
operating	system	is	a	big	project.	We	had	our	team	working	outside	Seattle.
IBM	had	teams	in	Boca	Raton,	Florida;	Hursley	Park,	England;	and	later
Austin,	Texas.
But	the	geographical	problems	were	not	as	bad	as	those	that	came	from	IBM's
mainframe	legacy.	IBM's	previous	software	projects	almost	never	caught	on
with	PC	customers	precisely	because	they	were	designed	with	a	mainframe
customer	in	mind.	For	instance,	it	took	three	minutes	for	one	version	of	OS/2
to	"boot"	(to	make	itself	ready	for	use	after	it	was	turned	on).	That	didn't	seem
bad	to	them,	because	in	the	mainframe	world,	booting	could	take	fifteen
minutes.
IBM,	with	more	than	300,000	employees,	was	also	stymied	by	its
commitment	to	company-wide	consensus.	Every	part	of	IBM	was	invited	to
submit	Design	Change	Requests,	which	usually	turned	out	to	be	demands	that
the	personal-computer-system	software	be	changed	to	fit	the	needs	of
mainframe	products	better.	We	got	more	than	10,000	such	requests,	and
talented	people	from	IBM	and	Microsoft	would	sit	and	discuss	them	for	days.
I	remember	change	request	#221:	"Remove	fonts	from	product.	Reason:
Enhancement	to	product's	substance."	Someone	at	IBM	didn't	want	the	PC
operating	system	to	offer	multiple	typefaces	because	a	particular	IBM
mainframe	printer	couldn't	handle	them.
Finally	it	became	clear	that	joint	development	wasn't	going	to	work.	We	asked
IBM	to	let	us	develop	the	new	operating	system	on	our	own	and	license	it	to
them	cheaply.	We'd	make	our	profit	by	selling	the	same	thing	to	other
computer	companies.	But	IBM	had	declared	that	its	own	programmers	had	to

be	involved	in	the	creation	of	any	software	it	considered	strategic.	And
operating-system	software	clearly	wa======================================================== ighway.	We	are	providing	software	tools	to	a	number	of	hardware	companies
building	new	applications.	Many	media	and	communications	companies	from
around	the	world	will	be	working	with	us	and	observing	the	ways	customers
respond	to	the	applications.	It	will	be	critical	to	listen	to	customer	feedback.
You	too	will	be	able	to	read	about	the	results	of	the	highway	trials.	Are	people
gravitating	toward	new	types	of	multiplayer	games?	Are	they	socializing	in
new	ways?	Are	they	working	together	across	the	network?	Are	they	shopping
in	the	new	marketplace?	Are	exciting	applications	you	never	would	have
imagined	coming	along?	Are	people	willing	to	pay	for	these	new	capabilities?
The	answers	to	these	questions	are	the	key	to	how	the	Information	Age
develops.	Mergers	and	mania	are	fun	to	watch.	But	if	you	want	to	know	how
the	race	to	build	the	information	highway	is	really	going,	keep	your	eye	on
PCs	connected	to	the	Internet,	and	on	the	software	applications	that	are
popular	in	highway	trials.	At	least	that's	what	I'm	going	to	do.

12
CRITICAL	ISSUES
This	is	an	exciting	time	in	the	Information	Age.	It	is	the	very	beginning.
Almost	everywhere	I	go,	whether	to	speak	to	a	group	or	to	have	dinner	with
friends,	questions	come	up	about	how	information	technology	will	change	our
lives.	People	want	to	understand	how	it	will	make	the	future	different.	Will	it
make	our	lives	better	or	worse?
I've	already	said	I'm	an	optimist,	and	I'm	optimistic	about	the	impact	of	the
new	technology.	It	will	enhance	leisure	time	and	enrich	culture	by	expanding
the	distribution	of	information.	It	will	help	relieve	pressures	on	urban	areas	by
enabling	individuals	to	work	from	home	or	remote-site	offices.	It	will	relieve
pressure	on	natural	resources	because	increasing	numbers	of	products	will	be
able	to	take	the	form	of	bits	rather	than	of	manufactured	goods.	It	will	give	us
more	control	over	our	lives	and	allow	experiences	and	products	to	be	custom
tailored	to	our	interests.	Citizens	of	the	information	society	will	enjoy	new
opportunities	for	productivity,	learning,	and	entertainment.	Countries	that
move	boldly	and	in	concert	with	each	other	will	enjoy	economic	rewards.
Whole	new	markets	will	emerge,	and	a	myriad	new	opportunities	for
employment	will	be	created.
When	measured	by	decades,	the	economy	is	always	in	upheaval.	For	the	past
few	hundred	years,	every	generation	has	found	more	efficient	ways	of	getting
work	done,	and	the	cumulative	benefits	have	been	enormous.	The	average
person	today	enjoys	a	much	better	life	than	the	nobility	did	a	few	centuries
ago.	It	would	be	great	to	have	a	king's	land,	but	what	about	his	lice?	Medical
advances	alone	have	greatly	increased	life	spans	and	improved	standards	of
living.
Henry	Ford,	in	the	first	part	of	the	twentieth	century,	was	the	automotive
industry,	but	your	car	is	superior	to	anything	he	ever	drove.	It's	safer,	more
reliable,	and	surely	has	a	better	sound	system.	This	pattern	of	improvement
isn't	going	to	change.	Advancing	productivity	propels	societies	forward,	and	it
is	only	a	matter	of	time	before	the	average	person	in	a	developed	country	will
be	"richer"	in	many	ways	than	anyone	is	today.
Just	because	I'm	optimistic	doesn't	mean	I	don't	have	concerns	about	what	is
going	to	happen	to	all	of	us.	As	with	all	major	changes,	the	benefits	of	the

information	society	will	carry	costs.	There	will	be	dislocations	in	some
business	sectors	that	will	create	a	need	for	worker	retraining.	The	availability
of	virtually	free	communications	and	computing	will	alter	the	relationships	of
nations,	and	of	socioeconomic	groups	within	nations.	The	power	and
versatility	of	digital	technology	will	raise	new	concerns	about	individual
privacy,	commercial	confidentiality,	and	national	security.	There	are,
moreover,	equity	issues	that	will	have	to	be	addressed.	The	information
society	should	serve	all	of	its	citizens,	not	only	the	technically	sophisticated
and	economically	privileged.	In	short,	a	range	of	important	issues	confronts
us.	I	don't	necessarily	have	the	solutions,	but,	as	I	started	off	the	book	saying,
now	is	a	good	time	for	a	broad	discussion.	Technological	progress	will	force
all	of	society	to	confront	tough	new	problems,	only	some	of	which	we	can
foresee.	The	pace	of	technological	change	is	so	fast	that	sometimes	it	seems
the	world	will	be	completely	different	from	one	day	to	the	next.	It	won't.	But
we	should	be	prepared	for	change.	Societies	are	going	to	be	asked	to	make
hard	choices	in	such	areas	as	universal	availability,	investment	in	education,
regulation,	and	the	balance	between	individual	privacy	and	community
security.
While	it	is	important	that	we	start	thinking	about	the	future,	we	should	guard
against	the	impulse	to	take	hasty	action.	We	can	ask	only	the	most	general
kinds	of	questions	today,	so	it	doesn't	make	sense	to	come	up	with	detailed,
specific	regulations.	We've	got	a	good	number	of	years	to	observe	the	course
of	the	coming	revolution,	and	we	should	use	that	time	to	make	intelligent
rather	than	reflexive	decisions.
Perhaps	the	most	widespread	and	personal	anxiety	is,	"How	will	I	fit	into	the
evolving	economy?"	Men	and	women	are	worried	that	their	own	jobs	will
become	obsolete,	that	they	won't	be	able	to	adapt	to	new	ways	of	working,
that	their	children	will	get	into	industries	that	will	cease	to	exist,	or	that
economic	upheaval	will	create	wholesale	unemployment,	especially	among
older	workers.	These	are	legitimate	concerns.	Entire	professions	and
industries	will	fade.	But	new	ones	will	flourish.	This	will	be	happening	over
the	next	two	or	three	decades,	which	is	fast	by	historical	standards,	but	may
turn	out	to	be	no	more	disruptive	than	the	pace	at	which	the	microprocessor
revolution	brought	about	its	changes	in	the	workplace,	or	the	upheavals	in	the
airline,	trucking,	and	banking	industries	over	the	last	decade.
Although	the	microprocessor	and	the	personal	computer	that	it	enabled	have
altered	and	even	eliminated	some	jobs	and	companies,	it	is	hard	to	find	any
large	sector	of	the	economy	that	has	been	negatively	affected.	Mainframe,
mini-computer,	and	typewriter	companies	have	downsized,	but	the	computer

industry	as	a	whole	has	grown,	with	a	substantial	net	increase	in	employment.
As	big	computer	companies	such	as	IBM	or	DEC	have	laid	people	off,	many
of	those	workers	have	found	employment	within	the	industry—usually	at
companies	doing	something	related	to	PCs.
Outside	the	computer	industry	it	is	also	hard	to	find	a	complete	business
sector	hurt	by	the	PC.	There	are	some	typesetters	who	were	displaced	by
desktop-publishing	programs—but	for	every	worker	in	that	situation	there	are
several	whose	jobs	desktop	publishing	created.	All	the	change	hasn't	always
been	good	for	all	the	people,	but	as	revolutions	go,	the	one	set	in	motion	by
the	personal	computer	has	been	remarkably	benign.
Some	people	worry	that	there	are	only	a	finite	number	of	jobs	in	the	world,
and	that	each	time	a	job	goes	away	someone	is	left	stranded	with	no	further
purpose.	Fortunately,	this	is	not	how	the	economy	works.	The	economy	is	a
vast	interconnected	system	in	which	any	resource	that	is	freed	up	becomes
available	to	another	area	of	the	economy	that	finds	it	most	valuable.	Each
time	a	job	is	made	unnecessary,	the	person	who	was	filling	that	job	is	freed	to
do	something	else.	The	net	result	is	that	more	gets	done,	raising	the	overall
standard	of	living	in	the	long	run.	If	there	is	a	general	downturn	across	the
economy—a	recession	or	a	depression—there	is	a	cyclical	loss	of	jobs,	but
the	shifts	that	have	come	about	as	a	result	of	technology	have	tended,	if
anything,	to	create	jobs.
Job	categories	change	constantly	in	an	evolving	economy.	Once	all	telephone
calls	were	made	through	an	operator.	When	I	was	a	child,	long-distance	calls
from	our	home	were	made	by	dialing	"0"	and	giving	an	operator	the	number,
and	when	I	was	a	teenager,	many	companies	still	employed	in-house
telephone	operators	who	routed	calls	by	plugging	cables	into	receptacles.
Today	there	are	comparatively	few	telephone	operators,	even	though	the
volume	of	calls	is	greater	than	ever.	Automation	has	taken	over.
Before	the	Industrial	Revolution,	most	people	lived	or	worked	on	farms.
Growing	food	was	mankind's	main	preoccupation.	If	someone	had	predicted
back	then	that	within	a	couple	of	centuries	only	a	tiny	percentage	of	the
population	would	be	needed	to	produce	food,	all	those	farmers	would	have
worried	about	what	everyone	would	do	for	a	living.	The	great	majority	of	the
501	job	categories	recognized	in	1990	by	the	U.S.	Census	Bureau	didn't	even
exist	fifty	years	earlier.	Although	we	can't	predict	new	job	categories,	most
will	relate	to	unmet	needs	in	education,	social	services,	and	leisure
opportunities.

We	know	that	when	the	highway	connects	buyers	and	sellers	directly,	it	will
put	pressure	on	people	who	are	currently	acting	as	middlemen.	This	is	the
same	sort	of	pressure	that	mass	merchants	such	as	WalMart,	Price-Costco,
and	other	companies	with	particularly	efficient	consumer-merchandising
approaches	have	already	put	on	more	traditional	stores.	When	Wal-Mart
moves	into	a	rural	area,	the	merchants	in	the	local	towns	feel	the	pinch.	Some
survive,	some	do	not,	but	the	net	economic	effect	on	the	region	is	modest.	We
may	regret	the	cultural	ramifications,	but	warehouse	stores	and	fast-food
chains	are	thriving	because	consumers,	who	vote	with	their	dollars,	tend	to
support	outlets	that	pass	their	productivity	savings	along	in	the	form	of	lower
prices.
Reducing	the	number	of	middlemen	is	another	way	of	lowering	costs.	It	will
also	cause	economic	shifts,	but	no	faster	than	the	changes	happened	in
retailing	in	the	last	decade.	It	will	take	many	years	for	the	highway	to	be
utilized	so	widely	for	shopping	that	there	will	be	significantly	fewer
middlemen.	There	is	plenty	of	time	to	prepare.	The	jobs	those	displaced
middlemen	change	to	might	not	even	have	been	thought	of	yet.	We'll	have	to
wait	and	see	what	kinds	of	creative	work	the	new	economy	devises.	But	as======================================================== gy	worked.	Virtually	every	personal-computer	manufacturer
licensed	a	programming	language	from	us.	Even	though	the	hardware	of	two
companies'	computers	was	different,	the	fact	that	both	ran	Microsoft	BASIC
meant	they	were	somewhat	compatible.	That	compatibility	became	an
important	part	of	what	people	purchased	with	their	computers.	Manufacturers
frequently	advertised	that	Microsoft	programming	languages,	including
BASIC,	were	available	for	their	computers.
Along	the	way,	Microsoft	BASIC	became	an	industry	software	standard.
Some	technologies	do	not	depend	upon	widespread	acceptance	for	their	value.
A	wonderful	nonstick	frying	pan	is	useful	even	if	you're	the	only	person	who
ever	buys	one.	But	for	communications	and	other	products	that	involve
collaboration,	much	of	the	product's	value	comes	from	its	widespread
deployment.	Given	a	choice	between	a	beautiful,	handcrafted	mailbox	with	an
opening	that	would	accommodate	only	one	size	envelope,	and	an	old	carton
that	everyone	routinely	dropped	all	mail	and	messages	for	you	into,	you'd
choose	the	one	with	broader	access.	You	would	choose	compatibility.
Sometimes	governments	or	committees	set	standards	intended	to	promote
compatibility.	These	are	called	"de	jure"	standards	and	have	the	force	of	law.
Many	of	the	most	successful	standards,	however,	are	"de	facto":	ones	the
market	discovers.	Most	analog	timepieces	operate	clockwise.	English-
language	typewriter	and	computer	keyboards	use	a	layout	in	which	the	keys

across	the	top	letter	row,	left	to	right,	spell	QWERTY.	No	law	says	they	must.
They	work,	and	most	customers	will	stick	with	those	standards	unless
something	dramatically	better	comes	along.
But	because	de	facto	standards	are	supported	by	the	marketplace	rather	than
by	law,	they	are	chosen	for	the	right	reasons	and	replaced	when	something
truly	better	shows	up—the	way	the	compact	disc	has	almost	replaced	the
vinyl	record.
De	facto	standards	often	evolve	in	the	marketplace	through	an	economic
mechanism	very	similar	to	the	concept	of	the	positive	spiral	that	drives
successful	businesses,	in	which	success	reinforces	success.	This	concept,
called	positive	feedback,	explains	why	de	facto	standards	often	emerge	as
people	search	for	compatibility.
A	positive-feedback	cycle	begins	when,	in	a	growing	market,	one	way	of
doing	something	gets	a	slight	advantage	over	its	competitors.	It	is	most	likely
to	happen	with	high-technology	products	that	can	be	made	in	great	volume
for	very	little	increase	in	cost	and	derive	some	of	their	value	from
compatibility.	A	home	video-game	system	is	one	example.	It	is	a	special-
purpose	computer,	equipped	with	a	special-purpose	operating	system	that
forms	a	platform	for	the	game's	software.	Compatibility	is	important	because
the	more	applications—in	this	case,	games—that	are	available,	the	more
valuable	the	machine	becomes	to	a	consumer.	At	the	same	time,	the	more
machines	consumers	buy,	the	more	applications	software	developers	create
for	it.	A	positive-feedback	cycle	sets	in	once	a	machine	reaches	a	high	level	of
popularity	and	sales	grow	further.
Perhaps	the	most	famous	industry	demonstration	of	the	power	of	positive
feedback	was	the	videocassette-recorder	format	battle	of	the	late	1970s	and
early	1980s.	The	persistent	myth	has	been	that	positive	feedback	alone	caused
the	VHS	format	to	win	out	over	Beta,	even	though	Beta	was	technically
better.	Actually,	early	Beta	tapes	only	recorded	for	an	hour—compared	to
three	hours	for	VHS—not	enough	for	a	whole	movie	or	football	game.
Customers	care	more	about	a	tape's	capacity	than	some	engineer's	specs.	The
VHS	format	got	off	to	a	small	lead	over	the	Beta	format	used	by	Sony	in	its
Betamax	player.	JVC,	which	developed	the	VHS	standard,	allowed	other
VCR	manufacturers	to	use	the	VHS	standard	for	a	very	low	royalty.	As	VHS-
compatible	players	proliferated,	video-rental	stores	tended	to	stock	more	VHS
than	Beta	tapes.	This	made	the	owner	of	a	VHS	player	more	likely	than	a
Beta	owner	to	find	the	movie	she	wanted	at	the	video	store,	which	made	VHS
fundamentally	more	useful	to	its	owners	and	caused	even	more	people	to	buy

VHS	players.	This,	in	turn,	further	motivated	video	stores	to	stock	VHS.	Beta
lost	out	as	people	chose	VHS	in	the	belief	that	it	represented	a	durable
standard.	VHS	was	the	beneficiary	of	a	positive-feedback	cycle.	Success	bred
success.	But	not	at	the	expense	of	quality.
While	the	duel	between	the	Betamax	and	VHS	formats	was	going	on,	sales	of
prerecorded	videocassettes	to	U.S.	tape-rental	dealers	were	almost	flat,	just	a
few	million	copies	a	year.	Once	VHS	emerged	as	the	apparent	standard,	in
about	1983,	an	acceptance	threshold	was	crossed	and	the	use	of	the	machines,
as	measured	by	tape	sales,	turned	abruptly	upward.	That	year,	over	9.5	million
tapes	were	sold,	a	more	than	50	percent	increase	over	the	year	before.	In
1984,	tapes	sales	reached	22	million.	Then,	in	successive	years:	52	million,	84
million,	and	110	million	units	in	1987,	by	which	time	renting	movies	had
became	one	of	the	most	popular	forms	of	home	entertainment,	and	the	VHS
machine	had	become	ubiquitous.
This	is	an	example	of	how	a	quantitative	change	in	the	acceptance	level	of	a
new	technology	can	lead	to	a	qualitative	change	in	the	role	the	technology
plays.	Television	is	another.	In	1946,	10,000	television	sets	were	sold	in	the
United	States	and	only	16,000	in	the	next	year.	But	then	a	threshold	was
crossed,	and	in	1948	the	number	was	190,000.	In	successive	years	it	was	1
million	units,	followed	by	4	million,	10	million,	and	steadily	up	to	32	million
sold	in	1955.	As	more	television	sets	were	sold,	more	was	invested	in	creating
programming,	which	in	turn	further	enticed	people	to	buy	television	sets.
For	the	first	few	years	after	they	were	introduced,	audio	compact	disc	(CD)
players	and	discs	didn't	sell	well,	in	part	because	it	was	difficult	to	find	music
stores	that	carried	many	titles.	Then,	seemingly	overnight,	enough	players
were	sold	and	titles	were	available,	and	an	acceptance	threshold	was	crossed.
More	people	bought	players	because	more	titles	were	available,	and	record
companies	made	more	titles	available	on	CDs.	Music	lovers	preferred	the
new,	high-quality	sound	and	convenience	of	compact	discs,	and	they	became
the	de	facto	standard	and	drove	LPs	out	of	the	record	stores.
One	of	the	most	important	lessons	the	computer	industry	learned	is	that	a
great	deal	of	a	computer's	value	to	its	user	depends	on	the	quality	and	variety
of	the	application	software	available	for	it.	All	of	us	in	the	industry	learned
that	lesson—some	happily,	some	unhappily.
In	the	summer	of	1980,	two	IBM	emissaries	came	to	Microsoft	to	discuss	a
personal	computer	they	might	or	might	not	build.
At	the	time,	IBM's	position	was	unchallenged	in	the	realm	of	hardware,	with

a	more	than	80	percent	market	share	of	large	computers.	It	had	had	only
modest	success	with	small	computers.	IBM	was	used	to	selling	big,	expensive
machines	to	big	customers.	IBM's	management	suspected	that	IBM,	which
had	340,000	employees,	would	require	the	assistance	of	outsiders	if	it	was
going	to	sell	little,	inexpensive	machines	to	individuals	as	well	as	companies
anytime	soon.
IBM	wanted	to	bring	its	personal	computer	to	market	in	less	than	a	year.	In
order	to	meet	this	schedule	it	had	to	abandon	its	traditional	course	of	doing	all
the	hardware	and	software	itself.	So	IBM	had	elected	to	build	its	PC	mainly
from	off-the-shelf	components	available	to	anyone.	This	made	a	platform	that
was	fundamentally	open,	which	made	it	easy	to	copy.
Although	it	generally	built	the	microprocessors	used	in	its	products,	IBM
decided	to	buy	microprocessors	for	its	PCs	from	Intel.	Most	important	for
Microsoft,	IBM	decided	to	license	the	operating	system	from	us,	rather	than
creating	software	itself.
Working	together	with	the	IBM	design	team,	we	promoted	a	plan	for	IBM	to
build	one	of	the	first	personal	computers	to	use	a	16-bit	microprocessor	chip,
the	8088.	The	move	from	8	to	16	bits	would	take	personal	computers	from
hobbyist	toys	to	high-volume	business	tools.	The	16-bit	generation	of
computers	could	support	up	to	one	full	megabyte	of	memory—256	times	as
much	as	an	8-bit	computer.	At	first	this	would	be	just	a	theoretical	advantage
because	IBM	initially	intended	to	offer	only	16K	of	memory,	1/64	of	the	total
memory	possible.	The	benefit	of	going	16-bit	was	further	lessened	by	IBM's
decision	to	save	money	by	using	a	chip	that	employed	only	8-bit	connections
to	the	rest	of	the	computer.	Consequently,	the	chip	could	think	much	faster
than	it	could	communicate.	However,	the	decision	to	use	a	16-bit	processor
was	very	smart	because	it	allowed	the	IBM	PC	to	evolve	and	remain	the
standard	for	PCs	to	this	day.
IBM,	with	its	reputation	and	its	decision	to	employ	an	open	design	that	other
companies	could	copy,	had	a	real	chance	to	create	a	new,	broad	standard	in
personal	computing.	We	wanted	to	be	a	part	of	it.	So	we	took	on	the
operating-system	challenge.	We	bought	some	early	work	from	another	Seattle
company	and	hired	its	top	engineer,	Tim	Paterson.	With	lots	of	modifications
the	system	became	the	Microsoft	Disk	Operating	System,	or	MS-DOS.	Tim
became,	in	effect,	the	father	of	MS-DOS.
IBM,	our	first	licensee,	called	the	system	PC-DOS;	the	PC	was	for	personal
computer.	The	IBM	Personal	Computer	hit	the	market	in	August	1981	and

was	a	triumph.	The	company	marketed	it	well	and	popularized	the	term	"PC."
The	project	had	been	conceived	by	Bill	Lowe	and	shepherded	to	completion
by	Don	Estridge.	It	is	a	tribute	to	the	quality	of	the	IBM	people	involved	that
they	were	able	to	take	their	personal	computer	from	idea	to	market	in	less
than	a	year.
Few	remember	this	now,	but	the	original	IBM	PC	actually	shipped	with	a
choice	of	three	operating	systems—our	PC-DOS,	CP/M-86,	and	the	UCSD
Pascal	P-system.	We	knew	that	only	one	of	the	three	could	succeed	and
become	the	standard.	We	wanted	the	same	kinds	of	forces	that	were	putting
VHS	cassettes	into	every	video	store	to	push	MS-DOS	to	become	the
standard.======================================================== ected	to	the	highway	will	help	teachers	monitor,	evaluate,	and
guide	student	performance.	Teachers	will	continue	to	give	homework,	but
soon	their	assignments	will	include	hypertext	references	to	electronic	resource
material.	Students	will	create	their	own	links	and	use	multi-media	elements	in
their	homework,	which	will	then	be	submitted	electronically	on	a	diskette	or
across	the	highway.	Teachers	will	be	able	to	keep	a	cumulative	record	of	a
student's	work,	which	can	be	reviewed	at	any	time	or	shared	with	other
instructors.
Special	software	programs	will	help	summarize	information	on	the	skills,
progress,	interests,	and	expectations	of	students.	Once	teachers	have	enough
information	on	a	student	and	are	relieved	of	a	lot	of	tedious	paperwork,	they
will	have	more	energy	and	time	to	meet	the	revealed	individual	needs	of	that
student.	This	information	will	be	used	to	tailor	classroom	materials	and
homework	assignments.	Teachers	and	parents	will	also	be	able	to	review	and
discuss	the	particulars	of	a	child's	progress	easily.	As	a	result	of	this—and	of
the	common	availability	of	videoconferences—the	potential	for	strong	parent-
teacher	collaboration	will	grow.	Parents	will	be	in	a	better	position	to	help

their	children,	whether	by	creating	informal	study	groups	with	other	parents
or	by	seeking	additional	assistance	for	their	children.
Parents	may	also	help	their	children	at	school	by	teaching	them	to	use	the
software	they	use	in	their	work.	Some	teachers	and	staff	are	already	using
popular	business	software	to	administer	their	activities	and	to	give	students
experience	with	the	tools	of	the	modern	workplace.	Most	college	students	and
an	increasing	number	of	high	schoolers	now	prepare	reports	on	PCs	with
word	processors	instead	of	using	typewriters	or	writing	by	hand.	Spreadsheets
and	charting	applications	are	routinely	used	to	explain	mathematics	and
economic	theories	and	have	become	a	standard	part	of	most	accounting
courses.	Students	and	faculty	have	also	discovered	new	uses	for	popular
business	applications.	For	example,	students	studying	a	foreign	language	can
take	advantage	of	the	major	word-processor	programs'	ability	to	work	in
different	languages.	Such	programs	include	supplemental	tools	for	checking
spellings	and	looking	up	synonyms	in	multilingual	documents.
In	some	families,	children	are	probably	introducing	their	parents	to
computing.	Kids	and	computers	get	along	just	great,	partly	because	kids	aren't
invested	in	established	ways	of	doing	things.	Children	like	to	provoke	a
reaction,	and	computers	are	reactive.	Parents	are	sometimes	surprised	by	how
taken	with	computers	even	their	preschoolers	are,	but	the	fascination	makes
sense	if	you	think	about	how	much	a	young	child	enjoys	interaction—whether
it	is	playing	peek-a-boo	with	a	parent	or	stabbing	at	a	remote	control	and
watching	channels	change.
I	like	to	watch	my	three-year-old	niece	play	with	Just	Grandma	and	Me,	a
Brøderbund	CD-ROM	based	on	a	children's	book.	She	has	memorized	the
dialogue	in	this	cartoon	story	and	talks	along	with	the	characters,	much	as	she
does	when	her	mother	reads	her	a	book.	If	my	niece	uses	the	computer's
mouse	to	click	on	a	mailbox,	the	mailbox	opens	and	a	frog	jumps	out	or
sometimes	a	hand	appears	and	pulls	the	mailbox	door	shut.	Her	ability	to
influence	what	she	sees	on	the	screen—to	answer	the	question	"What	happens
if	I	click	here?"—keeps	her	curiosity	high.	The	interactivity,	combined	with
the	underlying	quality	of	the	storyline,	keeps	her	involved.
I've	always	believed	most	people	have	more	intelligence	and	curiosity	than
current	information	tools	encourage	them	to	use.	Most	people	have	had	the
experience	of	getting	interested	in	a	topic	and	feeling	the	gratifying	sense	of
accomplishment	that	comes	from	finding	good	material	on	it,	and	the	pleasure
of	mastering	the	topic.	But	if	a	search	for	information	brings	you	up	against	a
blank	wall,	you	become	discouraged.	You	begin	to	think	you're	never	going	to

understand	the	subject.	And	if	you	experience	that	natural	reaction	too	often,
especially	when	you're	a	child,	your	impulse	to	try	again	is	diminshed.
I	was	fortunate	to	be	raised	in	a	family	that	encouraged	kids	to	ask	questions.
And	I	was	lucky	in	my	early	teens	to	become	friends	with	Paul	Allen.	Soon
after	I	had	met	Paul,	I	asked	him	where	gasoline	came	from.	I	wanted	to	know
what	it	meant	to	"refine"	gasoline.	I	wanted	to	know	exactly	how	it	was	that
gasoline	could	power	a	car.	I	had	found	a	book	on	the	subject,	but	it	was
confusing.	Gasoline,	however,	was	one	of	the	many	subjects	that	Paul
understood,	and	he	explained	it	in	a	way	that	made	it	interesting	and
understandable	to	me.	You	might	say	my	curiosity	about	gasoline	is	what
fueled	our	friendship.
Paul	had	lots	of	answers	to	things	I	was	curious	about	(and	a	great	collection
of	science	fiction	books	too).	I	was	more	of	a	math	person	than	Paul,	and	I
understood	software	better	than	anyone	he	knew.	We	were	interactive
resources	for	each	other.	We	asked	or	answered	questions,	drew	diagrams,	or
brought	each	other's	attention	to	related	information.	We	liked	to	challenge
and	test	each	other.	This	is	exactly	the	way	the	highway	will	interact	with
users.	Let's	say	another	teenager	wants	to	find	out	about	gasoline—not	in
1970,	but	three	or	four	years	from	now.	He	may	not	be	lucky	enough	to	have
a	Paul	Allen	around,	but	if	his	school	or	library	has	a	computer	linked	to	rich
multi-media	information,	he'll	be	able	to	delve	as	deeply	into	the	topic	as	he
likes.
He'll	see	photos,	videos,	and	animations	explaining	how	oil	is	drilled,
transported,	and	refined.	He'll	learn	the	difference	between	automobile	fuel
and	aviation	fuel—and	if	he	wants	to	know	the	difference	between	a	car's
internal-combustion	engine	and	a	jetliner's	turbine	engine,	all	he'll	have	to	do
is	ask.
He'll	be	able	to	explore	the	complex	molecular	structure	of	gasoline,	which	is
a	combination	of	hundreds	of	distinct	hydrocarbons,	and	learn	about
hydrocarbons	too.	With	all	of	the	links	to	additional	knowledge,	who	knows
what	fascinating	topics	this	exploration	will	lead	him	to.
At	first,	new	information	technology	will	just	provide	incremental
improvements	over	today's	tools.	Wall-mounted	video	white	boards	will
replace	a	teacher's	chalkboard	handwriting	with	readable	fonts	and	colorful
graphics	drawn	from	millions	of	educational	illustrations,	animations,
photographs,	and	videos.	Multi-media	documents	will	assume	some	of	the
roles	now	played	by	textbooks,	movies,	tests,	and	other	educational	materials.

And	because	multi-media	documents	will	be	linked	to	servers	on	the
information	highway,	they	will	be	kept	thoroughly	up-to-date.
CD-ROMs	available	today	offer	a	taste	of	the	interactive	experience.	The
software	responds	to	instructions	by	presenting	information	in	text,	audio,	and
video	forms.	CD-ROMs	are	already	being	used	in	schools	and	by	kids	doing
their	assignments	at	home,	but	they	have	limitations	the	highway	won't.	CD-
ROMs	can	offer	either	a	little	information	about	a	broad	range	of	topics	the
way	an	encyclopedia	does,	or	a	lot	of	information	about	a	single	topic,	such	as
dinosaurs,	but	the	total	amount	of	information	available	at	one	time	is	limited
by	the	capacity	of	the	disc.	And,	of	course,	you	can	use	only	the	discs	you
have	available.	Nevertheless,	they're	a	great	advance	over	just-paper	texts.
Multi-media	encyclopedias	provide	not	only	a	research	tool,	but	all	sorts	of
material	that	can	be	incorporated	into	homework	documents.	These
encyclopedias	are	available	with	teacher's	guides	that	include	suggestions	for
ways	to	use	the	encyclopedias	in	the	classroom	or	as	part	of	assignments.	I
have	been	excited	to	hear	from	teachers	and	students	about	the	ways	they
have	used	our	products—only	a	few	of	which	we	had	anticipated.
CD-ROMs	are	one	clear	precursor	to	the	highway.	The	Internet's	World	Wide
Web	is	another.	The	Web	offers	access	to	interesting,	educational	information,
although	most	of	it	is	still	plain	text.	Creative	teachers	are	already	using	on-
line	services	to	devise	exciting	new	kinds	of	lessons.
Fourth-graders	in	California	have	done	on-line	searches	of	newspapers	to	read
about	the	challenges	Asian	immigrants	face.	Boston	University	has	created
interactive	software	for	high	school	students	that	shows	detailed	visual
simulations	of	chemical	phenomena,	such	as	salt	molecules	dissolving	in
water.
Christopher	Columbus	Middle	School	in	Union	City,	New	Jersey,	was	a
school	created	out	of	crisis.	In	the	late	1980s,	the	state	test	scores	were	so	low
and	the	absentee	and	dropout	rates	were	so	high	among	the	children	of	the
school	district	that	the	state	was	considering	taking	it	over.	The	school
system,	the	teachers,	and	the	parents	(well	over	90	percent	of	whom	were	of
Hispanic	extraction	and	didn't	speak	English	as	a	first	language)	came	up	with
an	innovative	five-year	plan	to	rescue	their	schools.
Bell	Atlantic	(the	local	telephone	company)	agreed	to	help	find	a	special
networked,	multi-media	system	of	PCs	linking	the	students'	homes	with	the
classrooms,	teachers,	and	school	administrators.	The	corporation	initially
provided	140	multi-media	PCs,	enough	for	the	homes	of	the	seventh-graders,

the	homes	of	all	seventh-grade	teachers,	and	at	least	four	per	classroom.	The
computers	were	networked	and	linked	with	high-speed	lines	and	connected	to
the	Internet,	and	the	teachers	were	trained	in	using	the	PCs.	The	teachers	set
up	weekend	training	courses	for	the	parents,	over	half	of	whom	attended,	and
encouraged	the	students	to	use	e-mail	and	the	Internet.
Two	years	later,	parents	are	actively	involved	with	their	children's	use	of	the
home	PCs	and	employ	them	themselves	to	keep	in	touch	with	teachers	and
administrators;	the	dropout	rate	and	absenteeism	are	both	almost	zero,	and	the
students	are	scoring	nearly	three	times	higher	than	the	average	for	all	New
Jersey	inner-city	schools	on	standardized	tests.	And	the	program	has	been
expanded	to	include	the	entire	middle	school.
Raymond	W.	Smith,	chairman======================================================== l	it	into	quadrillions	of	atomistic	packets	of	data.	Once
digital	information	is	stored,	anyone	with	access	and	a	personal	computer	can
instantaneously	recall,	compare,	and	refashion	it.	What	characterizes	this
period	in	history	is	the	completely	new	ways	in	which	information	can	be
changed	and	manipulated,	and	the	increasing	speeds	at	which	we	can	handle
it.	The	computer's	abilities	to	provide	low-cost,	high-speed	processing	and
transmission	of	digital	data	will	transform	the	conventional	communication
devices	in	homes	and	offices.
The	idea	of	using	an	instrument	to	manipulate	numbers	isn't	new.	The	abacus
had	been	in	use	in	Asia	for	nearly	5,000	years	by	1642,	when	the	nineteen-
year-old	French	scientist	Blaise	Pascal	invented	a	mechanical	calculator.	It
was	a	counting	device.	Three	decades	later,	the	German	mathematician
Gottfried	von	Leibniz	improved	on	Pascal's	design.	His	"Stepped	Reckoner"
could	multiply,	divide,	and	calculate	square	roots.	Reliable	mechanical
calculators,	powered	by	rotating	dials	and	gears,	descendants	of	the	Stepped
Reckoner,	were	the	mainstay	of	business	until	their	electronic	counterparts
replaced	them.	When	I	was	a	boy,	a	cash	register	was	essentially	a	mechanical
calculator	linked	to	a	cash	drawer.
More	than	a	century	and	a	half	ago,	a	visionary	British	mathematician
glimpsed	the	possibility	of	the	computer	and	that	glimpse	made	him	famous
even	in	his	day.	Charles	Babbage	was	a	professor	of	mathematics	at
Cambridge	University	who	conceived	the	possibility	of	a	mechanical	device
that	would	be	able	to	perform	a	string	of	related	calculations.	As	early	as	the
1830s,	he	was	drawn	to	the	idea	that	information	could	be	manipulated	by	a
machine	if	the	information	could	be	converted	into	numbers	first.	The	steam-
powered	machine	Babbage	envisioned	would	use	pegs,	toothed	wheels,
cylinders,	and	other	mechanical	parts,	the	apparatus	of	the	then-new	Industrial
Age.	Babbage	believed	his	"Analytical	Engine"	would	be	used	to	take	the
drudgery	and	inaccuracy	out	of	calculating.

He	lacked	the	terms	we	now	use	to	refer	to	the	parts	of	his	machine.	He	called
the	central	processor,	or	working	guts	of	his	machine,	the	"mill."	He	referred
to	his	machine's	memory	as	the	"store."	Babbage	imagined	information	being
transformed	the	way	cotton	was—drawn	from	a	store	(warehouse)	and	milled
into	something	new.
His	Analytical	Engine	would	be	mechanical,	but	he	foresaw	how	it	would	be
able	to	follow	changing	sets	of	instructions	and	thus	serve	different	functions.
This	is	the	essence	of	software.	It	is	a	comprehensive	set	of	rules	a	machine
can	be	given	to	"instruct"	it	how	to	perform	particular	tasks.	Babbage	realized
that	to	create	these	instructions	he	would	need	an	entirely	new	kind	of
language,	and	he	devised	one	using	numbers,	letters,	arrows,	and	other
symbols.	The	language	was	designed	to	let	Babbage	"program"	the	Analytical
Engine	with	a	long	series	of	conditional	instructions,	which	would	allow	the
machine	to	modify	its	actions	in	response	to	changing	situations.	He	was	the
first	to	see	that	a	single	machine	could	serve	a	number	of	different	purposes.
For	the	next	century	mathematicians	worked	with	the	ideas	Babbage	had
outlined	and	finally,	by	the	mid-1940s,	an	electronic	computer	was	built	based
on	the	principles	of	his	Analytical	Engine.	It	is	hard	to	sort	out	the	paternity
of	the	modern	computer,	because	much	of	the	thinking	and	work	was	done	in
the	United	States	and	Britain	during	World	War	II	under	the	cloak	of	wartime
secrecy.	Three	major	contributors	were	Alan	Turing,	Claude	Shannon,	and
John	von	Neumann.
In	the	mid-1930s,	Alan	Turing,	like	Babbage	a	superlative	Cambridge-trained
British	mathematician,	proposed	what	is	known	today	as	a	Turing	machine.	It
was	his	version	of	a	completely	general-purpose	calculating	machine	that
could	be	instructed	to	work	with	almost	any	kind	of	information.
In	the	late	1930s,	when	Claude	Shannon	was	still	a	student,	he	demonstrated
that	a	machine	executing	logical	instructions	could	manipulate	information.
His	insight,	the	subject	of	his	master's	thesis,	was	about	how	computer
circuits—closed	for	true	and	open	for	false—could	perform	logical
operations,	using	the	number	1	to	represent	"true"	and	0	to	represent	"false."
This	is	a	binary	system.	It's	a	code.	Binary	is	the	alphabet	of	electronic
computers,	the	basis	of	the	language	into	which	all	information	is	translated,
stored,	and	used	within	a	computer.	It's	simple,	but	so	vital	to	the
understanding	of	the	way	computers	work	that	it's	worth	pausing	here	to
explain	it	more	fully.
Imagine	you	have	a	room	that	you	want	illuminated	with	as	much	as	250

watts	of	electric	lighting	and	you	want	the	lighting	to	be	adjustable,	from	0
watt	of	illumination	(total	darkness)	to	the	full	wattage.	One	way	to
accomplish	this	is	with	a	rotating	dimmer	switch	hooked	to	a	250-watt	bulb.
To	achieve	complete	darkness,	turn	the	knob	fully	counterclockwise	to	Off	for
0	watt	of	light.	For	maximum	brightness,	turn	the	knob	fully	clockwise	for	the
entire	250	watts.	For	some	illumination	level	in	between,	turn	the	knob	to	an
intermediate	position.
This	system	is	easy	to	use	but	has	limitations.	If	the	knob	is	at	an	intermediate
setting—if	lighting	is	lowered	for	an	intimate	dinner,	for	example—you	can
only	guess	what	the	lighting	level	is.	You	don't	really	know	how	many	watts
are	in	use,	or	how	to	describe	the	setting	precisely.	Your	information	is
approximate,	which	makes	it	hard	to	store	or	reproduce.
What	if	you	want	to	reproduce	exactly	the	same	level	of	lighting	next	week?
You	could	make	a	mark	on	the	switch	plate	so	that	you	know	how	far	to	turn
it,	but	this	is	hardly	exact,	and	what	happens	when	you	want	to	reproduce	a
different	setting?	What	if	a	friend	wants	to	reproduce	the	same	level	of
lighting?	You	can	say,	"Turn	the	knob	about	a	fifth	of	the	way	clockwise,"	or
"Turn	the	knob	until	the	arrow	is	at	about	two	o'clock"	but	your	friend's
reproduction	will	only	approximate	your	setting.	What	if	your	friend	then
passes	the	information	on	to	another	friend,	who	in	turn	passes	it	on	again?
Each	time	the	information	is	handed	on,	the	chances	of	its	remaining	accurate
decrease.
That	is	an	example	of	information	stored	in	"analog"	form.	The	dimmer's
knob	provides	an	analogy	to	the	bulb's	lighting	level.	If	it's	turned	halfway,
presumably	you	have	about	half	the	total	wattage.	When	you	measure	or
describe	how	far	the	knob	is	turned,	you're	actually	storing	information	about
the	analogy	(the	knob)	rather	than	about	the	lighting	level.	Analog
information	can	be	gathered,	stored,	and	reproduced,	but	it	tends	to	be
imprecise—and	runs	the	risk	of	becoming	less	precise	each	time	it	is
transferred.
Now	let's	look	at	an	entirely	different	way	of	describing	how	to	light	the
room,	a	digital	rather	than	analog	method	of	storing	and	transmitting
information.	Any	kind	of	information	can	be	converted	into	numbers	using
only	0s	and	1s.	These	are	called	binary	numbers—numbers	composed	entirely
of	0s	and	1s.	Each	0	or	1	is	called	a	bit.	Once	the	information	has	been
converted,	it	can	be	fed	to	and	stored	in	computers	as	long	strings	of	bits.
Those	numbers	are	all	that's	meant	by	"digital	information."

Instead	of	a	single	250-watt	bulb,	let's	say	you	have	eight	bulbs,	each	with	a
wattage	double	the	one	preceding	it,	from	1	to	128.	Each	of	these	bulbs	is
hooked	to	its	own	switch,	with	the	lowest-watt	bulb	on	the	right.	Such	an
arrangement	can	be	diagrammed	like	this:
By	turning	these	switches	on	and	off,	you	can	adjust	the	lighting	level	in	1-
watt	increments	from	0	watt	(all	switches	off)	to	255	watts	(all	switches	on).
This	gives	you	256	possibilities.	If	you	want	1	watt	of	light,	you	turn	on	only
the	rightmost	switch,	which	turns	on	the	1-watt	bulb.	If	you	want	2	watts	of
light,	you	turn	on	only	the	2-watt	bulb.	If	you	want	3	watts	of	light,	you	turn
on	both	the	1-watt	and	2-watt	bulbs,	because	1	plus	2	equals	the	desired	3
watts.	If	you	want	4	watts	of	light,	you	turn	on	the	4-watt	bulb.	If	you	want	5
watts,	you	turn	on	just	the	4-watt	and	1-watt	bulbs.	If	you	want	250	watts	of
light,	you	turn	on	all	but	the	4-watt	and	1-watt	bulbs.
If	you	have	decided	the	ideal	illumination	level	for	dining	is	137	watts	of
light,	you	turn	on	the	128-,	8-,	and	1-watt	bulbs,	like	this:
This	system	makes	it	easy	to	record	an	exact	lighting	level	for	later	use	or	to
communicate	it	to	others	who	have	the	same	light-switch	setup.	Because	the
way	we	record	binary	information	is	universal—low	number	to	the	right,	high
number	to	the	left,	always	doubling—you	don't	have	to	write	down	the	values
of	the	bulbs.	You	simply	record	the	pattern	of	switches:	on,	off,	off,	off,	on,
off,	off,	on.	With	that	information	a	friend	can	faithfully	reproduce	the	137
watts	of	light	in	your	room.	In	fact,	as	long	as	everyone	involved	double-
checks	the	accuracy	of	what	he	does,	the	message	can	be	passed	through	a

million	hands	and	at	the	end	every	person	will	have	the	same	information	and
be	able	to	achieve	exactly	137	watts	of	light.
To	shorten	the	notation	further,	you	can	record	each	"off"	as	0	and	each	"on"
as	1.	This	means	that	instead	of	writing	down	"on,	off,	off,	off,	on,	off,	off,
on,"	meaning	turn	on	the	first,	the	fourth,	and	the	eighth	of	the	eight	bulbs,
and	leave	the	others	off,	you	write	the	same	information	as	1,	0,	0,	0,	1,	0,	0,
1,	or	10001001,	a	binary	number.	In	this	case	it's	137.	You	call	your	friend
and	say:	"I've	got	the	perfect	lighting	level!	It's	10001001.	Try	it."	Your	friend
gets	it	exactly	right,	by	flipping	a	switch	on	for	each	1	and	off	for	each	0.
This	may	seem	like	a	complicated	way	to	describe	the	brightness	of	a	light
source,	but	it	is	an	example	of	the	theory	behind	binary	expression,	the	basis
of	all	modern	computers.
Binary	expression	made	it	possible	to	take	advantage	of	electric	circuits	to
build	calculators.	This	happened	during	World	War	II	when	a	group	of
mathematicians	led	by	J.	Presper	Eckert	and	John	Mauchly	at	the	University
of	Pennsylvania======================================================== conomics	2010.	The	professor	allowed
you	to	bet	your	whole	grade	on	the	final	if	you	chose.	So	Steve	and	I	focused
on	other	areas	all	semester,	and	did	absolutely	nothing	for	the	course	until	the
week	before	the	last	exam.	Then	we	studied	like	mad	and	ended	up	getting
A's.
After	Paul	Allen	and	I	started	Microsoft,	however,	I	found	out	that	that	sort	of
procrastination	hadn't	been	the	best	preparation	for	running	a	company.
Among	Microsoft's	first	customers	were	companies	in	Japan	so	methodical
that	the	minute	we	got	behind	schedule	they	would	fly	someone	over	to	baby-
sit	us.	They	knew	their	man	couldn't	really	help,	but	he	stayed	in	our	office
eighteen	hours	a	day	just	to	show	us	how	much	they	cared.	These	guys	were
serious!	They	would	ask,	"Why	did	the	schedule	change?	We	need	a	reason.
And	we're	going	to	change	the	thing	that	caused	it	to	happen."	I	can	still	feel
how	painful	being	late	on	some	of	those	projects	got	to	be.	We	improved	and
mended	our	ways.	We're	still	late	with	projects	sometimes	but	a	lot	less	often

than	we	would	have	been	if	we	hadn't	had	those	scary	baby-sitters.
Microsoft	started	out	in	Albuquerque,	New	Mexico,	in	1975	because	that's
where	MITS	was	located.	MITS	was	the	tiny	company	whose	Altair	8800
personal-computer	kit	had	been	on	the	cover	of	Popular	Electronics.	We
worked	with	it	because	it	had	been	the	first	company	to	sell	an	inexpensive
personal	computer	to	the	general	public.	By	1977,	Apple,	Commodore,	and
Radio	Shack	had	also	entered	the	business.	We	provided	BASIC	for	most	of
the	early	personal	computers.	This	was	the	crucial	software	ingredient	at	that
time,	because	users	wrote	their	own	applications	in	BASIC	rather	than	buying
packaged	applications.
In	the	early	days,	selling	BASIC	was	one	of	my	many	jobs.	For	the	first	three
years,	most	of	the	other	professionals	at	Microsoft	focused	solely	on	technical
work,	and	I	did	most	of	the	sales,	finance,	and	marketing,	as	well	as	writing
code.	I	was	barely	out	of	my	teens,	and	selling	intimidated	me.	Microsoft's
strategy	was	to	get	computer	companies	such	as	Radio	Shack	to	buy	licenses
to	include	our	software	with	the	personal	computers	they	sold	(the	Radio
Shack	TRS-80,	for	example)	and	pay	us	a	royalty.	One	reason	we	took	that
approach	was	software	piracy.
In	the	early	years	of	selling	Altair	BASIC,	our	sales	had	been	far	lower	than
the	widespread	usage	of	our	software	suggested	they	should	be.	I	wrote	a
widely	disseminated	"Open	Letter	to	Hobbyists"	asking	the	early	users	of
personal	computers	to	stop	stealing	our	software	so	that	we	could	make
money	that	would	let	us	build	more	software.	"Nothing	would	please	me
more	than	being	able	to	hire	ten	programmers	and	deluge	the	hobby	market
with	good	software,"	I	wrote.	But	my	argument	didn't	convince	many
hobbyists	to	pay	for	our	work;	they	seemed	to	like	it	and	used	it,	but	preferred
to	"borrow"	it	from	each	other.
Fortunately,	today	most	users	understand	that	software	is	protected	by
copyright.	Software	piracy	is	still	a	major	issue	in	trade	relations	because
some	countries	still	don't	have—or	don't	enforce—copyright	laws.	The	United
States	insists	that	other	governments	do	more	to	enforce	copyright	laws	for
books,	movies,	CDs,	and	software.	We	will	have	to	be	extremely	careful	to
make	sure	the	upcoming	highway	doesn't	become	a	pirate's	paradise.
Although	we	were	very	successful	selling	to	U.S.	hardware	companies,	by
1979	almost	half	of	our	business	was	coming	from	Japan,	thanks	to	an
amazing	guy	named	Kazuhiko	(Kay)	Nishi.	Kay	telephoned	me	in	1978	and
introduced	himself	in	English.	He	had	read	about	Microsoft	and	thought	he

should	be	doing	business	with	us.	As	it	happened,	Kay	and	I	had	a	lot	in
common.	We	were	the	same	age,	and	he	too	was	a	college	student	on	leave
because	of	his	passion	for	personal	computers.
We	met	some	months	later	at	a	convention	in	Anaheim,	California,	and	he
flew	back	with	me	to	Albuquerque,	where	we	signed	a	page-and-a-half
contract	that	gave	him	exclusive	distribution	rights	for	Microsoft	BASIC	in
East	Asia.	There	were	no	attorneys	involved,	just	Kay	and	me,	kindred	spirits.
We	did	more	than	$150	million	of	business	under	that	contract—more	than
ten	times	greater	than	we	had	expected.
Kay	moved	fluidly	between	the	business	cultures	of	Japan	and	those	of	the
United	States.	He	was	flamboyant,	which	worked	in	our	favor	in	Japan,
because	it	bolstered	the	impression	among	Japanese	businessmen	that	we
were	whiz	kids.	When	I	was	in	Japan	we'd	stay	in	the	same	hotel	room	and
he'd	be	getting	phone	calls	all	night	long	booking	millions	of	dollars	of
business.	It	was	amazing.	One	time	there	were	no	calls	between	three	and	five
in	the	morning,	and	so	when	a	call	came	in	at	five	o'clock,	Kay	reached	for
the	phone	and	said,	"Business	is	a	little	slow	tonight."	It	was	quite	a	ride.
For	the	next	eight	years,	Kay	seized	every	opportunity.	Once,	in	1981,	on	a
flight	from	Seattle	to	Tokyo,	Kay	found	himself	sitting	next	to	Kazuo
Inamori,	the	president	of	the	giant	$650	million	Kyocera	Corporation.	Kay,
who	ran	ASCII,	his	Japanese	company,	confident	of	Microsoft's	cooperation,
successfully	pitched	Inamori	on	a	new	idea—a	small	laptop	computer	with
simple	software	built	in.	Kay	and	I	designed	the	machine.	Microsoft	was	still
small	enough	that	I	could	play	a	personal	role	in	the	software	development.	In
the	United	States,	it	was	marketed	by	Radio	Shack	in	1983	as	the	Model	100
for	as	little	as	$799.	It	was	also	sold	in	Japan	as	the	NEC	PC-8200	and	in
Europe	as	the	Olivetti	M-10.	Thanks	to	Kay's	enthusiasm,	it	was	the	first
popular	laptop,	a	favorite	of	journalists	for	years.
Years	later,	in	1986,	Kay	decided	he	wanted	to	take	ASCII	in	a	direction
different	from	the	one	I	wanted	for	Microsoft,	so	Microsoft	set	up	its	own
subsidiary	in	Japan.	Kay's	company	has	continued	to	be	a	very	important
distributor	of	software	in	the	Japanese	market.	Kay,	who	is	a	close	friend,	is
still	as	flamboyant	and	committed	to	making	personal	computers	universal
tools.
The	global	nature	of	the	PC	market	will	also	be	a	vital	element	in	the
development	of	the	information	highway.	Collaborations	between	American
and	European	and	Asian	companies	will	be	even	more	important	for	the

personal	computer	than	they	have	been	in	the	past.	Countries	or	companies
that	fail	to	make	their	work	global	will	not	be	able	to	lead.
In	January	1979,	Microsoft	moved	from	Albuquerque	to	a	suburb	of	Seattle,
Washington.	Paul	and	I	came	home,	bringing	almost	all	of	our	dozen
employees	with	us.	We	concentrated	on	writing	programming	languages	for
the	profusion	of	new	machines	that	appeared	as	the	personal-computer
industry	took	off.	People	were	coming	to	us	with	all	kinds	of	interesting
projects	that	had	the	potential	to	turn	into	something	big.	Demand	for
Microsoft's	services	exceeded	what	we	could	supply.
I	needed	help	running	the	business	and	turned	to	my	old	Economics	2010	pal
from	Harvard,	Steve	Ballmer.	After	graduating,	Steve	worked	as	an	associate
product	manager	for	Procter	&	Gamble	in	Cincinnati,	where	his	work
included	a	stint	paying	calls	on	small	grocery	stores	in	New	Jersey.	After	a
few	years	he	decided	to	go	to	the	Stanford	Business	School.	When	he	got	my
call	he	had	finished	only	one	year	and	wanted	to	complete	his	degree,	but
when	I	offered	him	part	ownership	of	Microsoft,	he	became	another	student
on	indefinite	leave.	Shared	ownership	through	the	stock	options	Microsoft
offered	most	of	its	employees	has	been	more	significant	and	successful	than
anyone	would	have	predicted.	Literally	billions	of	dollars	of	value	have
accrued	to	them.	The	practice	of	granting	employee	stock	options,	which	has
been	widely	and	enthusiastically	accepted,	is	one	advantage	the	United	States
has	that	will	allow	it	to	support	a	disproportionate	number	of	start-up
successes,	building	on	opportunities	the	forthcoming	era	will	bring.
Within	three	weeks	of	Steve's	arrival	at	Microsoft,	we	had	the	first	of	our	very
few	arguments.	Microsoft	employed	about	thirty	people	by	this	time,	and
Steve	had	concluded	we	needed	to	add	fifty	more	immediately.
"No	way,"	I	said.	Many	of	our	early	customers	had	gone	bankrupt,	and	my
natural	fear	of	going	bust	in	a	boom	time	had	made	me	extremely
conservative	financially.	I	wanted	Microsoft	to	be	lean	and	hungry.	But	Steve
wouldn't	relent,	so	I	did.	"Just	keep	hiring	smart	people	as	fast	as	you	can,"	I
said,	"and	I	will	tell	you	when	you	get	ahead	of	what	we	can	afford."	I	never
had	to	because	our	income	grew	as	fast	as	Steve	could	find	great	people.
My	chief	fear	in	the	early	years	was	that	some	other	company	would	swoop	in
and	win	the	market	from	us.	There	were	several	small	companies	making
either	microprocessor	chips	or	software	that	had	me	particularly	worried,	but
luckily	for	me	none	of	them	saw	the	software	market	quite	the	way	we	did.
There	was	also	always	the	threat	that	one	of	the	major	computer

manufacturers	would	take	the	software	for	their	larger	machines	and	scale	it
down	to	run	on	small	microprocessor-based	computers.	IBM	and	DEC	had
libraries	of	powerful	software.	Again,	fortunately	for	Microsoft	the	major
players	never	focused	on	bringing	their	computer	architecture	and	software	to
the	personal-computer	industry.	The	only	close	call	came	in	1979,	when	DEC
offered	PDP-11	mini-computer	architecture	in	a	personal-computer	kit
marketed	by	HeathKit.	DEC	didn't	completely	believe	in	personal	computers,
though,	and	wasn't	really	pushing	the	product.
Microsoft's	goal	was	to	write	and	supply	software	for	most	personal
computers	without	getting	directly	involved	in	making	or	selling	computer
hardware.	Microsoft	licensed	the	software	at	extremely	low	prices.	It	was	our
belief	that	money	could	be	made	betting	on	volume.	We	adapted	our
programming	languages,	such	as	our	version	of	BASIC,	to	each	machine.	We
were	very	responsive	to	all	the	hardware	manufacturers'	requests.	We	didn't
want	to	give	anyone	a	reason	to	look	elsewhere.	We	wanted	choosing
Microsoft	software	to	be	a	no-brainer.
Our	strate======================================================== ange	seems	terse,	keep	in	mind	that	the	average	Microsoft
employee	receives	dozens	of	electronic	messages	a	day.	An	e-mail	message	is
like	a	statement	or	a	question	at	a	meeting—one	thought	or	inquiry	in	an	on-
going	communication.	Microsoft	provides	e-mail	for	business	purposes,	but,
like	the	office	telephone,	it	serves	many	other	purposes,	social	and	personal.
For	example,	hikers	can	reach	all	the	members	of	the	Microsoft	Hiking	Club
to	try	to	find	a	ride	to	the	mountain.	And	certainly	a	few	romances	around
Microsoft	have	benefited	from	e-mail.	When	my	wife,	Melinda,	and	I	were
first	going	out,	we	took	advantage	of	it.	For	some	reason	people	are	less	shy
about	sending	e-mail	than	communicating	on	the	phone	or	in	person.	This	can
be	a	benefit	or	a	problem,	depending	on	the	situation.
I	spend	several	hours	a	day	reading	and	answering	e-mail	to	and	from
employees,	customers,	and	partners	around	the	world.	Anyone	in	the
company	can	send	me	e-mail,	and	because	I	am	the	only	person	who	reads	it,
no	one	has	to	worry	about	protocol	in	a	message	to	me.
I	probably	wouldn't	have	to	spend	so	long	if	my	e-mail	address	weren't
semipublic.	There	is	actually	a	book	called	E-Mail	Addresses	of	the	Rich	&
Famous,	which	includes	my	e-mail	address	as	well	as	ones	for	Rush
Limbaugh	and	Senator	Ted	Kennedy.	When	John	Seabrook	was	writing	an
article	about	me	for	The	New	Yorker	magazine,	he	conducted	his	interview
primarily	on	e-mail.	It	was	a	very	effective	way	to	have	a	dialogue,	and	I
enjoyed	the	piece	when	it	appeared,	but	it	mentioned	my	e-mail	address.	The
result	has	been	an	avalanche	of	mail	ranging	from	students	asking	me,	in
effect,	to	do	their	homework	assignments,	to	people	asking	for	money,	to	mail
from	a	group	interested	in	whales	who	for	some	reason	added	my	e-mail
name	to	their	list.	My	address	is	also	a	target	for	both	rude	and	friendly
messages	from	strangers,	and	provocative	ones	from	the	press	("If	you	don't
answer	this	by	tomorrow	I	will	publish	a	story	about	you	and	that	topless
waitress!").
We	have	special	e-mail	addresses	at	Microsoft	for	job	applications,	product
feedback,	and	other	legitimate	communications.	But	a	lot	of	that	mail	still

comes	to	me	and	I	have	to	reroute	it.	There	are	also	three	e-mail	equivalents
of	chain	letters	that	keep	making	the	rounds.	One	threatens	general	bad	luck	if
it	isn't	forwarded.	Another	specifically	says	the	punishment	will	be	that	your
sex	life	will	suffer.	A	third,	which	has	been	going	around	for	six	years,
contains	a	cookie	recipe	and	a	story	about	a	company's	having	overcharged	a
woman	for	the	recipe,	and	so	she	wants	you	to	distribute	it	for	free.	In	the
various	versions	different	companies	are	named.	Apparently	it	is	the	idea	of
getting	back	at	a	corporation,	any	corporation,	that	has	made	that	one	such	a
perennial	favorite.	This	is	all	mixed	in	with	mail	that	really	should	come	to
me,	often	about	important	issues.	Fortunately,	e-mail	software	is	improving
all	the	time	and	it	now	includes	a	feature	that	lets	me	prioritize	mail	from
senders	I	have	designated.
When	I	travel,	I	connect	my	portable	computer	back	into	Microsoft's
electronic	mail	system	every	night	to	retrieve	new	messages	and	send	off	the
ones	I've	written	over	the	course	of	the	day	to	people	in	the	company.	Most
recipients	will	not	even	be	aware	that	I	am	out	of	the	ofrice.	When	I'm
connected	to	our	corporate	network	from	a	remote	site,	I	can	also	click	on	a
single	icon	to	see	how	sales	are	doing,	to	check	the	status	of	projects,	or	to
access	any	other	management	databases.	It	is	reassuring	to	check	my
electronic	in-box	when	I'm	thousands	of	miles	and	a	dozen	time	zones	away,
because	bad	news	almost	always	comes	through	on	e-mail.	So	if	nothing	bad
is	waiting	there,	I	don't	need	to	worry.
We	now	use	e-mail	in	all	sorts	of	ways	we	hadn't	anticipated.	For	example,	at
the	beginning	of	the	annual	Microsoft	Giving	Campaign,	which	raises	money
for	charity,	employees	receive	an	e-mail	message	encouraging	them	to
participate.	The	e-mail	message	contains	an	electronic	pledge-card	program.
When	the	icon	in	the	message	is	clicked,	the	pledge	card	appears	on	the
employee's	screen	and	he	or	she	can	pledge	a	cash	gift	or	sign	up	for	a	payroll
deduction.	If	the	latter	option	is	chosen,	the	information	is	automatically
entered	into	Microsofts	payroll	database.	From	the	electronic	form	employees
can	direct	their	gift	to	their	local	United	Way	or	to	another	nonprofit
organization.	If	they	want	to,	they	can	choose	to	have	their	donation	go	to	one
or	more	of	the	charities	the	United	Way	supports,	and	can	even	access	a
server	to	obtain	information	about	those	organizations	or	about	volunteering
in	their	community.	From	start	to	finish	it's	completely	electronic.	As	the
leader	of	the	company,	I	can	analyze	summary	information	day	by	day	to	find
out	if	we	are	getting	good	participation	or	if	we	need	to	have	a	few	more
rallies	to	get	out	the	message	about	how	important	we	think	the	giving
campaign	is.

Today,	besides	company-operated,	text-based	e-mail	systems,	the	kind
Microsoft	operates	for	its	own	use,	there	are	commercial	services	such	as
MCI	Mail	and	B.T.	Gold	(operated	by	British	Telecom).	There	are	also
offerings	from	all	of	the	commercial	on-line	systems	such	as	CompuServe,
Prodigy,	and	the	Microsoft	Network.	These	perform	some	of	the	same
functions	that	telegrams	and,	later,	telex	systems	once	did.	Users	connected	to
these	e-mail	systems	can	send	a	message	to	virtually	anyone	who	has	a
standard	Internet	e-mail	address.	Both	private	and	commercial	e-mail	systems
include	"gateways"	that	transfer	messages	sent	by	a	user	of	one	mail	system
to	a	recipient	on	another.	You	can	get	a	message	to	almost	anyone	who	has	a
PC	and	a	modem,	although	for	certain	communications	privacy	is	a	problem
because	transmissions	across	the	Internet	are	not	very	secure.	Some
commercial	services,	such	as	MCI,	will	also	deliver	a	message	by	fax,	telex,
or	traditional	mail	if	the	recipient	doesn't	have	an	electronic	mailbox.
Future	advances	in	electronic	mail	will	streamline	lots	of	activities	we	may
not	even	realize	are	inefficient.	For	example,	think	about	how	you	pay	bills.
More	often	than	not,	a	company	prints	out	a	bill	on	a	piece	of	paper	and	puts
it	in	an	envelope	that	is	physically	carried	to	your	house.	You	open	the	bill,
check	your	records	to	see	if	the	amount	and	details	seem	appropriate,	write	a
check,	and	then	try	to	time	when	you	mail	it	back	so	that	it	arrives	shortly
before	the	due	date.	We're	so	used	to	this	process	we	don't	even	think	about
how	wasteful	it	is.	Let's	say	you	disagree	with	a	bill.	You	call	the	company
up,	wait	on	hold,	and	try	to	get	through	to	the	right	person—who	may	not
really	be	the	right	person	at	all.	In	which	case	you	have	to	wait	for	someone
else	to	call	you	back.
Very	soon	you'll	check	your	PC,	wallet,	or	television	set	the	information
appliance	of	your	choice—for	e-mail,	including	bills.	When	a	bill	comes	in,
the	device	will	show	your	payment	history.	If	you	want	to	inquire	about	the
bill,	you'll	do	it	asynchronously—at	your	convenience—by	sending	e-mail:
"Hey	how	come	this	charge	is	so	high?"
Tens	of	thousands	of	businesses	in	the	United	States	already	exchange
information	via	an	electronic	system	called	Electronic	Document	Interchange,
or	EDI.	It	allows	companies	that	have	contractual	relationships	to	execute
specific	kinds	of	transactions	automatically.	Dealings	are	highly	structured—
reordering	products	or	checking	the	status	of	a	shipment—which	makes
conventional	EDI	unsuitable	for	ad	hoc	communications,	although	many
companies	are	working	to	combine	the	benefits	of	EDI	and	e-mail	into	a
single	system.

The	asynchronicity	of	e-mail	and	EDI	is	one	of	their	advantages,	but	there	is
still	a	place	for	synchronous	communications.	Sometimes	you	want	to	call
someone	up,	talk	directly,	and	get	an	immediate	response	rather	than	leaving	a
message.
Within	a	few	years	there	will	be	hybrid	communications	systems	that
combine	elements	of	synchronous	and	asynchronous	communications.	These
systems	will	use	DSVD	(and	later	ISDN)	telephone	connections	to	permit	the
simultaneous	transfer	of	voice	and	data,	even	before	the	full	information
highway	is	in	place.
It	will	work	this	way:	When	companies	post	information	about	their	products
on	the	Internet,	part	of	that	information	will	include	instructions	for	how	a
customer	can	connect	synchronously	with	a	sales	representative	who	will	be
able	to	answer	questions	through	a	voice-data	connection.	For	example,	if
you're	shopping	for	boots	on	Eddie	Bauer's	home	page	(an	electronic	catalog)
and	you	want	to	know	if	the	boots	you	like	are	appropriate	for	use	in	Florida's
Everglades	or	on	a	glacier,	you'll	be	able	to	click	a	button	to	get	a
representative	to	come	on	the	line	and	talk	to	you.	The	representative	will	see
immediately	that	you	are	looking	at	the	boots	and	will	have	whatever	other
information	about	yourself	you	have	decided	to	make	available,	not	just	your
clothing	and	shoe	sizes,	style	and	color	preferences,	but	your	athletic
interests,	your	past	purchases	from	other	companies,	and	even	your	price
range.	Some	people	will	choose	not	to	make	any	information	about
themselves	available.	Eddie	Bauer's	computer	may	route	your	inquiry	to	the
same	person	you	spoke	to	last	time,	or	it	may	route	you	to	someone	who	has
expertise	in	the	product	displayed	on	your	screen,	in	this	case,	boots.	Without
preamble,	you	will	be	able	to	ask,	"Do	these	boots	work	well	in	swamps	like
the	Everglades?"	or	whatever	your	question	is.	The	representative	doesn't
have	to	be	in	an	office.	He	can	be	anywhere	as	long	as	he	has	access	to	a	PC
and	has	indicated	he	is	available.	If	he	speaks	the	right	language	and	has	the
right	expertise,	he	can	help	out.
Or	if	you	decided	to	change	your	will,	you'd	phone	your	lawyer,	and	she
might	say,	"Let's	take	a	quick	look	at	that."	She	would	then	call	your	will	up
on	her	PC,	and	it	would	appear	on	your	screen	as	well	as	hers	courtesy	of
DSVD,	ISDN,	or	similar	techno======================================================== verhead	projectors	represent	the	state	of	the	art.
Reed	Hundt,	chairman	of	the	U.S.	Federal	Communications	Commission,
commented	on	this.	"There	are	thousands	of	buildings	in	this	country	with
millions	of	people	in	them	who	have	no	telephones,	no	cable	television	and
no	reasonable	prospect	of	broadband	services,"	he	said.	"They	are	called
schools"
Despite	these	constraints,	genuine	change	is	going	to	come.	It	won't	happen
abruptly.	On	the	face	of	it,	the	basic	patterns	of	education	will	remain	the
same.	Students	will	continue	to	attend	classes,	listen	to	teachers,	ask
questions,	participate	in	individual	and	group	work	(including	hands-on
experiments),	and	do	homework.
There	seems	to	be	a	universal	commitment	to	having	more	computers	in
schools,	but	the	rate	at	which	they	are	being	supplied	varies	from	country	to
country.	Only	a	few	countries,	such	as	the	Netherlands,	already	have
computers	in	nearly	every	school.	In	France	and	many	other	places,	although
few	installations	have	taken	place,	governments	have
pledged	to	equip	all	their	classrooms	with	computers.	Britain,	Japan,	and	the
People's	Republic	of	China	have	begun	the	process	of	incorporating
information	technology	into	their	national	curricula,	with	a	focus	on
vocational	training.	I	believe	most	countries	will	decide	to	make	increased
investments	in	education,	and	computer	use	in	schools	will	catch	up	to	its	use
in	homes	and	businesses.	Over	time—longer	in	less	developed	countries—we
are	likely	to	see	computers	installed	in	every	classroom	in	the	world.
The	cost	of	computer	hardware	gets	cheaper	almost	by	the	month,	and
educational	software	will	become	quite	affordable	when	purchased	in
quantity.	Already	many	cable	and	telephone	companies	in	the	United	States
have	promised	free	or	reduced-price	network	connections	to	schools	and
libraries	in	their	areas.	For	example,	Pacific	Bell	has	announced	a	plan	to
provide	free	ISDN	service	to	every	school	in	California	for	one	year,	and	TCI
and	Viacom	offer	free	cable	to	schools	in	every	community	they	serve.
Although	a	classroom	will	still	be	a	classroom,	technology	will	transform	a
lot	of	the	details.	Classroom	learning	will	include	multi-media	presentations,
and	homework	will	involve	exploring	electronic	documents	as	much	as
textbooks,	perhaps	even	more.	Students	will	be	encouraged	to	pursue	areas	of
particular	interest,	and	it	will	be	easy	for	them	to	do	so.	Each	pupil	will	be
able	to	have	his	own	question	answered	simultaneously	with	the	other
students'	queries.	A	class	will	spend	part	of	a	day	at	a	personal	computer

exploring	information	individually	or	in	groups.	Then	the	students	will	bring
back	their	thoughts	and	questions	about	the	information	they	have	discovered
to	the	teacher,	who	will	be	able	to	decide	which	questions	should	be	brought
to	the	attention	of	the	full	class.	While	students	are	at	their	computers,	the
teacher	will	be	free	to	work	with	individuals	or	small	groups	and	focus	less	on
lecturing	and	more	on	problem	solving.
Educators,	like	so	many	in	today's	economy,	are,	among	other	things,
facilitators.	Like	many	other,	similar	workers,	they	will	have	to	adapt	and
readapt	to	changing	conditions.	Unlike	some	professions,	however,	the	future
of	teaching	looks	extremely	bright.	As	innovation	has	improved	the	standard
of	living,	there	has	always	been	an	increase	in	the	portion	of	the	workforce
dedicated	to	education.	Educators	who	bring	energy	and	creativity	to	a
classroom	will	thrive.	So	will	teachers	who	build	strong	relationships	with
children,	because	kids	love	classes	taught	by	adults	they	know	genuinely	care
about	them.
We've	all	had	teachers	who	made	a	difference.	I	had	a	great	chemistry	teacher
in	high	school	who	made	his	subject	immensely	interesting.	Chemistry
seemed	enthralling	compared	to	biology.	In	biology,	we	were	dissecting	frogs
—just	hacking	them	to	pieces,	actually—and	our	teacher	didn't	explain	why.
My	chemistry	teacher	sensationalized	his	subject	a	bit	and	promised	that	it
would	help	us	understand	the	world.	When	I	was	in	my	twenties,	I	read	James
D.	Watson's	Molecular	Biology	of	the	Gene	and	decided	my	high	school
experience	had	misled	me.	The	understanding	of	life	is	a	great	subject.
Biological	information	is	the	most	important	information	we	can	discover,
because	over	the	next	several	decades	it	will	revolutionize	medicine.	Human
DNA	is	like	a	computer	program	but	far,	far	more	advanced	than	any	software
ever	created.	It	seems	amazing	to	me	now	that	one	great	teacher	made
chemistry	endlessly	fascinating	while	I	found	biology	totally	boring.
When	teachers	do	excellent	work	and	prepare	wonderful	materials,	only	their
few	dozen	students	benefit	each	year.	It's	difficult	for	teachers	in	different
locations	to	build	on	one	another's	work.	The	network	will	enable	teachers	to
share	lessons	and	materials,	so	that	the	best	educational	practices	can	spread.
In	most	cases	watching	a	lecture	on	video	is	much	less	interesting	than
actually	being	in	the	room	with	the	teacher.	But	sometimes	the	value	of	being
able	to	hear	a	particular	teacher	outweighs	the	loss	of	interactivity.	A	few
years	ago,	a	friend	and	I	discovered	in	the	University	of	Washington's	catalog
videotapes	of	a	series	of	lectures	by	the	distinguished	physicist	Richard
Feynman.	We	were	able	to	watch	the	lectures	on	vacation	ten	years	after
Feynman	gave	the	talks	at	Cornell.	We	might	have	gotten	more	from	the

lectures	if	we	had	been	in	the	lecture	hall	or	been	able	to	ask	him	questions
via	a	videoconference.	But	the	clarity	of	his	thinking	explained	many	of	the
concepts	of	physics	better	than	any	book	or	any	instructor	I've	ever	had.	He
brought	the	subject	to	life.	I	think	anyone	studying	physics	should	have	these
lectures	easily	accessible.	With	the	information	highway	there	will	be	lots	of
such	uniquely	valuable	resources	available	to	teachers	and	students.
If	a	teacher	in	Providence,	Rhode	Island,	happened	to	have	a	particularly
good	way	of	explaining	photosynthesis,	her	lecture	notes	and	multi-media
demonstrations	could	be	obtained	by	educators	around	the	world.	Some
teachers	will	use	material	exactly	as	it	comes	off	the	highway,	but	others	will
take	advantage	of	easy-to-use	authoring	software	to	adapt	and	combine	bits
and	pieces	of	what	they	find.	Feedback	from	other	interested	instructors	will
be	easy	to	get	and	will	help	refine	the	lesson.	In	a	short	time	the	improved
material	could	be	in	thousands	of	classrooms	all	over	the	world.	It	will	be
easy	to	tell	what	materials	are	popular,	because	the	network	will	be	able	to
count	the	number	of	times	they	are	accessed,	or	to	poll	teachers	electronically.
Corporations	wanting	to	help	with	education	could	provide	recognition	and
cash	awards	to	teachers	whose	materials	are	making	a	difference.
It	is	hard	for	a	teacher	to	prepare	in-depth,	interesting	material	for	twenty-five
students,	six	hours	a	day,	180	days	a	year.	This	is	particularly	true	if	students'
extensive	television	watching	has	raised	their	entertainment	expectations.	I
can	imagine	a	middle-school	science	teacher	a	decade	or	so	from	now,
working	on	a	lecture	about	the	sun,	explaining	not	only	the	science	but	also
the	history	of	discoveries	that	made	it	possible.	When	a	teacher	wants	to
select	a	picture,	still	or	video,	whether	it's	a	piece	of	art	or	a	portrait	of	a	great
solar	scientist,	the	highway	will	allow	her	to	select	from	a	comprehensive
catalog	of	images.	Snippets	of	video	and	narrated	animations	from	countless
sources	will	be	available.	It	will	only	take	minutes	to	pull	together	a	visual
show	that	would	now	require	days	of	work	to	organize.	As	she	lectures	about
the	sun,	she	will	have	images	and	diagrams	appear	at	appropriate	times.	If	a
student	asks	her	about	the	source	of	the	sun's	power,	she	can	answer	using
animated	graphics	of	hydrogen	and	helium	atoms,	she'll	be	able	to	show	solar
flares	or	sunspots	or	other	phenomena,	or	she	might	call	up	a	brief	video	on
fusion	energy	to	the	white	board.	The	teacher	will	have	organized	the	links	to
servers	on	the	information	highway	in	advance.	She	will	make	the	list	of	links
available	to	her	students,	so	that	during	study	times	in	the	library	or	at	home,
they	will	be	able	to	review	the	material	from	as	many	perspectives	as	they
find	helpful.
Think	of	a	high	school	art	teacher	using	a	digital	white	board	to	display	a

high-quality	digital	reproduction	of	Seurat's	Bathers	at	Asnières,	which	shows
young	men	relaxing	on	the	bank	of	the	Seine	River	in	the	1880s	against	a
background	of	sailboats	and	smokestacks.	The	white	board	will	pronounce	the
name	of	the	painting	in	the	original	French—Une	Baignade	à	Asnières	and
show	a	map	of	the	outskirts	of	Paris,	with	the	town	of	Asnières	highlighted.
The	teacher	might	use	the	painting,	which	presaged	Pointillism,	to	illustrate
the	end	of	Impressionism.	Or	she	will	use	it	to	get	into	broader	topics,	such	as
life	in	France	at	the	end	of	the	nineteenth	century,	the	Industrial	Revolution,
or	even	the	way	the	eye	sees	complementary	colors.
She	might	point	to	the	orangish-red	hat	of	a	figure	standing	on	the	far	right
side	of	the	composition	and	say:	"Look	at	the	vibrancy	of	the	hat.	Seurat	has
tricked	the	eye.	The	hat	is	red,	but	he	has	added	tiny	dots	of	orange	and	blue.
You	don't	really	notice	the	blue	unless	you	look	closely."	As	the	teacher	says
this,	the	picture	will	zoom	in	on	the	hat,	until	the	texture	of	the	canvas	is
apparent.	At	this	magnification,	specks	of	blue	will	be	obvious,	and	the
teacher	will	explain	that	blue	is	the	complement	of	orange.	A	color	wheel	will
appear	on	the	white	board,	and	either	the	teacher	or	the	multi-media	document
itself	will	explain:	"Every	color	on	this	wheel	is	arranged	opposite	its
complement.	Red	is	opposite	green,	yellow	is	opposite	purple,	and	blue	is
opposite	orange.	It	is	a	quirk	of	the	eye	that	staring	at	a	color	creates	an
afterimage	of	its	complementary	color.	Seurat	used	this	trick	to	make	the	red
and	orange	hues	of	the	hat	more	vivid	by	sneaking	in	dots	of	blue."
Computers	conn======================================================== re	will	continue	to	be	some	modest
price	variations	in	products	from	one	outlet	to	another.	These	will	reflect
differences	in	return	policies,	delivery	times,	and	whatever	limited	customer
assistance	is	available.
Some	merchants	will	offer	"consultants"	as	part	of	the	sales	price,	but	for
important	purchases	you	are	likely	to	welcome	a	truly	independent	guide.	The
cost	of	the	consultation	will	be	offset	to	an	extent	by	the	lower	price	you'll
end	up	paying	at	the	outlet	the	consultant	will	guide	you	to.	The	prices
consultants	charge	will	also	be	very	competitive.	Suppose	you	use	a	service
on	the	highway	to	obtain	information	about	where	to	buy	an	expensive	car	at
the	best	price,	and	then	you	buy	it.	The	price	for	using	the	service—which	has
acted	as	the	middleman	in	the	transaction—might	be	charged	at	a	low	hourly
rate,	or	it	could	be	a	small	percentage	of	the	purchase	price.	It	will	depend	on
the	uniqueness	of	the	service.	Electronic	competition	will	determine	the	fee.
Over	time,	more	advice	will	be	offered	by	software	applications	that	have
been	programmed	to	analyze	your	requirements	and	make	appropriate
suggestions.	A	number	of	large	banks	have	already	developed	"expert"
computer	systems	to	analyze	routine	loan	and	credit	applications,	with	great
success.	As	software	agents	become	common,	and	voice-simulation-and-
recognition	software	improves,	it	will	begin	to	feel	as	though	you're	talking	to
a	real	person	when	you	consult	a	multi-media	document	with	a	personality.
You'll	be	able	to	interrupt,	request	more	detail,	or	ask	to	have	an	explanation
repeated.	The	experience	will	be	like	chatting	with	a	personable	expert.
Eventually	it	won't	matter	much	whether	you	are	talking	to	a	human	being	or
a	very	good	simulation,	as	long	as	you	get	the	answers	you	need	to	make	an
appropriate	purchase.
A	step	toward	the	discount	electronic	commerce	of	the	highway	is	today's
home-shopping	television	networks.	In	1994	they	sold	nearly	$3	billion	worth
of	goods	despite	the	fact	that	they	are	synchronous,	which	means	you	may

have	to	sit	through	pitches	for	countless	other	items	until	they	offer	one	you're
interested	in.	On	the	information	highway	you'll	be	able	to	amble	globally	at
your	own	pace	among	goods	and	services.	If	you're	looking	for	sweaters,
you'll	choose	a	basic	style	and	see	as	many	variations	as	you	like,	in	every
price	range.	Perhaps	you'll	watch	a	fashion	show	or	a	product	demonstration.
Interactivity	will	marry	convenience	with	entertainment.
Today,	branded	products	often	appear	in	feature	films	and	television
programs.	A	character	who	once	would	have	ordered	a	beer	now	asks	for	a
Budweiser.	In	the	1993	movie	Demolition	Man,	Taco	Bell	restaurants	seem	to
be	the	only	fast-food	survivors.	Taco	Bell's	corporate	parent,	PepsiCo,	paid
for	the	privilege.	Microsoft	paid	a	fee	to	have	Arnold	Schwarzenegger
discover	the	Arabic	version	of	Windows	running	on	a	computer	screen	during
True	Lies.	In	the	future,	companies	may	pay	not	only	to	have	their	products
on-screen,	but	also	to	make	them	available	for	you	to	buy.	You	will	have	the
option	of	inquiring	about	any	image	you	see.	This	will	be	another	choice	the
highway	will	make	available	unobtrusively.	If	you	are	watching	the	movie
Top	Gun	and	think	Tom	Cruise's	aviator	sunglasses	look	really	cool,	you'll	be
able	to	pause	the	movie	and	learn	about	the	glasses	or	even	buy	them	on	the
spot—if	the	film	has	been	tagged	with	commercial	information.	Or	you	could
mark	the	scene	and	return	to	it	later.	If	a	movie	has	a	scene	filmed	in	a	resort
hotel,	you'll	be	able	to	find	out	where	it's	located,	check	room	rates,	and	make
reservations.	If	the	movie's	star	carries	a	handsome	leather	briefcase	or
handbag,	the	highway	will	let	you	browse	the	manufacturer's	entire	line	of
leather	goods	and	either	order	one	or	be	directed	to	a	convenient	retailer.
Because	the	information	highway	will	carry	video,	you'll	often	be	able	to	see
exactly	what	you've	ordered.	This	will	help	prevent	the	sort	of	mistake	my
grandmother	once	made.	I	was	at	summer	camp	and	she	ordered	lemon	drops
to	be	sent	to	me.	She	ordered	one	hundred,	thinking	I	would	get	one	hundred
pieces	of	candy.	Instead	I	got	one	hundred	bags.	I	gave	them	out	to	everyone
and	was	especially	popular	until	we	all	began	to	have	canker	sores.	On	the
highway	you	will	be	able	to	take	a	video	tour	of	that	hotel	before	you	make
your	reservation.	You	won't	have	to	wonder	whether	the	flowers	you	ordered
for	your	mother	by	telephone	really	were	as	stunning	as	you'd	hoped.	You'll
be	able	to	watch	the	florist	arrange	the	bouquet,	change	your	mind	if	you
want,	and	replace	wilting	roses	with	fresh	anemones.	When	you're	shopping
for	clothing,	it	will	be	displayed	in	your	size.	In	fact,	you'll	be	able	to	see	it
paired	with	other	items	you	have	purchased	or	are	considering.
Once	you	know	exactly	what	you	want,	you'll	be	able	to	get	it	just	that	way.
Computers	will	enable	goods	that	today	are	mass-produced	to	be	both	mass-

produced	and	custom	made	for	particular	customers.	Customization	will
become	an	important	way	for	a	manufacturer	to	add	value.	Increasing
numbers	of	products—from	shoes	to	chairs,	from	newspapers	and	magazines
to	music	albums—will	be	created	on	the	spot	to	match	the	exact	desires	of	a
particular	person.	And	often	the	item	will	cost	no	more	than	a	mass-produced
one	would.	In	many	product	categories	mass	customization	will	replace	mass
production,	just	as	a	few	generations	ago	mass	production	largely	replaced
made-to-order.
Before	mass	production,	everything	was	made	one	piece	at	a	time,	using
labor-intensive	methods	that	hampered	productivity	and	the	standard	of
living.	Until	the	first	practical	sewing	machine	was	built,	every	shirt	was
handmade	with	needle	and	thread.	The	average	person	didn't	have	many
shirts,	because	they	were	expensive.	In	the	1860s,	when	mass-production
techniques	began	to	be	used	to	make	clothing,	machines	turned	out	large
quantities	of	identical	shirts,	the	prices	dropped,	and	even	laborers	could
afford	to	own	a	number	of	them.
Soon	there	will	be	computerized	shirt-making	machines	that	will	obey	a
different	set	of	instructions	for	every	shirt.	When	you	order	you'll	indicate
your	measurements	as	well	as	your	choices	for	fabric,	fit,	collar,	and	every
other	variable.	The	information	will	be	communicated	across	the	information
highway	to	a	manufacturing	plant	that	will	produce	the	garment	for	prompt
delivery.	Delivering	goods	ordered	over	the	highway	will	become	a	big
business.	There	will	be	amazing	competition,	and	as	volume	becomes
enormous,	delivery	will	get	very	inexpensive	and	fast.
Levi	Strauss	&	Co.	is	already	experimenting	with	custom-made	jeans	for
women.	At	a	growing	number	of	their	outlets,	customers	pay	about	$10	extra
to	have	jeans	made	to	their	exact	specifications—any	of	8,448	different
combinations	of	hip,	waist,	inseam,	and	rise	measurements	and	styles.	The
information	is	relayed	from	a	PC	in	the	store	to	a	Levi's	factory	in	Tennessee,
where	the	denim	is	cut	by	computer-driven	machines,	tagged	with	bar	codes,
and	then	washed	and	sewn.	The	completed	jeans	are	sent	back	to	the	store
where	the	order	was	placed,	or	shipped	overnight	directly	to	the	customer.
It	is	conceivable	that	within	a	few	years	everyone	will	have	measurements
registered	electronically	so	it	will	be	easy	to	find	out	how	well	a	ready-made
item	will	fit,	or	to	place	a	custom	order.	If	you	give	friends	and	relatives
access	to	this	information,	they	will	find	it	a	lot	easier	to	buy	for	you.
Customized	information	is	a	natural	extension	of	the	tailored	consultation

capabilities	of	the	highway.	Individuals	who	have	achieved	eminence	in	some
field	may	publish	their	opinions,	recommendations,	or	even	worldview,	in
much	the	same	way	that	successful	investors	publish	newsletters.	Arnold
Palmer	or	Nancy	Lopez	might	offer	golfers	the	chance	to	read	or	look	at
whatever	golf	material	they	have	found	helpful.	An	editor	who	today	works	at
The	Economist	might	start	his	or	her	own	service,	and	offer	a	digest	of	the
news	with	links	to	text	and	video	news	accounts	from	a	variety	of	sources.
Someone	using	this	review	service,	instead	of	paying	60	cents	for	a
newspaper,	might	pay	the	expert	a	few	cents	a	day	for	performing	the
middleman	function	of	assembling	the	day's	news,	and	pay	the	publisher	of
each	story	selected	a	little	bit	too.	The	customer	would	decide	how	many
articles	he	wanted	to	read	and	how	much	to	spend.	For	your	own	daily	dose	of
news,	you	might	subscribe	to	several	review	services	and	let	a	software	agent
or	a	human	one	pick	and	choose	from	them	to	compile	your	completely
customized
"newspaper."
These	subscription	services,	whether	human	or	electronic,	will	gather
information	that	conforms	to	a	particular	philosophy	and	set	of	interests.	They
will	compete	on	the	basis	of	their	talents	and	reputations.	Magazines	fill	a
similar	role	today.	Many	are	narrowly	focused	and	serve	as	customized
realities	of	a	sort.	A	reader	who	is	politically	engaged	knows	that	what	he	or
she	is	reading	in	National	Review	is	not	"the	news."	It	is	a	bulletin	from	the
world	of	conservative	politics	where	little	of	what	the	reader	believes	is
challenged.	At	the	other	end	of	the	political	scale,	The	Nation	is	a	magazine
that	knows	its	readers'	liberal	views	and	biases	and	sets	out	to	confirm	and
massage	them.
In	the	same	ways	that	movie	studios	try	to	sell	you	their	newest	release	by
showing	previews	in	theaters,	print	advertising,	and	various	kinds	of
promotional	activities,	the	providers	of	information	will	use	all	sorts	of
techniques	to	convince	you	to	sample	their	wares.	A	lot	of	information	will	be
local—from	neighborhood	schools,	hospitals,	merchants,	and	even	pizza
joints.	Connecting	a	business	to	the	highway	won't	be	expensive.	Once	the
infrastructure	is	in	place	and	a	critical	number	of	users	adopt	it,	every
business	will	want	to	reach	out	to	its	customers	over	the	highway.
The	potential	for	electronic	efficiency	is	causing	some	people	to	worry	that	if
the======================================================== ighway.	We	are	providing	software	tools	to	a	number	of	hardware	companies
building	new	applications.	Many	media	and	communications	companies	from
around	the	world	will	be	working	with	us	and	observing	the	ways	customers
respond	to	the	applications.	It	will	be	critical	to	listen	to	customer	feedback.
You	too	will	be	able	to	read	about	the	results	of	the	highway	trials.	Are	people
gravitating	toward	new	types	of	multiplayer	games?	Are	they	socializing	in
new	ways?	Are	they	working	together	across	the	network?	Are	they	shopping
in	the	new	marketplace?	Are	exciting	applications	you	never	would	have
imagined	coming	along?	Are	people	willing	to	pay	for	these	new	capabilities?
The	answers	to	these	questions	are	the	key	to	how	the	Information	Age
develops.	Mergers	and	mania	are	fun	to	watch.	But	if	you	want	to	know	how
the	race	to	build	the	information	highway	is	really	going,	keep	your	eye	on
PCs	connected	to	the	Internet,	and	on	the	software	applications	that	are
popular	in	highway	trials.	At	least	that's	what	I'm	going	to	do.

12
CRITICAL	ISSUES
This	is	an	exciting	time	in	the	Information	Age.	It	is	the	very	beginning.
Almost	everywhere	I	go,	whether	to	speak	to	a	group	or	to	have	dinner	with
friends,	questions	come	up	about	how	information	technology	will	change	our
lives.	People	want	to	understand	how	it	will	make	the	future	different.	Will	it
make	our	lives	better	or	worse?
I've	already	said	I'm	an	optimist,	and	I'm	optimistic	about	the	impact	of	the
new	technology.	It	will	enhance	leisure	time	and	enrich	culture	by	expanding
the	distribution	of	information.	It	will	help	relieve	pressures	on	urban	areas	by
enabling	individuals	to	work	from	home	or	remote-site	offices.	It	will	relieve
pressure	on	natural	resources	because	increasing	numbers	of	products	will	be
able	to	take	the	form	of	bits	rather	than	of	manufactured	goods.	It	will	give	us
more	control	over	our	lives	and	allow	experiences	and	products	to	be	custom
tailored	to	our	interests.	Citizens	of	the	information	society	will	enjoy	new
opportunities	for	productivity,	learning,	and	entertainment.	Countries	that
move	boldly	and	in	concert	with	each	other	will	enjoy	economic	rewards.
Whole	new	markets	will	emerge,	and	a	myriad	new	opportunities	for
employment	will	be	created.
When	measured	by	decades,	the	economy	is	always	in	upheaval.	For	the	past
few	hundred	years,	every	generation	has	found	more	efficient	ways	of	getting
work	done,	and	the	cumulative	benefits	have	been	enormous.	The	average
person	today	enjoys	a	much	better	life	than	the	nobility	did	a	few	centuries
ago.	It	would	be	great	to	have	a	king's	land,	but	what	about	his	lice?	Medical
advances	alone	have	greatly	increased	life	spans	and	improved	standards	of
living.
Henry	Ford,	in	the	first	part	of	the	twentieth	century,	was	the	automotive
industry,	but	your	car	is	superior	to	anything	he	ever	drove.	It's	safer,	more
reliable,	and	surely	has	a	better	sound	system.	This	pattern	of	improvement
isn't	going	to	change.	Advancing	productivity	propels	societies	forward,	and	it
is	only	a	matter	of	time	before	the	average	person	in	a	developed	country	will
be	"richer"	in	many	ways	than	anyone	is	today.
Just	because	I'm	optimistic	doesn't	mean	I	don't	have	concerns	about	what	is
going	to	happen	to	all	of	us.	As	with	all	major	changes,	the	benefits	of	the

information	society	will	carry	costs.	There	will	be	dislocations	in	some
business	sectors	that	will	create	a	need	for	worker	retraining.	The	availability
of	virtually	free	communications	and	computing	will	alter	the	relationships	of
nations,	and	of	socioeconomic	groups	within	nations.	The	power	and
versatility	of	digital	technology	will	raise	new	concerns	about	individual
privacy,	commercial	confidentiality,	and	national	security.	There	are,
moreover,	equity	issues	that	will	have	to	be	addressed.	The	information
society	should	serve	all	of	its	citizens,	not	only	the	technically	sophisticated
and	economically	privileged.	In	short,	a	range	of	important	issues	confronts
us.	I	don't	necessarily	have	the	solutions,	but,	as	I	started	off	the	book	saying,
now	is	a	good	time	for	a	broad	discussion.	Technological	progress	will	force
all	of	society	to	confront	tough	new	problems,	only	some	of	which	we	can
foresee.	The	pace	of	technological	change	is	so	fast	that	sometimes	it	seems
the	world	will	be	completely	different	from	one	day	to	the	next.	It	won't.	But
we	should	be	prepared	for	change.	Societies	are	going	to	be	asked	to	make
hard	choices	in	such	areas	as	universal	availability,	investment	in	education,
regulation,	and	the	balance	between	individual	privacy	and	community
security.
While	it	is	important	that	we	start	thinking	about	the	future,	we	should	guard
against	the	impulse	to	take	hasty	action.	We	can	ask	only	the	most	general
kinds	of	questions	today,	so	it	doesn't	make	sense	to	come	up	with	detailed,
specific	regulations.	We've	got	a	good	number	of	years	to	observe	the	course
of	the	coming	revolution,	and	we	should	use	that	time	to	make	intelligent
rather	than	reflexive	decisions.
Perhaps	the	most	widespread	and	personal	anxiety	is,	"How	will	I	fit	into	the
evolving	economy?"	Men	and	women	are	worried	that	their	own	jobs	will
become	obsolete,	that	they	won't	be	able	to	adapt	to	new	ways	of	working,
that	their	children	will	get	into	industries	that	will	cease	to	exist,	or	that
economic	upheaval	will	create	wholesale	unemployment,	especially	among
older	workers.	These	are	legitimate	concerns.	Entire	professions	and
industries	will	fade.	But	new	ones	will	flourish.	This	will	be	happening	over
the	next	two	or	three	decades,	which	is	fast	by	historical	standards,	but	may
turn	out	to	be	no	more	disruptive	than	the	pace	at	which	the	microprocessor
revolution	brought	about	its	changes	in	the	workplace,	or	the	upheavals	in	the
airline,	trucking,	and	banking	industries	over	the	last	decade.
Although	the	microprocessor	and	the	personal	computer	that	it	enabled	have
altered	and	even	eliminated	some	jobs	and	companies,	it	is	hard	to	find	any
large	sector	of	the	economy	that	has	been	negatively	affected.	Mainframe,
mini-computer,	and	typewriter	companies	have	downsized,	but	the	computer

industry	as	a	whole	has	grown,	with	a	substantial	net	increase	in	employment.
As	big	computer	companies	such	as	IBM	or	DEC	have	laid	people	off,	many
of	those	workers	have	found	employment	within	the	industry—usually	at
companies	doing	something	related	to	PCs.
Outside	the	computer	industry	it	is	also	hard	to	find	a	complete	business
sector	hurt	by	the	PC.	There	are	some	typesetters	who	were	displaced	by
desktop-publishing	programs—but	for	every	worker	in	that	situation	there	are
several	whose	jobs	desktop	publishing	created.	All	the	change	hasn't	always
been	good	for	all	the	people,	but	as	revolutions	go,	the	one	set	in	motion	by
the	personal	computer	has	been	remarkably	benign.
Some	people	worry	that	there	are	only	a	finite	number	of	jobs	in	the	world,
and	that	each	time	a	job	goes	away	someone	is	left	stranded	with	no	further
purpose.	Fortunately,	this	is	not	how	the	economy	works.	The	economy	is	a
vast	interconnected	system	in	which	any	resource	that	is	freed	up	becomes
available	to	another	area	of	the	economy	that	finds	it	most	valuable.	Each
time	a	job	is	made	unnecessary,	the	person	who	was	filling	that	job	is	freed	to
do	something	else.	The	net	result	is	that	more	gets	done,	raising	the	overall
standard	of	living	in	the	long	run.	If	there	is	a	general	downturn	across	the
economy—a	recession	or	a	depression—there	is	a	cyclical	loss	of	jobs,	but
the	shifts	that	have	come	about	as	a	result	of	technology	have	tended,	if
anything,	to	create	jobs.
Job	categories	change	constantly	in	an	evolving	economy.	Once	all	telephone
calls	were	made	through	an	operator.	When	I	was	a	child,	long-distance	calls
from	our	home	were	made	by	dialing	"0"	and	giving	an	operator	the	number,
and	when	I	was	a	teenager,	many	companies	still	employed	in-house
telephone	operators	who	routed	calls	by	plugging	cables	into	receptacles.
Today	there	are	comparatively	few	telephone	operators,	even	though	the
volume	of	calls	is	greater	than	ever.	Automation	has	taken	over.
Before	the	Industrial	Revolution,	most	people	lived	or	worked	on	farms.
Growing	food	was	mankind's	main	preoccupation.	If	someone	had	predicted
back	then	that	within	a	couple	of	centuries	only	a	tiny	percentage	of	the
population	would	be	needed	to	produce	food,	all	those	farmers	would	have
worried	about	what	everyone	would	do	for	a	living.	The	great	majority	of	the
501	job	categories	recognized	in	1990	by	the	U.S.	Census	Bureau	didn't	even
exist	fifty	years	earlier.	Although	we	can't	predict	new	job	categories,	most
will	relate	to	unmet	needs	in	education,	social	services,	and	leisure
opportunities.

We	know	that	when	the	highway	connects	buyers	and	sellers	directly,	it	will
put	pressure	on	people	who	are	currently	acting	as	middlemen.	This	is	the
same	sort	of	pressure	that	mass	merchants	such	as	WalMart,	Price-Costco,
and	other	companies	with	particularly	efficient	consumer-merchandising
approaches	have	already	put	on	more	traditional	stores.	When	Wal-Mart
moves	into	a	rural	area,	the	merchants	in	the	local	towns	feel	the	pinch.	Some
survive,	some	do	not,	but	the	net	economic	effect	on	the	region	is	modest.	We
may	regret	the	cultural	ramifications,	but	warehouse	stores	and	fast-food
chains	are	thriving	because	consumers,	who	vote	with	their	dollars,	tend	to
support	outlets	that	pass	their	productivity	savings	along	in	the	form	of	lower
prices.
Reducing	the	number	of	middlemen	is	another	way	of	lowering	costs.	It	will
also	cause	economic	shifts,	but	no	faster	than	the	changes	happened	in
retailing	in	the	last	decade.	It	will	take	many	years	for	the	highway	to	be
utilized	so	widely	for	shopping	that	there	will	be	significantly	fewer
middlemen.	There	is	plenty	of	time	to	prepare.	The	jobs	those	displaced
middlemen	change	to	might	not	even	have	been	thought	of	yet.	We'll	have	to
wait	and	see	what	kinds	of	creative	work	the	new	economy	devises.	But	as======================================================== he	telegraph	and,	later,	ticker	services	was	to	deliver	racetrack
results.	Satellite	television	broadcasts	contributed	to	off-track	betting.	Slot
machine	designs	have	always	tracked	the	progress	in	mechanical	calculators
and,	more	recently,	computers.	The	information	highway	will	have	an	even
more	significant	effect	on	both	legal	and	illegal	gambling.	We	are	sure	to	see
current	odds	posted	on	servers,	and	e-mail	as	a	way	to	make	bets.	Electronic
currency	will	be	used	to	place	bets	and	make	payoffs.
Gambling	is	a	highly	regulated	business,	so	it's	difficult	to	predict	what	forms
will	be	allowed	on	the	highway.	Maybe	air	travelers	who	are	stuck	on	a	plane
with	nothing	else	to	do	will	be	able	to	gamble	with	each	other.	Perhaps
gambling	games	will	have	to	provide	full	disclosure	of	the	odds	against	you.
The	technology	will	allow	people	to	bet	on	anything	they	choose	to,	and	if	it's
legal	someone	is	sure	to	set	up	a	service.	It	will	be	possible	to	bring	horse
races,	dog	races,	or	any	other	kind	of	live	sports	event	into	your	home	in	real-
time,	so	some	of	the	excitement	of	the	track	or	stadium	will	be	made
available.	Many	governments	raise	revenue	with	lotteries	and	in	the	future
could	provide	plug-into	electronic	lotteries.	The	highway	will	make	gambling
far	more	difficult	to	control	than	it	is	today.
We	can	be	sure	we'll	use	the	highway's	unique	capabilities	to	help	us	find
communities	of	others	with	common	interests.	Today	you	may	belong	to	the
local	ski	club	so	you	can	meet	other	people	who	like	to	ski.	You	may	also

subscribe	to	Recreational	Skier	so	you	can	get	information	about	new	ski
products.	Tomorrow	you	will	be	able	to	join	such	a	community	on	the
information	highway.	It	will	not	only	provide	you	with	up-to-date	information
about	weather	conditions	instantly,	but	will	also	be	a	way	for	you	to	stay	in
touch	with	other	enthusiasts.
The	greater	the	number	of	people	who	join	an	electronic	community,	the	more
valuable	it	will	be	to	everyone	who	uses	it.	Most	of	the	world's	skiing
enthusiasts	will	participate,	at	least	occasionally.	In	time,	the	world's	best
information	about	skis	and	skiing	will	be	available	electronically.	If	you	join,
you	will	find	the	best	slopes	near	Munich,	the	lowest	price	anywhere	for	a
particular	set	of	poles,	and	the	latest	news	and	advertising	about	all	ski-related
products.	If	people	have	taken	photos	or	made	videos	of	a	race	or	a	trip,	they
can	share	them.	Books	about	skiing	will	be	reviewed	by	anyone	who	has	an
opinion.	Laws	and	safety	practices	will	be	debated.	Instructional	videos	will
be	available	on	a	moment's	notice.	These	multi-media	documents	will	be
available	free	or	for	a	charge,	to	one	person	or	to	hundreds	of	thousands.	This
community	on	the	information	highway	will	become	the	place	to	go	if	you	are
interested	in	skiing.
If	you	want	to	get	yourself	in	better	physical	condition	before	trying	a	hard
slope,	you	might	find	training	more	fun	if	you	are	in	close	electronic	touch
with	a	dozen	other	people	who	are	your	size,	weight,	and	age,	and	who	share
your	specific	goals	for	exercise	and	weight	reduction.	You	would	have	less	to
be	self-conscious	about	in	an	exercise	program	in	which	everyone	else	is	like
you.	And	if	you	still	were	uncomfortable,	you	could	turn	your	video	camera
off.	Members	of	this	community	could	get	together	to	encourage	each	other
and	even	work	out	at	the	same	time.
The	community	of	skiers	is	quite	large	and	easy	to	define.	On	the	information
highway	there	will	be	applications	to	help	you	find	people	and	information
that	intersect	with	your	interests,	no	matter	how	specific.	If	you're	thinking	of
visiting	Berlin,	the	highway	will	make	vast	amounts	of	historical,	touristic,
and	sociological	information	available.	But	there	will	also	be	applications	to
let	you	find	fellow	enthusiasts	there.	You'll	be	invited	to	register	your	interests
in	databases	that	can	be	analyzed	by	the	applications.	These	applications	will
even	suggest	people	you	might	like	to	meet.	If	you	have	a	collection	of
Venetian	glass	paperweights,	you'll	probably	choose	to	be	a	member	of	one	or
more	world	communities	of	people	who	share	this	interest.	Some	of	those
people	may	live	in	Berlin	and	have	collections	they'd	be	delighted	to	show
you.	If	you	have	a	ten-year-old	daughter	you'll	be	taking	with	you	to	Berlin,
you	might	query	whether	there	is	anyone	in	Berlin	who	has	a	ten-year-old,

shares	your	language,	and	is	willing	to	spend	time	with	you	during	your	visit.
If	you	find	two	or	three	suitable	people,	you	have	created	a	small—and
probably	temporary—community	of	interest.
I	recently	visited	Africa	and	took	a	lot	of	pictures	of	chimpanzees.	If	the
information	highway	were	available	now,	I	would	put	out	a	message	saying
that	if	anyone	else	from	the	safari	wanted	to	exchange	photographs,	he	or	she
should	put	them	on	the	same	bulletin	board	where	I	had	posted	my
chimpanzee	photos.	I	would	be	able	to	set	it	up	so	only	fellow	safari	members
could	have	access	to	that	bulletin	board.
Already,	thousands	of	newsgroups	on	the	Internet	and	countless	forums	on
commercial	on-line	services	have	been	set	up	as	locations	for	small
communities	to	share	information.	For	example,	on	the	Internet	there	are
lively	text-based	discussion	groups	with	such	names	as	alt.agriculture.fruit,
alt.animals.raccoons,	alt.asian-movies,	alt.coffee,	bionet.-
biology.cardiovascular,	soc.religion.islam,	and	talk.philosophy,	misc.	But
these	topics	aren't	nearly	so	specialized	as	some	of	the	subjects	I	expect
electronic	communities	will	address	in	the	future.	Some	communities	will	be
very	local,	and	some	will	be	global.	You	won't	be	overwhelmed	by	the
number	of	choices	of	communities	any	more	than	you	are	now	by	the
telephone	system.	You'll	look	for	a	group	that	interests	you	in	general,	and
then	you'll	search	through	it	for	the	small	segment	you	want	to	join.	I	can
imagine	the	administration	of	every	municipality,	for	example,	becoming	the
focus	of	an	electronic	community.
Sometimes	I	get	annoyed	by	a	traffic	light	near	my	office	that	always	stays
red	longer	than	I	think	it	should.	I	could	write	a	letter	to	the	city,	telling	the
folks	who	program	the	lights	that	the	timing	isn't	optimal,	but	that	would	just
be	one	cranky	letter.	On	the	other	hand,	if	I	could	find	the	"community"	of
people	who	drive	the	route	I	do,	we	could	send	a	strong	complaint	to	the	city.
I	could	find	these	others	by	sending	a	message	to	people	who	live	near	me	or
by	posting	a	message	on	a	community	affairs	bulletin	board	that	showed	a
map	of	the	intersection	accompanied	by	the	message:	"During	the	morning
rush	hours	hardly	anyone	goes	left	at	this	intersection.	Does	anyone	else	think
the	cycle	should	be	shortened?"	Anyone	who	agreed	with	me	could	add	to	my
message.	It	would	make	it	easier	to	fight	City	Hall.
As	on-line	communities	grow	in	importance,	they	will	increasingly	be	where
people	will	turn	to	find	out	what	the	public	is	really	thinking.	People	like	to
know	what's	popular,	which	movies	friends	are	watching,	and	what	news
others	think	is	interesting.	I	want	to	read	the	same	"newspaper	front	page"	as

those	I'm	going	to	meet	with	later	today,	so	we	can	have	something	in
common	to	talk	about.	You	will	be	able	to	see	what	places	on	the	network	are
being	looked	at	often.	There	will	be	all	sorts	of	"hot	lists"	of	the	coolest
places.
Electronic	communities,	with	all	the	information	they	reveal,	will	also	create
problems.	Some	institutions	will	have	to	make	big	changes	as	on-line
communities	gain	power.	Doctors	and	medical	researchers	are	already	having
to	contend	with	patients	who	explore	medical	literature	electronically	and
compare	notes	with	other	patients	who	have	the	same	serious	disease.	Word
of	unorthodox	or	unapproved	treatments	spreads	fast	in	these	communities.
Some	patients	in	drug	trials	have	been	able	to	figure	out,	by	communicating
with	other	patients	in	the	trial,	that	they	are	receiving	a	placebo	rather	than	the
real	medication.	The	discovery	has	prompted	some	of	them	to	drop	out	of	the
trials	or	to	seek	alternate,	simultaneous	remedies.	This	undermines	the
research,	but	it	is	hard	to	fault	patients	who	are	trying	to	save	their	lives.
It's	not	just	medical	researchers	who	will	be	affected	by	so	much	access	to
information.	One	of	the	biggest	concerns	is	parents	having	to	contend	with
children	who	can	find	out	about	almost	anything	they	want	to,	right	from	a
home	information	appliance.	Already,	rating	systems	are	being	designed	to
allow	parental	control	over	what	kids	have	access	to.	This	could	become	a
major	political	issue	if	the	information	publishers	don't	handle	it	properly.
On	balance,	the	advantages	will	greatly	outweigh	the	problems.	The	more
information	there	is	available,	the	more	choices	we	will	have.	Today,	devoted
fans	plan	their	evenings	around	the	broadcast	times	of	their	favorite	television
shows,	but	once	video-on-demand	gives	us	the	opportunity	to	watch	whatever
we	like	whenever	we	like,	family	or	social	activities,	rather	than	a
broadcaster's	time	slots,	will	control	our	entertainment	schedules.	Before	the
telephone,	people	thought	of	their	neighbors	as	their	only	community.	Almost
everything	was	done	with	others	who	lived	nearby.	The	telephone	and	the
automobile	allowed	us	to	stretch	out.	We	may	visit	face-to-face	less	often	than
we	did	a	century	ago	because	we	can	pick	up	the	telephone,	but	this	doesn't
mean	we	have	become	isolated.	It	has	made	it	easier	for	us	to	talk	to	each
other	and	stay	in	touch.	Sometimes	it	may	seem	too	easy	for	people	to	reach
you.
A	decade	from	now,	you	may	shake	your	head	that	there	was	ever	a	time
when	any	stranger	or	a	wrong	number	could	interrupt	you	at	home	with	a
phone	call.	Cellular	phones,	pagers,	and	fax	machines	have	already	made	it
necessary	for	businesspeople	to	make	explicit	decisions	that	used	to	be

implicit.	A	decade	ago	we	didn't	have	to	decide	whether	we	wanted	to	receive
documents	at	home	or	take	calls	on	the	road.	It	was	easy	to	withdraw	to	your
house,	or	certainly	to	you======================================================== s,	and	if	they	were	controlled	finely
enough,	any	touch	sensation	could	be	duplicated.	If	a	large	number	of	tactels
poked	all	together	at	precisely	the	same	depth,	the	resulting	"surface"	would
feel	smooth,	as	if	a	piece	of	polished	metal	were	against	your	skin.	If	they
pushed	with	a	variety	of	randomly	distributed	depths,	it	would	feel	like	a
rough	texture.
Between	1	million	and	10	million	tactels—depending	on	how	many	different

levels	of	depth	a	tactel	had	to	convey—would	be	needed	for	a	VR	bodysuit.
Studies	of	the	human	skin	show	that	a	full	bodysuit	would	have	to	have	about
100	tactels	per	inch—a	few	more	on	the	fingertips,	lips,	and	a	couple	of	other
sensitive	spots.	Most	skin	actually	has	poor	touch	resolution.	I'd	guess	that
256	tactels	would	be	enough	for	the	highest-quality	simulation.	That's	the
same	number	of	colors	most	computer	displays	use	for	each	pixel.
The	total	amount	of	information	a	computer	would	have	to	calculate	to	pipe
senses	into	the	tactel	suit	is	somewhere	between	one	and	ten	times	the	amount
required	for	the	video	display	on	a	current	PC.	This	really	isn't	a	lot	of
computer	power.	I'm	confident	that	as	soon	as	someone	makes	the	first	tactel
suit,	PCs	of	that	era	will	have	no	problem	driving	them.
Sound	like	science	fiction?	The	best	descriptions	of	VR	actually	come	from
so-called	cyberpunk	science	fiction	like	that	written	by	William	Gibson.
Rather	than	putting	on	a	bodysuit,	some	of	his	characters	"jack	in"	by
plugging	a	computer	cable	directly	into	their	central	nervous	systems.	It	will
take	scientists	a	while	to	figure	out	how	this	can	be	done,	and	when	they	do,	it
will	be	long	after	the	highway	is	established.	Some	people	are	horrified	by	the
notion,	whereas	others	are	intrigued.	It	will	probably	first	be	used	to	help
people	with	physical	disabilities.
Inevitably,	there	has	been	more	speculation	(and	wishful	thinking)	about
virtual	sex	than	about	any	other	use	for	VR.	Sexually	explicit	content	is	as	old
as	information	itself.	It	never	takes	long	to	figure	out	how	to	apply	any	new
technology	to	the	oldest	desire.	The	Babylonians	left	erotic	poems	in
cuneiform	on	clay	tablets,	and	pornography	was	one	of	the	first	things	the
printing	press	was	used	for.	When	VCRs	became	common	home	appliances,
they	provoked	a	surge	in	the	sales	and	rentals	of	X-rated	videos,	and	today
pornographic	CD-ROMs	are	popular.	On-line	bulletin	boards	such	as	the
Internet	and	the	French	Minitel	system	have	lots	of	subscribers	for	their
sexually	oriented	services.	If	historical	patterns	are	a	guide,	a	big	early	market
for	advanced	virtual-reality	documents	will	be	virtual	sex.	But	again,
historically,	as	each	of	these	markets	grew,	explicit	material	became	a	smaller
and	smaller	factor.
Imagination	will	be	a	key	element	for	all	new	applications.	It	isn't	enough	just
to	re-create	the	real	world.	Great	movies	are	a	lot	more	than	just	graphic
depictions	on	film	of	real	events.	It	took	a	decade	or	so	for	such	innovators	as
D.	W.	Griffith	and	Sergei	Eisenstein	to	take	the	Vitascope	and	the	Lumièes'
Cinématographe	and	figure	out	that	motion	pictures	could	do	more	than
record	real	life	or	even	a	play.	Moving	film	was	a	new	and	dynamic	art	form

and	the	way	it	could	engage	an	audience	was	very	different	from	the	way	the
theater	could.	The	pioneers	saw	this	and	invented	movies	as	we	know	them
today.
Will	the	next	decade	bring	us	the	Griffiths	and	Eisensteins	of	multi-media?
There	is	every	reason	to	think	they	are	already	tinkering	with	the	existing
technology	to	see	what	it	can	do	and	what	they	can	do	with	it.
I	expect	multi-media	experimentation	will	continue	into	the	decade	after	that,
and	the	one	after	that,	and	so	on	indefinitely.	At	first,	the	multi-media
components	appearing	in	documents	on	the	information	highway	will	be	a
synthesis	of	current	media—a	clever	way	to	enrich	communication.	But	over
time	we	will	start	to	create	new	forms	and	formats	that	will	go	significantly
beyond	what	we	know	now.	The	exponential	expansion	of	computing	power
will	keep	changing	the	tools	and	opening	new	possibilities	that	will	seem	as
remote	and	farfetched	then	as	some	of	the	things	I've	speculated	on	here
might	seem	today.	Talent	and	creativity	have	always	shaped	advances	in
unpredictable	ways.
How	many	have	the	talent	to	become	a	Steven	Spielberg,	a	Jane	Austen,	or	an
Albert	Einstein?	We	know	there	was	at	least	one	of	each,	and	maybe	one	is	all
we're	allotted.	I	cannot	help	but	believe,	though,	that	there	are	many	talented
people	whose	aspirations	and	potential	have	been	thwarted	by	economics	and
their	lack	of	tools.	New	technology	will	offer	people	a	new	means	with	which
to	express	themselves.	The	information	highway	will	open	undreamed-of
artistic	and	scientific	opportunities	to	a	new	generation	of	geniuses.

7
IMPLICATIONS
FOR	BUSINESS
As	documents	become	more	flexible,	richer	in	multi-media	content,	and	less
tethered	to	paper,	the	ways	in	which	people	collaborate	and	communicate	will
become	richer	and	less	tied	to	location.	Almost	every	sphere	of	activity—
business,	education,	and	leisure—will	be	affected.	The	information	highway
will	revolutionize	communications	even	more	than	it	will	revolutionize
computing.	This	is	already	starting	in	the	workplace.
Because	the	most	efficient	businesses	have	an	advantage	over	their
competitors,	companies	have	an	incentive	to	embrace	technologies	that	make
them	more	productive.	Electronic	documents	and	networks	offer	businesses
opportunities	to	improve	their	information	management,	service,	and	internal
and	external	collaboration.	The	personal	computer	has	already	had	a	huge
effect	on	business.	But	its	greatest	impact	won't	be	felt	until	the	PCs	inside
and	outside	a	company	are	intimately	interconnected.
Over	the	next	decade,	businesses	worldwide	will	be	transformed.	Software
will	become	friendlier,	and	companies	will	base	the	nervous	systems	of	their
organizations	on	networks	that	reach	every	employee	and	beyond,	into	the
world	of	suppliers,	consultants,	and	customers.	The	result	will	be	companies
that	are	more	effective	and,	often,	smaller.	In	the	longer	run,	as	the
information	highway	makes	physical	proximity	to	urban	services	less
important,	many	businesses	will	decentralize	and	disperse	their	activities,	and
cities,	like	companies,	may	be	downsized.
In	just	the	next	five	years	the	communications	bandwidth	available	in	urban
business	areas	will	grow	by	a	factor	of	100,	as	network	providers	compete	to
connect	concentrations	of	high-use	customers.	Businesses	will	be	the	first
users	of	these	high-speed	networks.	Every	new	computing	technology	was
adopted	first	by	businesses	because	the	financial	benefits	of	advanced
information	systems	can	be	readily	demonstrated.
Managers	of	both	small	and	large	businesses	are	going	to	be	dazzled	by	the
capabilities	information	technology	has	to	offer.	Before	they	invest	they
should	remember	that	a	computer	is	just	a	tool	to	help	in	solving	identified

problems.	It	isn't,	as	people	sometimes	seem	to	expect,	a	magical	universal
panacea.	If	I	heard	a	business	owner	say,	"I'm	losing	money,	I'd	better	get	a
computer,"	I'd	tell	him	to	rethink	his	strategy	before	he	invests.	Technology
will,	at	best,	probably	delay	the	need	for	more	fundamental	changes.	The	first
rule	of	any	technology	used	in	a	business	is	that	automation	applied	to	an
efficient	operation	will	magnify	the	efficiency.	The	second	is	that	automation
applied	to	an	inefficient	operation	will	magnify	the	inefficiency.
Instead	of	rushing	out	to	buy	the	latest	and	greatest	equipment	for	every
employee,	managers	in	a	company	of	any	size	should	first	step	back	and	think
about	how	they	would	like	their	business	to	work.	What	are	its	essential
processes,	and	its	key	databases?	Ideally,	how	should	information	move?
For	example,	when	a	customer	calls,	does	all	the	information	about	your
dealings—the	status	of	the	account,	any	complaints,	a	history	of	who	in	your
organization	has	worked	with	the	customer—appear	immediately	on	a	screen?
The	technology	for	doing	this	is	quite	straightforward,	and,	increasingly,
customers	expect	the	level	of	service	it	affords.	If	your	systems	can't	provide
product-availability	information	or	quote	a	price	immediately,	you	risk	losing
out	to	a	competitor	who	is	taking	better	advantage	of	technology.	For
example,	some	car	companies	are	centralizing	service	information	so	that	any
dealer	can	easily	check	a	vehicle's	entire	service	history	and	watch	for
recurring	problems.
A	company	should	also	examine	all	of	its	internal	processes,	such	as
employee	reviews,	business	planning,	sales	analysis,	and	product
development,	and	determine	how	networks	and	other	electronic	information
tools	can	make	these	operations	more	effective.
There	has	been	quite	a	shift	in	the	way	we	think	about	and	use	computers	as
business	tools.	When	I	was	a	kid,	my	image	of	computers	was	that	they	were
very	big	and	powerful.	Banks	had	a	bunch.	Computers	let	big	airlines	keep
track	of	reservations.	They	were	the	tools	of	large	organizations	and	were	part
of	the	edge	big	businesses	had	over	the	small	guys	who	used	pencils	and
typewriters.
But	today	the	personal	computer,	as	the	name	suggests,	is	a	tool	for	the
individual,	even	in	a	large	company.	We	think	of	and	use	a	personal	computer
very	personally	to	help	us	get	our	job	done.
Those	doing	solo	work	can	write,	create	newsletters,	and	explore	new	ideas
better	with	a	personal	computer.	A	Luddite	might	ask,	"If	Churchill	had	used
a	word	processor,	would	his	writing	have	been	better?	Would	Cicero	have

given	better	speeches	in	the	Roman	Senate?"	Such	critics	have	a	notion	that
because	great	things	were	achieved	without	modern	tools,	it	is	presumptuous
to	suggest	that	better	tools	might	elevate	human	potential.	We	can	only
speculate	on	how	an	artist's	output	might	be	helped,	but	it	is	quite	clear	that
personal	computers	improve	business	processes,	efficiency,	and	accuracy.
Consider	the	average	reporter.	There	have	been	great	journalists	through
history,	but	today======================================================== o	ballet
slippers.	Of	course	you	will	still	ask	people	you	know	for	recommendations,
but	efficiently,	by	electronic	mail.
If	you're	thinking	of	doing	business	with	a	company	or	buying	a	product,
you'll	be	able	to	check	what	others	say	about	it.	If	you	want	to	buy	a
refrigerator,	you	will	look	for	the	electronic	bulletin	boards	containing	formal
and	informal	reviews	of	refrigerators	and	their	manufacturers	and	retailers.
You'll	get	into	the	habit	of	checking	these	bulletin	boards	before	you	make
any	significant	purchase.	When	you	have	a	compliment	or	complaint	about	a
record	club,	a	doctor,	or	even	a	computer	chip,	it	will	be	easy	to	find	the	place
on	the	network	where	that	company	or	product	is	discussed	and	add	your
opinion.	Ultimately,	companies	that	don't	serve	their	customers	well	will	see
their	reputations	and	their	sales	decline,	while	those	that	do	a	great	job	will

attract	sizable	followings	through	this	new	form	of	word	of	"mouth."
But	the	various	endorsements	and	especially	the	negative	comments	will	have
to	be	examined	carefully.	They	may	be	motivated	more	by	fanaticism	than	a
genuine	desire	to	share	pertinent	information.
Let's	say	a	company	is	selling	an	air	conditioner	that	99.9	percent	of	its
customers	are	very	happy	with.	One	angry	consumer	in	the	remaining	0.1
percent	can	post	horrible	insults	about	a	brand	of	air	conditioner,	the	company
that	manufactures	it,	and	individuals	in	the	company,	and	keep	sending	the
messages	over	and	over	and	over.	The	effect	could	be	compared	to	sitting	in	a
meeting	where	everyone	has	a	volume	control	that	could	be	set	from	0	to
1,000,	and	the	normal	level	of	conversation	is,	say,	3.	Then	a	few	people
decide	to	crank	their	volume	up	to	1,000	and	start	shouting.	This	means	that	if
I	happen	to	look	in	on	the	bulletin	board	because	I'm	buying	an	air
conditioner,	my	visit	may	be	a	waste	of	time	because	all	I	find	there	is	the
shouting.	It	is	unfair	to	me	and	to	the	company	selling	the	air	conditioners.
Already,	a	network	etiquette,	or	"netiquette,"	is	evolving.	As	the	information
highway	becomes	society's	town	square,	we	will	come	to	expect	it	to	conform
to	our	culture's	mores.	There	are	vast	cultural	differences	around	the	world,	so
the	highway	will	be	divided	into	different	parts,	some	dedicated	to	various
cultures,	and	some	specified	for	global	usage.	So	far,	a	frontier	mentality	has
prevailed,	and	participants	in	electronic	forums	have	been	known	to	lapse	into
behavior	that	is	antisocial	and	even	illegal.	Illegal	copies	of	copyrighted
intellectual	property,	including	articles,	books,	and	software	applications,	are
distributed	freely.	Get-rich-quick	scams	pop	up	here	and	there.	Pornography
flourishes	within	the	easy	reach	of	children.	Single-minded	voices	rant,
sometimes	almost	incessantly,	about	products,	companies,	and	people	they
have	come	to	dislike.	Forum	participants	get	horrible	insults	hurled	at	them
because	of	some	comment	they	have	made.	The	ease	with	which	an
individual,	any	individual,	can	share	his	opinions	with	the	members	of	a	huge
electronic	community	is	unprecedented.	And	the	ones	who	are	yelling	are
able,	because	the	electronic	community	is	so	efficient,	to	take	a	piece	of	hate
mail	and	post	it	on	twenty	bulletin	boards.	I've	seen	bulletin	boards	collapse
into	foolishness	after	people	start	getting	shrill.	Other	participants	in	the
discussion	don't	know	what	to	do.	Some	people	yell	back;	a	few	try	to	say
rational	things.	But	the	shrill	comments	continue,	and	that	destroys	the	sense
of	community.
The	Internet,	true	to	its	roots	as	an	academic	cooperative,	has	relied	on	peer
pressure	for	regulation.	For	example,	if	someone	in	a	discussion	group	posts

an	extraneous	comment	or,	worse,	tries	to	sell	something	in	an	electronic
forum	that	is	seen	by	others	as	a	noncommercial	setting,	the	would-be
diverger	or	merchant	may	get	a	withering	barrage	of	insults.	The	enforcement
so	far	has	been	mostly	by	self-appointed	censors
who	"flame"	those	they	believe	have	crossed	the	line	into	antisocial	behavior.
The	commercial	on-line	services	employ	volunteers	and	professional
moderators	to	monitor	conduct	on	their	bulletin	boards.	Forums	that	have
moderators	can	filter	out	some	antisocial	behavior	by	refusing	to	allow	insults
or	copyrighted	information	to	remain	on	a	system's	servers.	Most	Internet
forums	remain	unmoderated,	however.	Anything	goes,	and	because	people
can	post	messages	and	information	anonymously,	little	accountability	exists.
We	need	a	more	sophisticated	process	to	gather	consensus	opinions	without
depending	on	the	Attorney	General's	Consumer	Complaints	Division	to	act	as
a	filter.	We	will	have	to	find	some	way	to	force	people	to	turn	their	volume
down	so	the	highway	doesn't	become	an	amplifier	for	libel	or	slander	or	an
outlet	for	venting	irritation.
Many	providers	of	Internet	access	are	beginning	to	restrict	entry	to	forums
containing	sexually	explicit	material,	and	there	has	been	a	crackdown	on	the
illegal	traffic	of	copyrighted	materials.	Some	universities	are	getting	students
and	staff	to	remove	objectionable	postings.	This	rubs	some	the	wrong	way,
because	they	see	cyberspace	as	a	place	where	anything	goes.	The	commercial
services	have	had	similar	problems.	There	have	been	complaints	about
restriction	of	free	speech.	And	parents	were	outraged	when	their	family
account	was	closed	after	their	eleven-year-old	made	an	objectionable
comment	to	a	moderator.	Companies	will	create	special	communities	on	the
Internet	and	will	"compete"	by	having	rules	about	how	they	are	going	to	deal
with	these	issues.
Politicians	are	already	wrestling	with	the	question	of	when	an	on-line	service
should	be	treated	as	a	common	carrier	and	when	it	should	be	treated	as	a
publisher.	Telephone	companies	are	legally	considered	common	carriers.
They	transport	messages	without	assuming	any	responsibility	for	them.	If	an
obscene	caller	bothers	you,	the	telephone	company	will	cooperate	with	the
police,	but	nobody	thinks	it	is	the	phone	company's	fault	that	some	creep	is
calling	you	and	talking	dirty.	Magazines	and	newspapers,	on	the	other	hand,
are	publishers.	They	are	legally	responsible	for	their	content	and	can	be	sued
for	libel.	They	also	have	a	strong	interest	in	maintaining	their	reputation	and
editorial	integrity	because	that	is	an	important	part	of	their	business.	Any
responsible	newspaper	checks	very	carefully	before	making	a	previously

unpublished	allegation	about	someone—in	part	because	it	doesn't	want	a	libel
suit,	but	also	because	inaccuracy	would	hurt	its	reputation.
On-line	services	function	simultaneously	as	common	carriers	and	publishers,
which	is	where	the	problem	lies.	When	they	act	as	publishers,	and	offer
content	they	have	acquired,	authored,	or	edited,	it	makes	sense	that	the	rules
of	libel	and	the	self-governing	incentive	of	editorial	reputation	would	apply.
But	we	also	expect	them	to	deliver	our	e-mail	like	a	common	carrier	without
examining	or	taking	responsibility	for	its	contents.	Likewise,	chat	lines,
bulletin	boards,	and	forums	that	encourage	users	to	interact	without	editorial
supervision	are	a	new	means	of	communication,	and	shouldn't	be	treated	the
same	way	as	material	published	on	the	service.	A	New	York	judge,	however,
recently	cleared	the	way	for	a	libel	lawsuit	by	ruling	that	the	on-line	service
involved	was	a	publisher	of	information,	not	just	a	distributor.	Perhaps	by	the
time	you	read	this	things	will	have	been	clarified.	The	stakes	in	the	resolution
of	this	issue	are	high.	If	network	providers	are	treated	entirely	as	publishers,
they	will	have	to	monitor	and	preapprove	the	content	of	all	information	they
transmit.	This	could	create	an	unwelcome	atmosphere	of	censorship	and
curtail	spontaneous	exchange,	so	important	in	the	electronic	world.
Ideally,	the	industry	will	develop	some	standards	so	that	when	you	go	into	a
bulletin	board	or	article,	you	get	an	indication	of	whether	or	not	some
"publisher"	has	looked	it	over,	edited	it,	and	stands	behind	its	content.	The
question	will	be	what	standards	and	who	will	oversee	them?	A	bulletin	board
for	lesbians	should	not	be	forced	to	accept	antilesbian	comments,	nor	should	a
bulletin	board	about	some	product	be	overwhelmed	by	messages	from	a
competitor.	It	would	be	a	shame	to	have	to	keep	children	away	from	all
bulletin	boards,	but	it	would	also	be	unrealistic,	and	possibly	an	abridgment
of	free	expression,	to	force	all	bulletin	boards	to	undergo	review	by	someone
willing	to	accept	liability	for	everything	they	contain.	What	we	will	most
likely	end	up	with	is	a	series	of	categories,	like	the	ratings	given	movies,	that
will	indicate	whether	shrill	voices	have	been	controlled	and	whether	an
"editor"	has	deleted	messages	he	thought	were	out	of	line	with	the	policies	of
the	group	involved.
The	bulletin	boards	I've	been	discussing	are	the	free,	public	ones,	but	there
will	also	be	places	where	professional	information	and	advice	will	be	offered
for	a	fee.	You	might	wonder	why	you	would	need	an	expert	when	so	much
information	will	be	available.	For	the	same	reasons	you	might	need	one	now.
All	sorts	of	consumer	data	can	be	had	now.	Consumer	Reports	offers
objective	evaluations	of	a	lot	of	products,	but	the	reviews	are	aimed	at	a	broad
audience—they	don't	necessarily	discuss	your	particular	requirements.	If	you

can't	find	exactly	the	advice	you	need	on	the	highway,	you	will	be	able	to	hire
a	knowledgeable	sales	consultant,	for	five	minutes	or	an	afternoon,	via
videoconference.	She	will	help	you	choose	products,	which	your	computer
will	then	buy	for	you	from	the	cheapest	reliable	source.
I	expect	the	traditional	binding	together	of	advice	and	sales	to	be	much	less
prevalent,	because	although	the	advice	appears	free	to	the	customer,	it	is	paid
for	by	the	stores	and	services	that	offer	it.	This	cost	then	gets	added	on	to	the
price	of	the	goods.	Stores	that	are	charging	more	because	they	offer	advice
will	have	increasing	difficulty	competing	with	the	discounters	who	will
operate	on	the	information	highway.	The