======================================================== its  keep.  Given  our  beliefs  about  the  human  
mind,  the  success  of our widespread collaboration with  other human 
beings, and the degree to which we all rely on the  news, it is scarcely 
conceivable  that  a  respected  television  network  and  a  highly  paid  
anchorman  are  perpetrating  a  hoax,  or  that  thousands  of  firefight-
ers,  newsmen,  and  terrified  homeowners  have  mistaken  Texas  for  
Colorado.  Implicit in  such  commonsense judgments  lurks  an  under-
standing  of the  causal  connections  between  various  processes  in  the  
world,  the  likelihood  of different  outcomes,  and the  vested  interests,  
or  lack  thereof,  of those  whose  testimony  we  are  considering. What 
would  a  professional  news  anchor  stand  to  gain  from  lying  about  a  
fire  in  Colorado ? We  need  not go  into the details here; if the anchor 
on  the  evening  news  says  that  there  is  a  fire  in  Colorado  and  then  
shows  us  images  of  burning  trees,  we  can  be  reasonably  sure  that  
there  really  is  a  fire  in  Colorado.  
Proposition 2: What about the "truths" of science? Are they true'? 
Much  has  been  written  about  the  inherent  provisionality  of  scien-
tific  theories.  Karl  Popper  has  told  us  that  we  never  prove  a  theory  
right;  we  merely  fail  to  prove  it wrong.
32
 Thomas  Kuhn  has  told  us  
that  scientific  theories  undergo  wholesale  revision with  each  gener-
ation and therefore do not converge on the truth.
33
 There's no telling 
which  of  our  current  theories  will  be  proved  wrong  tomorrow,  so  
how  much  confidence  can  we  have  in  them?  Many  unwary  con-
sumers  of  these  ideas  have  concluded  that  science  is  just  another  
area  of  human  discourse  and,  as  such,  is  no  more  anchored  to  the  
facts  of  this  world  than  literature  or  religion  are.  All  truths  are  up  
for  grabs.  
But  all  spheres  of  discourse  are  not  on  the  same  footing,  for  the  
simple  reason  that  not  all  spheres  of discourse  seek  the  same  footing  
(or  any  footing  whatsoever).  Science  is  science  because  it  represents  

76         THE    END    OF   FAITH   
our  most  committed  effort  to  verify  that  our  statements  about  the  
world  are  true  (or  at  least  not  false).
34
  We  do  this  by  observation  
and  experiment  within  the  context  of  a  theory.  To  say  that  a  given  
scientific  theory  may  be  wrong  is  not  to  say  that  it  may  be  wrong  
in  its  every  particular,  or  that  any  other  theory  stands  an  equal  
chance  of  being  right.  What  are  the  chances  that  DNA  is  not  the  
basis  for  genetic  inheritance?  Well,  if  it  isn't,  Mother  Nature  sure  
has  a  lot  of  explaining  to  do.  She  must  explain  the  results  of  fifty  
years  of  experimentation,  which  have  demonstrated  reliable  corre-
lations   between  genotype   and  phenotype   (including  the   repro-
ducible   effects   of   specific   genetic   mutations).   Any   account   of   
inheritance  that  is  going  to  supersede  the  present  assumptions  of  
molecular  biology  will  have  to  account  for  the  ocean  of  data  that  
now  conforms  to  these  assumptions. What  are  the  chances  that  we  
will  one  day  discover  that  DNA  has  absolutely  nothing  to  do  with  
inheritance ?  They  are  effectively  zero.  
Proposition 3: Can we  rely on the authority of the pope?  Millions  
of Catholics  do,  of course.  He  is,  in  fact,  infallible  in matters  of faith 
and  morality.  Can  we  really  say  that  Catholics  are  wrong  to  believe  
that  the  pope  knows  whereof he  speaks?  We  surely  can.  
We  know  that  no  evidence  would  be  sufficient  to  authenticate  
many  of  the  pope's  core  beliefs.  How  could  anyone  born  in  the  
twentieth  century  come  to  know  that  Jesus  was  actually  born  of  a  
virgin?  What  process  of  ratiocination,  mystical  or  otherwise,  will  
deliver the  necessary  facts  about  a  Galilean woman's  sexual  history  
(facts  that  run  entirely  counter  to  well-known  facts  of human  biol-
ogy) ? There is  no such process.  Even  a time machine could not help 
us,  unless  we  were  willing  to  keep  watch  over  Mary  twenty-four  
hours  a day  for the months  surrounding the  probable time of Jesus' 
conception. 
Visionary  experiences,  in  and  of  themselves,  can  never  be  suffi-
cient  to  answer  questions  of historical  fact.  Let's  say  the  pope  had  a  
dream  about  Jesus,  and  Jesus  came  to  him  looking  fresh  from  Da  
Vinci's  brush. The  pope  would  not  even  be  in  a  position  to  say  that  

THE      NATURE      OF      BELIEF  77  
the  Jesus  of his  dream  looked  like  the  real  Jesus.  The  pope's  infalli-
bility,  no  matter  how  many  dreams  and  visions  he  may  have  had,  
does  not  even  extend to  making  a judgment  about whether  the  his-
torical  Jesus  wore  a  beard,  let  alone  whether  he  was  really  the  Son  
of God, born  of a virgin,  or able  to  raise the  dead. These  are just not 
the  kinds  of propositions  that  spiritual  experience  can  authenticate.  
Of  course,  we  could  imagine  a  scenario  in  which  we  would  give  
credence  to  the  pope's  visions,  or  to  our  own.  If Jesus  came  saying  
things  like  "The Vatican  Library  has  exactly thirty-seven thousand, 
two  hundred  and  twenty-six  books"  and  he  turned  out  to  be  right,  
we  would  then  begin  to  feel  that  we  were,  at the very  least,  in  dia-
logue  with  someone  who  had  something  to  say  about  the  way  the  
world   is.   Given   a   sufficient   number   of   verifiable   statements,   
plucked  from  the  ethers  of  papal  vision,  we  could  begin  speaking  
seriously  about  any  further  claims  Jesus  might  make.  The  point  is  
that  his  authority  would  be  derived  in  the  only  way  that  such  
authority  ever  is—by  making  claims  about  the  world  that  can  be  
corroborated  by  further  observation. As  far  as  proposition  3  is  con-
cerned,  it  is  quite  obvious  that  the  pope  has  nothing  to  go  on  but  
the  Bible  itself. This  document is  not  a  sufficient justification  for his 
beliefs,  given  the  standards  of evidence that prevailed at the time  of  
its  composition.  
WHAT  about  our much  championed  freedom  of religious  belief?  It  is  
no   different   from   our   freedoms   of   journalistic   and   biological   
belief—and  anyone  who  believes  that  the  media  are  perpetrating  a  
great  fire  conspiracy,  or  that  molecular  biology  is just  a  theory  that  
may  prove  totally  wrong,  has  merely  exercised  his  freedom  to  be  
thought  a  fool.  Religious  unreason  should  acquire  an  even  greater  
stigma  in  our  discourse,  given  that  it  remains  among  the  principal  
causes  of armed  conflict  in  our  world.  Before you  can  get  to  the  end  
of this  paragraph,  another  person  will  probably  die  because  of what 
someone  else  believes  about  God.  Perhaps  it  is  time  we  demanded  

78  THE      END      OF      FAITH      
that  our  fellow  human  beings  had  better  reasons  for  maintaining  
their  religious  differences,  if such  reasons  even  exist.  
We must  begin  speaking  freely about what  is  really  in  these holy 
books of ours, beyond the timid heterodoxies  of modernity—the gay 
and  lesbian  ministers,  the  Muslim  clerics  who  have  lost  their  taste  
for  public  amputations,  or  the  Sunday  churchgoers  who  have  never  
read their  Bibles quite through. A  close study of these  books,  and  of  
history, demonstrates that there is  no  act of cruelty so appalling that 
it  cannot  be justified,  or  even  mandated,  by  recourse  to  their  pages.  
It is  only by the  most  acrobatic  avoidance  of passages  whose  canon-
icity  has  never  been  in  doubt  that  we  can  escape  murdering  one  
another  outright  for  the  glory  of  God.  Bertrand  Russell  had  it  right  
when  he  made  the  following  observation:  
The  Spaniards  in  Mexico  and  Peru  used  to  baptize  Indian  infants  
and  then  immediately  dash  their  brains  out:  by  this  means  they  
secured these  infants went  to Heaven.  No orthodox  Christian  can  
find  any  logical  reason  for  condemning  their  action,  although  all  
nowadays   do   so.   In   countless  ways   the  doctrine   of  personal  
immortality  in  its  Christian  form  has  had  disastrous  effects  upon  
morals. . . .
35 
It  is  true  that  there  are  millions  of  people  whose  faith  moves  
them  to  perform extraordinary acts  of self-sacrifice  for the  benefit of 
others.  The  help  rendered  to  the  poor  by  Christian  missionaries  in  
the  developing  world  demonstrates  that  religious  ideas  can  lead  to  
actions  that  are  both  beautiful  and  necessary.  But  there  are  far  bet-
ter  reasons  for  self-sacrifice  than  those  that  religion  provides.  The  
fact that  faith  has motivated many people  to do good things  does  not  
suggest  that  faith  is  itself  a  necessary  (or  even  a  good)  motivation  
for  goodness.  It  can  be  quite  possible,  even  reasonable,  to  risk  one's  
life  to  save  others  without  believing  any  incredible  ideas  about  the  
nature  of the  universe.  
By  contrast,  the  most  monstrous  crimes  against  humanity  have  

THE      NATURE      OF      BELIEF  79  
invariably  been  inspired  by  unjustified  belief.  This  is  nearly  a  tru-
ism.  Genocidal  projects  tend  not  to  reflect  the  rationality  of  their  
perpetrators  simply  because  there  are  no  good reasons  to  kill  peace-
ful  people  indiscriminately.  Even where  such  crimes  have  been  sec-
ular, they  have required the======================================================== group  of about  30  embryonic  stem  cells.  
These  cells  have  two  properties  that  make  them  of  such  abiding  
interest  to  scientists:  as  stem  cells, they  can  remain  in  an  unspecial-

l66          THE    END     OF    FAITH    
ized  state,  reproducing  themselves  through  cell  division  for  long  
periods  of time  (a population  of such  cells  living in culture  is known 
as a cell line); stem  cells are also pluripotent, which means they have 
the  potential  to  become  any  specialized  cell  in  the  human  body—  
neurons  of the  brain  and  spinal  cord,  insulin-producing  cells  of the 
pancreas,  muscle  cells  of the  heart,  and  so  forth.  
Here  is  what  we  know. We  know  that  much  can  be  learned  from  
research  on  embryonic  stem  cells.  In  particular,  such  research  may  
give  us  further insight  into the  processes  of cell division  and  cell  dif-
ferentiation.  This  would  almost  certainly  shed  new  light  on  those  
medical  conditions,  like  cancer  and  birth  defects,  that  seem  to  be  
merely  a  matter  of  these  processes  gone  awry.  We  also  know  that  
research  on embryonic  stem  cells  requires  the destruction  of human 
embryos  at  the  150-cell  stage.  There  is  not  the  slightest  reason  to  
believe,  however,  that such embryos  have  the capacity to sense pain, 
to  suffer,  or  to  experience  the  loss  of  life  in  any  way  at  all. What  is  
indisputable  is that there are millions  of human  beings  who do have 
these  capacities,  and  who  currently  suffer  from  traumatic  injuries  to  
the brain  and  spinal cord.  Millions  more  suffer  from  Parkinson's  and  
Alzheimer's  diseases.  Millions  more  suffer  from  stroke  and  heart  
disease,  from  burns,  from  diabetes,  from  rheumatoid  arthritis,  from  
Purkinje  cell  degeneration,  from  Duchenne muscular dystrophy,  and  
from  vision  and  hearing  loss.  We  know  that  embryonic  stem  cells  
promise  to  be  a  renewable  source  of  tissues  and  organs  that  might  
alleviate  such  suffering  in  the  not  too  distant  future.  
Enter  faith:  we  now  find  ourselves  living  in  a  world  in  which  
college-educated  politicians  will  hurl  impediments  in  the  way  of  
such  research  because  they  are  concerned  about  the  fate  of  single  
cells.  Their  concern  is  not  merely  that  a  collection  of  150  cells  may  
suffer its destruction.  Rather, they believe that  even  a human zygote 
(a  fertilized  egg)  should  be  accorded  all  the  protections  of  a  fully  
developed  human  being.  Such  a  cell,  after  all,  has  the  potential  to  
become   a   fully   developed   human   being.   But   given   our   recent   
advances  in  the  biology  of  cloning,  as  much  can  be  said  of  almost  

WEST    OF    EDEN           l67           
every  cell  in  the  human  body.  By  the  measure  of  a  cell's  potential,  
whenever  the  president  scratches  his  nose  he  is  now  engaged  in  a  
diabolical  culling  of souls. 
Out  of deference  to  some  rather  poorly  specified tenets  of Chris-
tian  doctrine  (after  all,  nothing  in  the  Bible  suggests  that  killing  
human  embryos,  or even human  fetuses,  is  the  equivalent of killing 
a human being), the  U.S.  House  of Representatives voted  effectively  
to ban  embryonic  stem-cell  research  on  February  27,  2003.  
No  rational  approach  to  ethics  would  have  led  us  to  such  an  
impasse. Our present policy on human stem  cells has been shaped by 
beliefs  that  are  divorced  from  every  reasonable  intuition  we  might  
form  about  the  possible  experience  of living  systems.  In  neurologi-
cal  terms, we  surely visit more  suffering upon this  earth by killing a 
fly  than  by  killing  a  human  blastocyst,  to  say  nothing  of  a  human  
zygote  (flies,  after  all,  have  100,000  cells  in  their  brains  alone).  Of  
course,  the  point  at  which  we  fully  acquire  our  humanity,  and  our  
capacity to  suffer,  remains an open question. But anyone who would 
dogmatically  insist  that  these  traits  must  arise  coincident  with  the  
moment  of  conception  has  nothing  to  contribute,  apart  from  his  
ignorance,  to  this  debate.  Those  opposed  to  therapeutic  stem-cell  
research  on  religious  grounds  constitute  the  biological  and  ethical  
equivalent  of  a   flat-earth   society.  Our  discourse  on  the   subject   
should  reflect  this.  In  this  area  of public policy alone, the  accommo-
dations  that  we  have  made  to  faith  will  do  nothing  but  enshrine  a  
perfect  immensity  of human  suffering  for  decades  to  come.  
BUT  the  tendrils  of unreason  creep  further.  President Bush  recently  
decided  to  cut  off  funding  to  any  overseas  family-planning  group  
that  provides  information  on  abortion.  According  to  the  New  York  
Times,  this  "has  effectively  stopped  condom  provision  to  16  coun-
tries  and  reduced  it  in  13  others,  including  some  with  the  world's  
highest  rates  of AIDS  infection."
41
  Under the  influence  of Christian 
notions  of  the  sinfulness  of  sex  outside  of  marriage,  the  U.S.  gov-

l68          THE    END     OF    FAITH    
ernment  has  required  that  one-third  of  its  AIDS  prevention  funds  
allocated  to Africa be  squandered  on  teaching  abstinence  rather than 
condom use.  It  is  no exaggeration  to  say that millions  could  die  as  a  
direct  result  of  this  single  efflorescence  of  religious  dogmatism.  As  
Nicholas  Kristof points out, "sex kills, and so does this kind of blush-
ing  prudishness."
42  
And yet,  even  those  who  see  the  problem  in  all  its  horror  find it 
impossible  to  criticize  faith  itself.  Take  Kristof as  an  example:  in  the  
very  act  of  exposing  the  medievalism  that  prevails  in  the  U.S.  gov-
ernment,  and  its  likely  consequences  abroad,  he  goes  on  to  chastise  
anyone  who  would  demand  that  the  faithful  be  held  fully  account-
able  for  their  beliefs:  
I  tend  to  disagree  with  evangelicals  on  almost  everything,  and  I  
see  no  problem  with  aggressively pointing out  the  dismal  conse-
quences  of this  increasing  religious  influence.  For example,  evan-
gelicals'  discomfort  with  condoms  and  sex  education  has  led  the  
administration  to  policies  that  are  likely  to  lead  to  more  people  
dying  of AIDS  at  home  and  abroad,  not  to  mention  more  preg-
nancies  and  abortions.  
But  liberal  critiques  sometimes  seem  not just  filled  with  out-
rage  at  evangelical-backed  policies,  which  is  fair,  but  also  to  have  
a   sneering   tone   about   conservative   Christianity   itself.   Such   
mockery  of religious  faith  is  inexcusable. And  liberals  sometimes  
show  more  intellectual  curiosity  about  the  religion  of  Afghan-
istan  than  that  of  Alabama,  and  more  interest  in  reading  the  
Upanishads  than  in  reading  the  Book  of  Revelation.
43  
This is reason in ruins.  Kristof condemns the "dismal consequences" 
of  faith while honoring  their  cause.
44
  It  is true that  the  rules  of civil 
discourse  currently  demand  that  Reason  wear  a  veil  whenever  she  
ventures  out  in  public.  But the  rules  of  civil  discourse  must  change.  
Faith  drives  a  wedge between  ethics  and  suffering. Where  certain  
actions  cause  no  suffering  at  all,  religious  dogmatists  still  maintain  

WEST    OF    EDEN           l69           
that  they  are  evil  and  worthy  of  punishment  (sodomy,  marijuana  
use,  homosexuality,  the  killing  of blastocysts,  etc.). And  yet,  where  
suffering  and  death  are  found  in  abundance  their  causes  are  often  
deemed  to  be  good  (withholding  funds  for  family  planning  in  the  
third   world,   prosecuting   nonviolent   drug   offenders,   preventing   
stem-cell  research,  etc). This  inversion  of priorities  not  only  victim-
izes  innocent  people  and  squanders  scarce  resources;  it  completely  
falsifies  our  ethics.  It  is  time  we  found  a  more  reasonable  approach  
to  answering  questions  of right  and wrong. 

6 
A   Science   of  Good  and  Evil  
Is  THE  difference  between  good  and  evil just  a  matter  of what  any  
particular group of human beings says it is ?  Consider that one of the 
greatest  sources  of  amusement  in  sixteenth-century  Paris  was  cat  
burning.   At   the   midsummer's   fair   an   impresario   would   gather   
dozens  of  cats  in  a  net,  hoist  them  high  into  the  air  from  a  special  
stage,  and  then,  to  everyone's  delight,  lower  the  whole  writhing  
bundle  onto  a  bonfire.  The  assembled  spectators  "shrieked  with  
laughter as the animals, howling with pain, were singed, roasted, and 
finally  carbonized."
1
  Most  of  us  would  recoil  from  such  a  spectacle  
today. But would we be  right to do  so?  Can we say that there are eth-
ical  truths  of which  all  avid torturers  of  cats  are  ignorant?  
Many  people  appear  to  believe  that  ethical  truths  are  culturally  
contingent in  a way that  scientific truths  are  not.  Indeed,  this  loss  of  
purchase  upon  ethical  truth  seems  to  be  one  of the  principal  short-
comings  of  secularism.  The  problem  is  that  once  we  abandon  our  
belief  in  a  rule-making  God,  the  question  of  why  a  given  action  is  
good or bad becomes  a matter of debate. And  a statement  like "Mur-
der is wrong," while being uncontroversial in  most circles,  has  never  
seemed  anchored  to  the  facts  of  this  world  in  the  way  that  state-
ments  about  planets  or  molecules  appear  to  be.  The  problem,  in  
philosophical  terms,  has  been  one of characterizing just what  sort======================================================== faith  is  currently  taboo  in  every  
corner  of  our  culture.  On  this  subject,  liberals  and  conservatives  
have  reached  a  rare  consensus:  religious  beliefs  are  simply  beyond  
the scope of rational discourse. Criticizing a person's ideas about God 
and  the  afterlife  is  thought  to  be  impolitic  in  a  way  that  criticizing  
his  ideas  about  physics  or  history  is  not.  And  so  it  is  that  when  a  
Muslim  suicide  bomber  obliterates  himself  along  with  a  score  of  
innocents  on  a  Jerusalem  street,  the  role  that  faith  played  in  his  
actions  is  invariably  discounted.  His  motives must have  been politi-
cal,  economic,  or  entirely  personal. Without  faith,  desperate  people  
would  still  do  terrible things.  Faith  itself is  always,  and everywhere, 
exonerated. 
But  technology  has  a  way  of  creating  fresh  moral  imperatives.  
Our  technical  advances  in  the  art  of war  have  finally  rendered  our  

14        THE    END    OF    FAITH    
religious  differences—and  hence  our  religious   beliefs—antithetical   
to our survival. We  can  no  longer ignore  the  fact that billions  of our 
neighbors  believe  in the metaphysics  of martyrdom, or in  the literal 
truth  of  the  book  of  Revelation,  or  any  of  the  other  fantastical  
notions that  have lurked in the minds  of the  faithful  for millennia— 
because  our neighbors  are  now armed with  chemical,  biological,  and  
nuclear  weapons.  There  is  no  doubt  that  these  developments  mark  
the  terminal  phase  of  our  credulity.  Words  like  "God"  and  "Allah"  
must  go  the  way  of  "Apollo"  and  "Baal,"  or  they  will  unmake  our  
world. 
A  few  minutes  spent  wandering  the  graveyard  of  bad  ideas  sug-
gests that such conceptual revolutions are possible. Consider the  case  
of  alchemy:  it  fascinated  human  beings  for  over  a  thousand  years,  
and  yet  anyone  who  seriously  claims  to  be  a  practicing  alchemist  
today  will  have  disqualified  himself  for  most  positions  of  responsi-
bility  in  our  society  Faith-based  religion  must  suffer  the  same  slide  
into  obsolescence.  
What is the alternative to  religion as we  know it? As  it turns  out,  
this  is  the  wrong  question  to  ask.  Chemistry  was  not  an  "alterna-
tive"  to  alchemy;  it  was  a  wholesale  exchange  of  ignorance  at  its  
most  rococo  for  genuine  knowledge.
3
  We  will  find  that,  as  with  
alchemy,  to  speak  of  "alternatives"  to  religious  faith  is  to  miss  
the  point.  
OF  COURSE,  people  of  faith  fall  on  a  continuum:  some  draw  solace  
and  inspiration  from  a  specific  spiritual  tradition,  and  yet  remain  
fully  committed  to  tolerance  and  diversity,  while  others  would burn 
the  earth  to  cinders  if  it  would  put  an  end  to  heresy.  There  are,  in  
other  words,  religious  moderates  and  religious  extremists,  and  their  
various  passions  and  projects  should  not  be  confused.  One  of  the  
central themes  of this  book, however, is that religious moderates  are  
themselves  the  bearers  of  a  terrible  dogma:  they  imagine  that  the  
path  to  peace  will  be  paved  once  each  of  us  has  learned  to  respect  

REASON    IN    EXILE          15          
the  unjustified  beliefs  of  others.  I  hope  to  show  that  the  very  ideal  
of  religious  tolerance—born  of  the  notion  that  every  human  being  
should  be  free  to  believe  whatever  he  wants  about  God—is  one  of  
the  principal  forces  driving  us  toward the  abyss.  
We  have  been  slow  to  recognize  the  degree  to  which  religious  
faith  perpetuates  man's  inhumanity  to  man. This  is  not  surprising,  
since many  of us  still believe that  faith  is  an essential component  of  
human  life.  Two  myths  now  keep  faith  beyond  the  fray  of  rational  
criticism,  and they  seem  to  foster  religious  extremism  and  religious  
moderation equally: (1) most of us believe that there are good things 
that  people  get  from  religious  faith  (e.g.,  strong  communities,  ethi-
cal  behavior,  spiritual  experience)  that  cannot  be  had  elsewhere;  (2)  
many  of us  also  believe  that  the  terrible  things  that  are  sometimes  
done  in the  name  of religion  are  the  products  not  of faith  per  se but 
of our  baser  natures—forces  like  greed,  hatred,  and  fear—for which 
religious  beliefs  are  themselves the  best  (or  even the  only)  remedy.  
Taken  together,  these  myths  seem  to  have granted us  perfect immu-
nity  to  outbreaks  of reasonableness  in  our  public  discourse.  
Many  religious  moderates  have  taken  the  apparent  high  road  of  
pluralism,  asserting  the  equal  validity  of  all  faiths,  but  in  doing  so  
they  neglect  to  notice  the  irredeemably  sectarian  truth  claims  of  
each. As  long  as  a Christian believes that only his  baptized brethren 
will  be  saved  on  the  Day  of Judgment,  he  cannot  possibly  "respect"  
the  beliefs  of others,  for  he  knows  that  the  flames  of hell  have been 
stoked by these very ideas and await their adherents  even now. Mus-
lims  and  Jews  generally  take  the  same  arrogant  view  of  their  own  
enterprises  and  have  spent  millennia  passionately  reiterating  the  
errors  of  other  faiths.  It  should  go  without  saying  that  these  rival  
belief  systems  are  all  equally  uncontaminated  by  evidence.  
And  yet,  intellectuals  as  diverse  as  H.  G.  Wells,  Albert  Einstein,  
Carl Jung, Max Planck, Freeman Dyson, and Stephen Jay Gould have 
declared  the  war  between  reason  and  faith  to  be  long  over.  On  this  
view,  there  is  no  need  to  have  all  of our  beliefs  about  the  universe  
cohere.  A  person  can  be  a  God-fearing  Christian  on  Sunday  and  a  

l6         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
working  scientist  come  Monday  morning,  without  ever  having  to  
account  for the partition that  seems  to have erected  itself in  his  head  
while  he  slept.  He  can,  as  it were,  have  his  reason  and  eat  it  too. As 
the  early  chapters  of this  book  will  illustrate,  it  is  only  because  the  
church  has  been  politically  hobbled  in  the  West  that  anyone  can  
afford  to think  this  way.  In  places  where  scholars  can  still  be  stoned  
to  death  for  doubting  the  veracity  of the  Koran,  Gould's  notion  of a 
"loving  concordat"  between  faith  and  reason  would  be  perfectly  
delusional.
4 
This   is   not  to  say  that  the   deepest  concerns   of  the   faithful,   
whether  moderate  or  extreme,  are  trivial  or  even  misguided.  There  
is  no  denying  that  most  of  us  have  emotional  and  spiritual  needs  
that are now addressed—however obliquely and at a terrible  price—  
by  mainstream  religion.  And  these  are  needs  that  a  mere  under-
standing  of  our  world,   scientific   or  otherwise,  will  never   fulfill.   
There  is  clearly  a  sacred  dimension  to  our  existence,  and  coming  to  
terms  with  it  could  well  be  the  highest  purpose  of human  life.  But  
we  will  find  that  it  requires  no  faith  in  untestable  propositions—  
Jesus  was born  of  a  virgin;  the  Koran  is  the  word  of  God—for  us  to  
do this. 
The    Myth     of    "Moderation"    in    Religion    
The  idea that any  one  of our  religions  represents  the  infallible  word  
of the One True  God  requires  an  encyclopedic  ignorance  of history, 
mythology,  and  art  even  to  be  entertained—as  the  beliefs,  rituals,  
and iconography  of each  of our  religions  attest  to centuries  of cross-
pollination  among  them.  Whatever  their  imagined  source,  the  doc-
trines  of modern  religions  are no more tenable than those which,  for  
lack  of adherents,  were  cast  upon  the  scrap  heap  of mythology  mil-
lennia ago;  for there  is  no more  evidence  to justify a  belief in the lit-
eral  existence  of  Yahweh  and  Satan  than  there  was  to  keep  Zeus  
perched  upon  his  mountain  throne  or  Poseidon  churning  the  seas.  

REASON       IN       EXILE  17  
According  to  Gallup,  35  percent  of  Americans  believe  that  the  
Bible  is the literal  and inerrant word of the  Creator  of the universe.
5  
Another  48  percent  believe  that  it  is  the  "inspired"  word  of  the  
same—still  inerrant,  though  certain  of  its  passages  must  be  inter-
preted  symbolically  before  their truth  can be brought  to  light.  Only  
17  percent  of us  remain  to  doubt that  a  personal  God,  in  his  infinite  
wisdom,  is  likely  to  have  authored  this  text—or,  for  that  matter,  to  
have  created  the  earth  with  its  250,000  species  of  beetles.  Some  46  
percent  of  Americans  take  a  literalist  view  of  creation  (40  percent  
believe  that  God  has  guided  creation  over  the  course  of millions  of  
years).  This  means  that  120  million  of  us  place  the  big  bang  2,500  
years  after the  Babylonians  and  Sumerians  learned  to  brew  beer.  If  
our polls are to be trusted, nearly 230 million Americans believe that 
a  book  showing  neither  unity  of  style  nor  internal  consistency  was  
authored  by  an  omniscient,  omnipotent,  and  omnipresent  deity.  A  
survey of Hindus, Muslims, and Jews around the world would surely 
yield  similar  results,  revealing  that  we,  as  a  species,  have  grown  
almost perfectly intoxicated by our myths. How is it that, in this one 
area  of our  lives,  we have  convinced  ourselves that our  beliefs  about  
the  world  can  float entirely  free  of reason  and  evidence?  
It  is  with  respect  to  this  rather  surprising  cognitive  scenery  that  
we  must  decide  what  it  means  to  be  a  religious  "moderate"  in  the======================================================== (1995): 52-62,137-58. 
Bohm,  D., and  B.  J. Hiley.  The  Undivided  Universe.  London: Routledge, 1993. 
Bok,  S.  Lying:  Moral  Choice  in  Public  and  Private  Life.  New York: Vintage,  1978.  
Bouveresse,  J.  Wittgenstein  Reads  Freud:  The  Myth  of  the  Unconscious.  Translated  
by C. Cosman. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1995. 
Bowden,  M.  "The  Dark  Art  of  Interrogation."  Atlantic  Monthly,  March  2003,  pp.  
51-77. 
Bowker,  J.,  ed.   The  Oxford  Dictionary   of  World  Religions.   Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  
Press, 1997. 
——.       What  Muslims  Believe.  Oxford:  Oneworld,  1998.  
Boyer,  P.  When  Time  Shall  Be  No  More:  Prophecy  Belief  in  Modern  American  Cul-
ture.  Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press, 1992. 
Braun,  S.  The  Science  of  Happiness:  Unlocking  the  Mysteries  of  Mood.  New  York:  
John  Wiley,  2000.  
Briggs,  R.   Witches   and  Neighbors:  The   Social  and  Cultural  Context  of  European  
Witchcraft.  New York: Viking,  1996.  
Brisick,  W,  ed.  Crystal  Cave:  A  Compendium  of  Teachings  by  Masters  of  the  Prac-
tice  Lineage.  Translated  by  E.  P.  Kunsang.  Katmandu:  Rangjung  Yeshe  Publica-
tions, 1990. 

306           BIBLIOGRAPHY           
Brockman,  J.,  ed.  The  Next  Fifty  Years:  Science  in  the  First  Half  of  the  Twenty-first  
Century.  New  York:  Vintage,  2002.  
——,      ed.  The  Third  Culture.  New York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1995.  
Buber, M., ed.  Ecstatic  Confessions. Translated by E. Cameron. New York: Harper and 
Row, 1985. 
——.      7  and Thou.  Translated by W.  Kaufmann.  New  York:  Charles  Scribner,  1970.  
Buckley, W.  R,  Jr.  "The War  on  Drugs  Is  Lost."  National  Review,  Feb.  12,1996.  
——.      "Abolish Drug Laws?: 400  Readers Give Their Views."  National Review, July 
1,1996. 
Buddhaghosa.  The  Path  of Purification. Translated  by  Bhikkhu  Nanamoli.  Kandy,  Sri  
Lanka:  Buddhist  Publication  Society,  1975.  
Burt, A.  M.  Textbook  of Neuroanatomy.  Philadelphia:  W.  B.  Saunders,  1993.  
Campbell,  A.  "Cartesian  Dualism  and  the  Concept  of  Medical  Placebos."  Journal  of  
Consciousness  Studies  1,  no  2  (1994):  230-33.  
Campbell,  J.  The  Hero  with  a  Thousand  Faces.  Princeton:  Princeton  Univ.  Press,  
1949. 
Canetti, E.  Crowds and Power. Translated by C. Stewart. New York: Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux,  1962.  
Carroll,  J.  "The  Silence."  New  Yorker, April  7,1997.  
——.       Constantine's  Sword:  The  Church  and  the  Jews.  Boston:  Houghton  Mifflin,  
2001. 
Casebeer,  W.  D.  "Moral  Cognition  and  Its  Neural  Constituents."  Nature  Reviews  
Neuroscience  4  (2003):  840-46.  
Chalmers,  D.  J.  The  Conscious  Mind:  In  Search  of  a  Fundamental  Theory.  Oxford:  
Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1996.  
Cheney,  D.  L.,  and  R.  M.  Seyfarth.  How  Monkeys  See  the  World:  Inside  the  Mind  of  
Another  Species.  Chicago:  Univ.  of  Chicago  Press,  1990.  
Chisholm,  R.  M.  "On  the  Observability  of  the  Self."  Philosophy  and  Phenomeno-
logical  Research  30  (1969): 7-21. 
Chomsky, N. 9-11. New York:  Seven  Stories  Press,  2001.  
Chuang  Tzu.  Basic  Writings.  Translated  by  B.  Watson.  New  York:  Columbia  Univ.  
Press, 1964. 
Churchland,  P.  M.  Scientific  Realism  and  the  Plasticity  of  Mind.  Cambridge:  Cam-
bridge Univ. Press, 1979. 
——.       Matter  and  Consciousness.  Cambridge:  MIT  Press,  1988.  
——.       "Knowing  Qualia:  A  Reply  to  Jackson."  In  The  Nature  of  Consciousness:  
Philosophical  Debates,  ed.  N.  Block,  O.  Flanagan,  and  G.  Güzeldere.  Cambridge:  
MIT Press,  1997.  
Churchland,  P.  S.,  and  P.  M.  Churchland.  "Neural Worlds  and  Real Worlds."  Nature  
Reviews  Neuroscience  3  (2002):  903-7.  
Cialdini,  R.  B.  Influence:  The  Psychology  of Persuasion.  New  York:  Quill,  1993.  
Cohen, J. D., and K. I. Blum. "Reward and Decision." Neuron 36, no. 2  (2002): 193-98. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY            307            
Collins,  L.,  and  D.  Lapierre.  Freedom  at  Midnight.  New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  
1975. 
Conway,  M. A.  "Repression  Revisited."  Nature 410  (March  15,  2001): 319-20. 
Conze,  E.  A  Short  History  of  Buddhism.  Oxford:  Oneworld,  1980.  
——,       trans,   and   ed.   Buddhist   Texts   through   the   Ages.   Boston:   Shambhala,   
1990. 
Copleston,  F.  A  History  of Philosophy.  9  vols.  New York:  Image,  1960-77.  
Corballis,  M.  C.  "Sperry  and  the  Age  of  Aquarius:  Science,  Values,  and  the  Split  
Brain."  Neuropsychologia  36  (1998):  1083-87.  
Crick,  F.  The  Astonishing  Hypothesis:  The  Scientific  Search  for  the  Soul.  New  York:  
Charles  Scribner,  1994.  
Crick,  F., and  C.  Koch. "Consciousness and Neuroscience."  Cerebral  Cortex  8  (1998):  
97-107. 
——.      "The  Unconscious  Humunculus."  In  The  Neural  Correlates  of  Conscious-
ness,  ed. T. Metzinger. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1999. 
——.      "The  Problem  of Consciousness."  Scientific American  Special  Edition  12,  no.  
1  (2002):  10-17.  
Dahlbom,  B.,  ed.  Dennett  and  His  Critics.  Oxford:  Blackwell,  1993.  
Damasio,  A.  Descartes'  Error:  Emotion,  Reason,  and  the  Human  Brain.  New  York:  
Avon  Books, 1994. 
——.      "How  the  Brain  Creates  the  Mind."  Scientific  American  Special  Edition  12,  
no.  1  (2002): 4-9. 
——.       Looking  for  Spinoza:  joy,  Sorrow,  and  the  Feeling  Brain.  New  York:  Har-
court, 2003. 
Daprati,  E.,  N.  Franck,  N.  Georgieff,  J.  Proust,  E.  Pacherie,  J.  Dalery,  M.  Jeannerod.  
"Looking   for   the   Agent:   An   Investigation   into   Consciousness   and   Self-
consciousness  in  Schizophrenic  Patients."  Cognition  65  (1997):  71-86.  
Davidson,  D.  "A  Coherence Theory  of Truth  and Knowledge."  Undated MS. 
——.      "A  Nice Derangement  of Epitaphs."  Undated  MS.  
——.      "The  Myth  of the  Subjective."  Undated  MS.  
——.      "Actions,  Reasons,  and  Causes."  In  Essays  on  Actions  and  Events.  Oxford:  
Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1980.  
——.      "Paradoxes  of  Irrationality."  In  Philosophical  Essays  on  Freud,  ed.  R. Woll-
heim and J. Hopkins.  Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press,  1982.  
——.       Inquiries  into  Truth  and  Interpretation.  Oxford:  Clarendon  Press,  1984.  
——.      "Deception  and  Division."  In  The  Multiple  Self,  ed.  J.  Elster.  Cambridge:  
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1985. 
——.       "Knowing  One's  Own  Mind."  Proceedings  and  Addresses  of  the  American  
Philosophical Association  60  (1987):  441-58.  
——.      "Who  Is  Fooled?"  In  Self-Deception  and  Paradoxes  of  Rationality,  ed.  J.  P.  
Dupuy. Stanford:  CSLI  Publications,  1998.  
Davies,  N.  Europe: A  History.  Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1996.  

308             BIBLIOGRAPHY             
Davies,  P.  Are  We  Alone?:  Philosophical  Implications  of  the  Discovery  of  Extrater-
restrial  Life.  New York:  Basic  Books,  1995.  
Davies,  P.,  and  J.  Gribbin.  The  Matter  Myth.  New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1992.  
Davies,  P., and J.  R. Brown, eds.  The  Ghost in  the Atom.  Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. 
Press, 1986. 
Davies,  R.  R.,  J.  H.  Xuereb,  and  J.  R.  Hodges.  "The  Human  Perirhinal  Cortex  in  
Semantic  Memory: An  in  Vivo  and  Postmortem  Volumetric  Magnetic  Resonance  
Imaging  Study  in  Semantic  Dementia,  Alzheimer's  Disease  and  Matched  Con-
trols."  Neuropathology  and  Applied  Neurobiology  28,  no.  2  (April  2002):  167-68  
[abstract]. 
Davis, M. H., and I. S. Johnsrude. "Hierarchical Processing in Spoken Language Com-
prehension."  Journal  of  Neuroscience  23  (2003):  3423-31.  
Davis,  P.  J.,  and  R.  Hersh.  The  Mathematical  Experience.  Boston:  Houghton  Mifflin,  
1981. 
Dawkins,  R.  Climbing  Mount  Improbable.  New  York:  W.  W.  Norton,  1996.  
Dawood,  N.  J., trans.  The  Koran. New York: Viking,  1956.  
de  Quincey,  C.  "Consciousness All  the Way  Down?"  Journal  of  Consciousness  Stud-
ies 1, no. 2 (1994): 217-29. 
——.      "Conceiving  the  'Inconceivable'?"  Journal  of  Consciousness  Studies  7,  no.  4  
(2000): 67-81. 
deCharms,  C.  Two  Views  of Mind: Abhidharma  and  Brain  Science.  Ithaca, N.Y:  Snow  
Lion  Publications,  1998.  
Delacour, J.  "An  Introduction  to the  Biology  of Consciousness."  Neuropsychologia  33  
(1995): 1061-74. 
Denes,  G., and M. Signorini. "Door But Not Four and 4 a Category  Specific Transcod-
ing  Deficit in  a  Pure Acalculic Patient."  Cortex 37, no.  2  (2001):  267-77.  
Dennett,   D.   C.   "Intentional   System   in   Cognitive   Ethology:   The   Tanglossian   
Paradigm'  Defended."  Behavioral  and  Brain  Sciences  6  (1983):  343-90.  
——.       Elbow  Room:  The  Varieties  of  Free  Will  Worth  Wanting.  Cambridge:  MIT  
Press, 1984. 
——.      Consciousness  Explained.  Boston:  Little,  Brown,  1991.  
——.       Darwin's  Dangerous  Idea:  Evolution  and  the  Meanings  of  Life.  New  York:  
Simon  and  Schuster,  1995.  
——.       "Facing  Backwards  on  the  Problem  of  Consciousness."  Journal  of  Con-
sciousness  Studies  3,  no.  1  (1996): 4-6. 
——.      "It's  Not  a  Bug,  It's  a  Feature."  Journal  of  Consciousness  Studies  7,  no.  4  
(2000): 25-27. 
Dershowitz, A.  The  Case for Israel.  Hoboken,  N.J.:  John Wiley,  2003.  
Descartes,  R.  Discourse  and  Method  and  Meditations.  Translated  by  L.  J.  Lafleur.  
Indianapolis:  Library  of Liberal Arts,  1960.  
Deutsch,  D.  The  Fabric  of Reality.  New York:  Penguin,  1997.  
Dewey,  J.  Reconstruction  in  Philosophy.  1920;  reprint,  Boston:  Beacon  Press,  1957.  

BIBLIOGRAPHY            309            
Diamond,  J.  Guns,  Germs,  and  Steel: The  Fates  of Human  Societies.  New York: W. W 
Norton,  1997.  
——.      "The  Last Americans:  Environmental  Collapse  and the  End  of  Civilization."  
Harper's, June 2003,======================================================== Prac-
tice   of  Meditation.  Translated  by  Thanissaro  Bhikkhu.  Bangkok:   P.  Sumphan  
Panich, 1987. 
——.      1988.  Things  as  They  Are.  Translated  by  Thanissaro  Bhikkhu.  Bangkok:  P.  
Samphan  Panich,  1988.  
Mahasi  Sayadaw.  Buddhist  Meditation  and  Its  Forty  Subjects.  Translated  by  U  Pe  
Thin.  N.p.: Buddha  Sasana  Council  Press,  1957.  
——.      Thoughts  on  the  Dhamma.  Kandy,  Sri  Lanka:  Buddhist  Publication  Society,  
1983. 
——.       The   Progress   of  Insight.   Translated  by  Nyanaponika  Thera.   Kandy,   Sri   
Lanka:  Buddhist  Publication  Society,  1985.  
Malachowski,  A.,  ed.  Reading  Rorty.  Oxford:  Blackwell,  1990.  
Manchester,  W.  A  World  Lit  Only  by  Fire:  The  Medieval  Mind  and  the  Renaissance.  
Boston: Little, Brown, 1992. 
Margulis,  L.,  and  D.  Sagan.  Slanted  Truths:  Essays  on  Gaia,  Symbiosis,  and  Evolu-
tion.  New York:  Springer-Verlag,  1997.  
Marks,  C.  E.  Commissurotomy,  Consciousness,  and  the  Unity  of Mind.  Montgomery,  
Vt.:  Bradford  Books,  1980.  
Marr, D. "Understanding Complex Information-Processing Systems."  In  Vision. New 
York: W. H. Freeman, 1982. 
Martin,  J.  H.  Neuroanatomy:  Text  and  Atlas.  Stamford,  Conn.:  Appleton  and  Lange,  
1996. 
Masson,  J.  M.  My  Father's  Guru.  Reading,  Mass.: Addison-Wesley,  1993.  
Masson,  J.  M.,  and  S.  McCarthy.  When  Elephants  Weep:  The  Emotional  Lives  of Ani-
mals. New York: Delacorte  Press,  1995.  
Mates,  B.,  ed.  and  trans.  The  Skeptic  Way:  Sextus  Empiricus's  Outlines  of  Pyrrhon-
ism.  Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1996.  

320            BIBLIOGRAPHY            
McCormick,  P.  J.,  ed.  Star  Making:  Realism,  Anti-realism,  and  Irrealism.  Cambridge:  
MIT Press,  1996.  
McGinn,  C.  "Consciousness  and  Space."  Journal  of  Consciousness  Studies  2,  no.  3  
(1995):  220-30.  
——.      "Can We  Solve  the  Mind-Body  Problem?"  In  The  Nature  of Consciousness: 
Philosophical  Debates,  ed.  N.  Block,  O.  Flanagan,  and  G.  Güzeldere.  Cambridge:  
MIT Press,  1997.  
——.       The  Mysterious  Flame:  Conscious  Minds  in  a  Material  World.  New  York:  
Basic Books, 1999. 
McKenna, T.  The Archaic  Revival.  San  Francisco:  Harper  San  Francisco,  1991.  
——.      Food  of the  Gods: The  Search for  the  Original Tree  of Knowledge.  New York: 
Bantam  Books,  1992.  
——.      True  Hallucinations.  San  Francisco:  Harper  San  Francisco,  1993.  
Medin,   D.   L.   "Concepts   and   Conceptual   Structure."   American   Psychologist  44  
(1989): 1469-81. 
Mele, A.  R.  "Real Self-Deception."  Behavioral and  Brain  Sciences  20  (1997): 91-102. 
——.      "Understanding and  Explaining  Real  Self-Deception."  Behavioral  and  Brain  
Sciences  20  (1997): 127-36. 
——.       Self-Deception  Unmasked.  Princeton:  Princeton  Univ.  Press,  2001.  
Melton, J. G., ed. American Religious  Creeds. 3 vols. New York: Triumph Books, 1991. 
Menand,  L.  The  Metaphysical  Club:  The  Story  of  Ideas  in  America.  New  York:  Far-
rar,  Straus  and Giroux,  2001.  
Merikle,  P.  M.,  and  M.  Daneman.  "Conscious  vs.  Unconscious  Perception."  In  The  
New  Cognitive  Neurosciences.  2d  ed.  Edited  by  M.  S.  Gazzaniga.  Cambridge:  MIT  
Press, 2000. 
Metzger,  B. M., and M. D.  Coogan.,  eds.  The  Oxford  Companion  to  the  Bible. Oxford: 
Oxford Univ.  Press,  1993.  
Miller,  W.  I.  Humiliation:  And  Other  Essays  on  Honor,  Social  Discomfort,  and  Vio-
lence.  Ithaca: Cornell Univ. Press, 1993. 
——.       The  Anatomy  of Disgust.  Cambridge:  Harvard  Univ.  Press,  1997.  
Minsky,  M.  The  Society  of Mind.  New York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1985.  
——.      "Consciousness  Is  a  Big  Suitcase."  1998  Interview,  www.edge.org/3rd_cul  
ture/minsky/index.html 
Mischel,  W.  Introduction  to  Personality.  6th  ed.  Orlando:  Harcourt  Brace  College  
Publishers, 1999. 
Mishra,  P.  "The  Other   Face  of  Fanaticism."   New  York  Times   Magazine,   Feb.  2,  
2003. 
Mitchell,  S.  The  Gospel  according  to Jesus.  New York:  HarperCollins,  1991.  
Monk,   R.  Ludwig  Wittgenstein:  The  Duty   of  Genius.  New  York:  Viking  Penguin,  
1990. 
——.       Bertrand  Russell:  The  Spirit  of  Solitude,  1872-1921.  New  York:  Free  Press,  
1996. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY           321           
Montaigne.  The  Complete  Works  of  Montaigne.  Translated  by  D.  M.  Frame.  Stan-
ford:  Stanford  Univ.  Press,  1943.  
Murphy, J.  P.  Pragmatism: From  Peirce  to  Davidson.  Boulder,  Colo.: Westview Press, 
1990. 
Murphy,  M.  P., and  L. A.  J. O'Neill,  eds.  What Is  Life? The  Next  Fifty  Years:  Specula-
tions  on  the  Future  of Biology.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  Univ.  Press,  1995.  
Murti,  T.  The  Central  Philosophy  of Buddhism.  London: Allen  and  Unwin,  1974.  
Naess, A.  A  Skeptical  Dialogue  on  Induction. Assen,  Netherlands: Vangorcum,  1984.  
Nagarjuna.   Nagarjuna's    Seventy    Stanzas:   A    Buddhist   Psychology   of   Emptiness.   
Translated by D.  R. Comito.  Ithaca,  N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1987. 
——.         The  Fundamental  Wisdom   of  the  Middle  Way:  Nagarjuna's  Mulamadhya-
makakarika.  Edited  and Translated  by  J.  L.  Garfield.  Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  
1995. 
Nagel, T.  Mortal  Questions.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  Univ.  Press,  1979.  
——.      The  View from  Nowhere.  Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1986.  
——.       What  Does  It  All  Mean?: A  Very  Short  Introduction  to  Philosophy.  Oxford:  
Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1987.  
——.      Other  Minds.  Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1995.  
——.      The  Last  Word.  Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1997.  
Nahmias,  E.  A.  "Verbal  Reports  on  the  Contents  of  Consciousness:  Reconsidering  
Introspectionist  Methodology."  Psyche,  Oct.  2002.  
Naipaul,  V.  S.  Among  the  Believers: An  Islamic  journey.  New  York:  Vintage,  1981.  
——.      India: A  Million  Mutinies  Now.  New  York:  Viking,  1990.  
Namgyal,  T.  T.  Mahamudra:  The  Quintessence  of  Mind  and  Meditation.  Translated  
by L. P. Lhalungpa. Boston: Shambhala, 1986. 
Nanamoli Thera, ed.  Selected Buddhist Texts.  Vol. 1.  Kandy,  Sri  Lanka: Buddhist Pub-
lication  Society,  1958.  
——,       trans.  Mindfulness  of  Breathing.  Kandy,  Sri  Lanka:  Buddhist  Publication  
Society, 1982. 
Nanamoli,  Bhikkhu,  trans.  The  Middle  Length  Discourses  of  the  Buddha:  A  New  
Translation  of  the  Majjhima  Nikaya.  Edited  by  Bhikkhu  Bodhi.  Boston:  Wisdom  
Publications, 1995. 
Narada  Maha  Thera.  The  Buddha  and  His  Teachings.  Kandy,  Sri  Lanka:  Buddhist  
Publication  Society,  1973.  
Newberg, A.  B. "The Neuropsychology of Religious  and Spiritual  Experience." Jour-
nal  of  Consciousness  Studies  7,  nos.  11-12  (2000):  251-66.  
Newberg,  A.  B.,  A.  Alavi,  M.  Baime,  M.  Pourdehnad,  J.  Santanna,  and  E.  d'Aquili.  
"The  Measurement  of  Regional  Cerebral  Blood  Flow  during the  Complex  Cogni-
tive  Task  of Meditation: A  Preliminary  SPECT  Study."  Psychiatry  Research:  Neu-
roimaging  Section  106  (2001):  113-22.  
Nichols,  M.  J.,  and  W.  T.  Newsome.  "The  Neurobiology  of  Cognition."  Nature  402  
(1999): SUPP,C35-C38. 

322           BIBLIOGRAPHY           
Niemeier,  M.,  J.  Douglas  Crawford,  and  D.  B.  Tweed.  "A  Bayesian  Approach  to  
Change  Blindness."  Annals  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Sciences  956   (2002):   
474-75.  [abstract]  
Nietzsche,  F.  The  Portable  Nietzsche.  Translated by W.  Kaufmann.  New York: Viking, 
1954. 
——.       Thus  Spoke  Zarathustra.  Translated  by  W.  Kaufmann.  New  York:  Penguin  
Books, 1954. 
——.       Beyond  Good  and  Evil.  Translated  by  W.  Kaufmann.  New  York:  Vintage  
Books, 1966. 
——.       On  the  Genealogy  of  Morals  and  Ecce  Homo.  Translated  by  W.  Kaufmann.  
New York: Vintage Books, 1967. 
——.      The  Birth  of Tragedy.  New York:  Dover,  1995.  
Nikhilananda,   Swami,   trans.   The   Bhagavad   Gita.   New   York:   Ramakrishna-
Vivekananda  Center,  1979.  
Nisargadatta Maharaj.  J Am  That. Translated by M.  Frydman,  edited by  S.  S. Dikshit. 
Durham, N.C.: Acorn Press, 1973. 
——.      Prior to  Consciousness. Edited by J. Dunn. Durham, N.C.: Acorn Press, 1985. 
——.       The  Nectar  of  the  Lord's  Feet.  Edited  by  R.  Powell.  Great  Britain:  Element  
Books, 1987. 
——.       The  Ultimate  Medicine.  Edited  by  R.  Powell.  San  Diego:  Blue  Dove  Press,  
1994. 
Niznik,  J.,  and  J. T.  Sanders,  eds.  Debating  the  State  of Philosophy:  Habermas,  Rorty,  
and  Kolakowski.  Westport,  Conn.:  Praeger,  1996.  
Norbu,  N.  The  Small  Golden  Key. Translated  by  L. Anderson.  New York:  Jewel  Pub-
lishing House,  1977.  
——.       The  Crystal  and  the  Way  of Light.  Edited by  J.  Shane.  New York:  Routledge  
and Kegan  Paul,  1986.  
——.       The  Cycle  of Day  and  Night.  Translated by  J.  M.  Reynolds.  New  York:  Sta-
tion Hill Press,  1987.  
——.       Dzogchen: The  Self-Perfected  State. Translated by J.  Shane.  London: Arkana, 
1989. 
——.       Dream  Yoga  and  the  Practice  of  Natural  Light.  Edited  by  M.  Katz.  Ithaca,  
N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1992. 
Norbu, T.  Magic  Dance. New York:  Jewel  Publishing House, 1981. 
——.       White  Sail.  Boston:  Shambhala,  1992.  
Norretranders, T. The  User  Illusion:  Cutting  Consciousness  Down  to  Size.  New York: 
Viking, 1998. 
Nozick,  R.  Philosophical  Explanations.  Cambridge:  Harvard  Univ.  Press,  1981.  
Nuland,  S.  B.  How  We  Die:  Reflections  on  Life's  Final  Chapter.  New York:  Alfred A. 
Knopf, 1994. 
Nyanaponika  Thera.  The  Heart  of  Buddhist  Meditation.  York  Beach,  Maine:  Samuel  
Weiser,  1962.  

BIB  LIOGRAPHY            323            
——.       The  Vision   of  Dhamma.  Edited  by  Bhikkhu  Bodhi.  York  Beach,======================================================== articles  of  faith  regularly  pro-
duces  utterances  of this  sort:  "Islam  is  a  religion  of peace. The  very  
word 'Islam,'  after  all,  means  'peace.' And  suicide  is  forbidden in  the  
Koran.  So  there  is  no  scriptural  basis  whatsoever  for  the  actions  of  
these  terrorists."  To  such  magician's  patter,  we  might  add  that  the  
phrase  "dirty  bomb"  does  not  appear  anywhere  in  the  text  of  the  
Koran. Yes, the Koran seems to say something that can be construed 
as   a   prohibition   against   suicide—"Do   not   destroy   yourselves"   
(4:29)—but  it  leaves  many  loopholes  large  enough  to   fly  a  767  
through: 
Let those who  would  exchange  the  life  of this world  for the here-
after,  fight  for  the  cause  of  God;  whoever  fights  for  the  cause  of  

34         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
God, whether he  dies or triumphs, We shall richly reward him 
The true believers  fight  for the cause of God, but the  infidels  fight  
for the  devil.  Fight then against the  friends of Satan.... Say: "Tri-
fling  are the pleasures  of this  life. The  hereafter is better  for those 
who would keep  from  evil.  .  .  ."  (Koran 4:74-78) 
When the  above  invitations  to  martyrdom  are  considered in  light  
of the  fact that  Islam  does not distinguish between  religious and  civil  
authority,
15
  the  twin  terrors  of  Koranic  literalism  spring  into  view:  
on  the  level  of  the  state,  a  Muslim  aspiration  for  world  domination  
is  explicitly  enjoined  by  God;  on  the  level  of  the  individual,  the  
metaphysics  of  martyrdom  provides  a  rationale  for  ultimate  self-
sacrifice  toward this  end. As  Bernard  Lewis  observes,  since  the  time  
of the  Prophet,  Islam  has  been  "associated  in  the  minds  and memo-
ries  of Muslims with  the  exercise  of political  and military  power."
16  
The  metaphysics  of  Islam  are  particularly  inauspicious  where  toler-
ance  and  religious  diversity  are  concerned,  for  martyrdom  is  the  
only  way that  a Muslim  can bypass  the painful  litigation that  awaits  
us  all  on  the  Day  of  Judgment  and  proceed  directly  to  paradise.  
Rather  than  spend  centuries  moldering  in  the  earth  in  anticipation  
of  being   resurrected   and   subsequently   interrogated   by   wrathful   
angels,  the  martyr  is  immediately  transported  to  Allah's  Garden,  
where  a  flock  of "dark-eyed"  virgins  awaits  him.  
Because  they  are  believed  to  be  nothing  less  than  verbatim  tran-
scripts  of  God's  utterances,  texts  like  the  Koran  and  the  Bible  must  
be  appreciated,  and  criticized,   for  any  possible  interpretations  to  
which  they  are  susceptible—and  to  which  they  will  be  subjected,  
with varying  emphases  and elisions, throughout the  religious world. 
The problem  is  not that  some  Muslims  neglect to  notice the  few  ref-
erences  to  nonaggression  that  can  be  found  in  the  Koran,  and  that  
this  leads  them  to  do  terrible  things  to  innocent  unbelievers;  the  
problem  is  that  most  Muslims  believe  that  the  Koran  is  the  literal  
word  of God. The corrective  to  the worldview of Osama  bin  Laden  is  
not  to  point  out  the  single  line  in  the  Koran  that  condemns  suicide,  

REASON         IN         EXILE  35  
because  this  ambiguous  statement  is  set  in  a  thicket  of  other  pas-
sages  that  can  be  read  only  as  direct  summons  to  war  against  the  
"friends  of  Satan."  The  appropriate  response  to  the  bin  Ladens  of  
the  world  is  to  correct  everyone's  reading  of  these  texts  by  making  
the  same  evidentiary  demands  in  religious  matters  that  we  make  in  
all  others.  If we  cannot  find  our  way  to  a  time  when  most  of us  are  
willing  to  admit  that,  at  the  very  least,  we  are  not  sure  whether  or  
not  God wrote  some of our books, then we  need only count the  days  
to  Armageddon—because  God  has  given  us  far  many  more  reasons  
to  kill  one  another  than  to  turn  the  other  cheek.  
We live in an age in which most people believe that mere words— 
"Jesus,"  "Allah,"  "Ram"—can  mean  the  difference  between  eternal  
torment  and  bliss  everlasting.  Considering  the  stakes  here,  it  is  not  
surprising  that  many  of  us  occasionally  find  it  necessary  to  murder  
other  human  beings  for  using  the  wrong  magic  words,  or  the  right  
ones  for  the  wrong  reasons.  How  can  any  person  presume  to  know  
that  this  is  the  way  the  universe  works?  Because  it  says  so  in  our  
holy  books.  How  do  we  know  that  our  holy  books  are  free  from  
error?  Because  the  books  themselves  say  so.  Epistemological  black  
holes  of this  sort  are  fast  draining  the  light  from  our  world.  
There  is,  of course,  much that  is  wise  and  consoling  and beautiful 
in  our  religious  books.  But  words  of  wisdom  and  consolation  and  
beauty  abound  in  the  pages  of  Shakespeare,  Virgil,  and  Homer  as  
well,  and  no  one  ever  murdered  strangers  by the  thousands  because  
of the  inspiration  he  found  there.  The  belief that  certain  books were 
written  by  God  (who,  for  reasons  difficult  to  fathom,  made  Shake-
speare   a   far  better  writer  than   himself)   leaves   us   powerless   to   
address  the most potent  source  of human  conflict, past and present.
17 
How is it that the absurdity of this  idea does not bring us, hourly,  to  
our  knees?  It  is  safe  to  say  that  few  of  us  would  have  thought  so  
many  people  could  believe  such  a  thing,  if  they  did  not  actually  
believe  it.  Imagine  a  world  in  which  generations  of  human  beings  
come  to  believe  that  certain films  were  made  by  God  or  that  specific  
software  was  coded  by  him.  Imagine  a  future  in  which  millions  of  

36          THE    END    OF    FAITH    
our  descendants murder  each other  over  rival  interpretations  of Star 
Wars  or Windows  98.  Could  anything—anything—be  more  ridicu-
lous? And  yet,  this  would  be  no  more  ridiculous  than  the  world  we  
are  living  in.  
Death:   The    Fount    of   Illusions   
We  live  in  a  world  where  all  things,  good  and  bad,  are  finally  
destroyed  by  change. The  world  sustains  us,  it  would  seem,  only  to  
devour us at its leisure. Parents  lose their children and children their 
parents.  Husbands  and  wives  are  separated  in  an  instant,  never  to  
meet  again.  Friends  part  company  in  haste,  without  knowing  that  it  
will  be  for  the  last  time.  This  life,  when  surveyed  with  a  broad  
glance,  presents  little more than  a vast  spectacle  of loss. 
But it seems that there is a  cure  for all this.  If we live rightly—not 
necessarily  ethically,  but  within  the  framework  of  certain  ancient  
beliefs  and  stereotyped  behaviors—we  will  get  everything  we  want  
after we  die. When  our  bodies  finally  fail  us,  we just  shed our  corpo-
real  ballast  and  travel  to  a  land where  we  are  reunited with  everyone  
we  loved while alive.  Of course, overly  rational  people  and other  rab-
ble will be kept out of this happy place, and those who suspended their 
disbelief while  alive  will  be  free  to  enjoy  themselves  for  all  eternity.  
We  live  in  a  world  of  unimaginable  surprises—from  the  fusion  
energy  that  lights  the  sun  to  the  genetic  and  evolutionary  conse-
quences  of this  light's  dancing  for  eons  upon  the  earth—and yet par-
adise conforms to our most superficial concerns with all the  fidelity of 
a Caribbean cruise. This is wondrously strange. If one didn't know bet-
ter,  one  would  think  that  man,  in  his  fear  of  losing  all  that  he  loves,  
had  created  heaven,  along with  its  gatekeeper  God,  in  his  own  image.  
IMAGINE  that  you  have  gone  to  your  doctor  for  a  routine  checkup,  
and he gives you terrible news: you have contracted a virus that kills 

REASON         IN         EXILE  37  
100  percent  of  those  it  infects.  The  virus  mutates  so  often  that  its  
course  is  totally  unpredictable.  It  can  lie  dormant  for  many  years,  
even  decades,  or  it  can  kill  you  outright  in  an  hour.  It  can  lead  to  
heart  attack,  stroke,  myriad  forms  of cancer,  dementia,  even  suicide;  
in  fact,  there  seems  to  be  no  constraints  upon  what  its  terminal  
stages  might  be.  As  for  strategies  of  avoidance—diet  and  health  
regimes, sequestration  to  one's bed—nothing avails.  You  can  be  cer-
tain  that  even  if  you  live  with  no  other  purpose  than  to  keep  the  
progress  of this  virus  in  check,  you  will  die,  for  there  is  no  cure  for  
it  in  sight,  and  the  corruption  of your  body  has  already  begun.  
Surely, most people would consider this report to be terrible news 
indeed—but would it be  news,  in  fact?  Isn't the  inevitability of death 
just  such  a  prognosis?  Doesn't  life  itself  have  all  the  properties  of  
our  hypothetical  virus?  
You  could  die  at any moment.  You might not even  live  to  see the 
end  of this  paragraph.  Not  only  that,  you  will  definitely  die  at  some  
moment  in  the  future.  If  being  prepared  for  death  entails  knowing  
when  and  where  it  will  happen,  the  odds  are  you  will  not  be  pre-
pared.  Not  only  are  you  bound  to  die  and  leave  this  world;  you  are  
bound  to  leave  it  in  such  a  precipitate  fashion  that  the  present  sig-
nificance of anything—your relationships, your plans  for the  future,  
your  hobbies,  your  possessions—will  appear  to  have  been  totally  
illusory.  While  all  such  things,  when  projected  across  an  indefinite======================================================== and  
an  orange  in  Jack's  lunch  box,  you  will  be  able  to  pull  out  an  apple,  
an orange,  or both. There is  a point at which the meanings  of words, 

THE      NATURE       OF      BELIEF  59  
their  syntactical  relations,  and  rationality  itself  can  no  longer  be  
divorced  from  the  orderly  behavior  of  objects  in  the  world.
17  
WHATEVER  beliefs  are,  none  of  us  harbors  an  infinite  number  of  
them.
18
  While  philosophers  may  doubt  whether  beliefs  are  the  sort  
of thing that  can  be  counted,  it  is  clear that we  have  a  finite amount 
of storage  in our brains,
19
  a  finite number  of discrete  memories,  and  
a  finite  vocabulary  that  waxes  and  wanes  somewhere  well  shy  of  
100,000 words. There is  a  distinction  to be made, therefore, between 
beliefs  that  are  causally  active
20
—i.e.,  those  that  we  already  have  in  
our  heads—and  those  that  can  be  constructed  on  demand.  If believ-
ing  is  anything  like  perceiving,  it  is  obvious  that  our  intuitions  
about  how  many  of  our  beliefs  are  present  within  us  at  any  given  
moment  might  be  unreliable.  Studies  of  "change  blindness,"  for  
instance, have revealed that we do not perceive nearly as much of the 
world as we think we  do,  since  a large percentage  of the visual  scene  
can  be  suddenly  altered  without  our  noticing.
21
  An  analogy  with  
computer  gaming  also  seems  apropos:  current  generations  of  com-
puter  games  do  not  compute  parts  of  their  virtual  world  until  a  
player  makes  a  move  that  demands  their  existence.
22
  Perhaps many 
of our  cognitive  commitments  are just  like  this.
23  
Whether  most  of  what  we  believe  is  always  present  within  our  
minds  or  whether  it  must  be  continually  reconstructed,  it  seems  
that  many  beliefs  must  be  freshly  vetted  before  they  can  guide  our  
behavior.  This   is   demonstrated  whenever   we   come   to   doubt   a   
proposition that  we previously believed.  Just consider what  it  is  like  
to  forget  the  multiplication  table—12  x  7  =  ?  All  of  us  have  had  
moments  when  84 just  didn't  sound  quite  right.  At  such  times,  we  
may  be  forced  to  perform  some  additional  calculations  before  we  
can  again  be  said  to  believe  that 12x7  =  84.  Or  consider what  it  is  
like  to  fall  into  doubt  over  a  familiar  person's  name  ("Is  his  name  
really  ]eff1  Is  that  what  I  call  him?").  It  is  clear  that  even  very  
well-worn  beliefs  can  occasionally  fail  to  achieve  credibility  in  the  

60           THE     END     OF    FAITH    
present.  Such  failures  of truth  testing  have  important  implications,  
to  which  we  now turn. 
A   Matter   of  True   and   False   
Imagine  that  you  are  having  dinner  in  a  restaurant with  several  old  
friends.  You  leave  the  table  briefly  to  use  the  restroom,  and  upon  
your return you  hear  one  of your  friends whisper,  "Just be  quiet.  He  
can't  know about  any  of this." 
What  are  you  to  make  of  this  statement?  Everything  turns  on  
whether you  believe  that  you  are  the  "he"  in  question.  If you  are  a  
woman,  and  therefore  excluded  by  this   choice  of  pronoun,  you  
would  probably  feel  nothing but  curiosity.  Upon  retaking your  seat,  
you  might even  whisper,  "Who  are  you  guys  talking  about?"  If you 
are  a  man,  on  the  other  hand,  things  have  just  gotten  interesting.  
What  secret  could  your  friends  be  keeping  from  you?  If your birth-
day is just a  few weeks  away, you might assume that a surprise party 
has  been  planned  in  your  honor.  If  not,  more  Shakespearean  possi-
bilities  await  your  consideration.  
Given your prior cognitive commitments, and the contextual  cues  
in  which  the  utterance  was  spoken,  some  credence-granting  circuit  
inside your brain will begin  to test a variety of possibilities.  You  will  
study  your  friends'  faces.  Are  their  expressions  compatible  with  the  
more  nefarious  interpretations  of this  statement  that are  now  occur-
ring  to you?  Has  one  of your  friends just  confessed  to  sleeping with 
your  wife? When  could  this  have  happened?  There  has  always  been  
a  certain  chemistry  between   them.   .   .   .   Suffice   it   to   say  that  
whichever  interpretation  of these  events  becomes  a  matter  of  belief  
for  you  will  have  important  personal  and  social  consequences.  
At  present,  we  have  no  understanding  of  what  it  means,  at  the  
level  of the brain,  to  say that a person  believes  or disbelieves  a given 
proposition—and  yet  it  is  upon  this  difference  that  all  subsequent  
cognitive  and  behavioral  commitments  turn.  To  believe  a  proposi-

THE    NATURE    OF    BELIEF          6l          
tion  we  must  endorse,  and  thereby  become  behaviorally  susceptible  
to,  its  representational  content. There  are  good  reasons  to think that 
this   process   happens   quite   automatically—and,   indeed,   that  the  
mere  comprehension  of  an  idea  may  be  tantamount  to  believing  it,  
if only  for  a  moment.  The  Dutch  philosopher  Spinoza  thought  that  
belief  and  comprehension  were  identical,  while  disbelief  required  a  
subsequent  act  of  rejection.  Some  very  interesting  work  in  psychol-
ogy  bears  this  out.
24
  It  seems  rather  likely  that  understanding  a  
proposition  is  analogous  to  perceiving  an  object  in  physical  space.  
Our  default  setting  may  be  to  accept  appearances  as  reality  until  
they  prove  to  be  otherwise.  This  would  explain  why  merely  enter-
taining the  possibility  of a  friend's betrayal  may  have  set your heart 
racing a  moment  ago.  
Whether  belief  formation  is  a  passive  or  an  active  process,  it  is  
clear that we continuously monitor spoken utterances  (both our own 
and those  of others)  for  logical  and  factual  errors. The  failure  to  find  
such  errors allows us  to  live by the  logic of what would otherwise be 
empty  phrases.  Of  course,  even  the  change  of  a  single  word  can  
mean  the  difference  between  complaisance  and  death-defying  feats:  
if your child comes to you in the middle of the night saying, "Daddy, 
there's  an  elephant  in  the  hall,"  you  might  escort  him  back  to  bed  
toting an imaginary gun; if he had said,  "Daddy, there's  a  man  in the 
hall,"  you  would probably  be  inclined  to  carry  a  real  one.  
Faith    and    Evidence    
It  does  not  require  any  special  knowledge  of  psychology  or  neuro-
science  to  observe  that  human  beings  are  generally  reluctant  to  
change  their  minds. As  many  authors  have  noted,  we  are  conserva-
tive  in  our  beliefs  in  the  sense  that  we  do  not  add  or  subtract  from  
our  store  of  them  without  reason.  Belief,  in  the  epistemic  sense—  
that  is,  belief  that  aims  at  representing  our  knowledge  about  the  
world—requires  that  we  believe  a  given  proposition  to  be  true,  not  

62          THE     END      OF     FAITH     
merely that we wish it were  so.  Such  a constraint upon our thinking 
is  undoubtedly  a  good  thing,  since  unrestrained  wishful  thinking  
would  uncouple  our  beliefs  from  the  regularities  in  the  world  that  
they  purport  to  represent. Why  is  it  wrong  to  believe  a  proposition  
to  be  true  just  because  it  might  feel  good  to  believe  it?  One  need  
only linger over the meaning  of the word "because"  (Middle  English  
"by"  +  "cause")  to  see  the  problem  here.  "Because"  suggests  a  
causal connection  between  a  proposition's  being true  and  a  person's  
believing that it is. This explains the value we generally place on evi-
dence:  because  evidence  is  simply  an  account  of  the  causal  linkage  
between  states  of  the  world  and  our  beliefs  about  them.  ("I  believe  
Oswald  shot  Kennedy  because  I  found  his  fingerprints  on  the  gun,  
and  because  my  cousin  saw  him  do  it,  and  my  cousin  doesn't  lie.")  
We  can  believe  a  proposition  to  be  true  only  because  something  in  
our  experience,  or in our reasoning  about the  world,  actually  speaks  
to  the  truth  of the  proposition  in  question.
25  
Let's say that I believe that  God exists,  and some impertinent per-
son   asks   me   why.   This   question   invites—indeed,   demands—an   
answer of the form "I believe that God exists because..."  I cannot  say,  
however, "I believe that God exists because it is prudent to do so"  (as  
Pascal would have us do). Of course, I  can say this, but I cannot mean 
by the word "believe" what  I mean when  I  say things  like  "I  believe  
that water  is  really two parts hydrogen  and one part oxygen  because  
two  centuries  of  physical  experiments  attest  to  this"  or  "I  believe  
there  is  an oak in my yard because  I  can  see it." Nor  can  I  say things 
like  "I  believe  in  God  because  it  makes  me  feel  good."  The  fact  that  
I would  feel good if there  were  a  God  does  not  give  me the  slightest  
reason  to  believe  that  one  exists.  This  is  easily  seen  when  we  swap  
the  existence  of God  for  some  other  consoling  proposition.  Let's  say  
that  I  want  to  believe  that  there  is  a  diamond  buried  somewhere  in  
my yard that  is  the  size  of  a  refrigerator.  It  is  true  that  it  would  feel  
uncommonly  good  to  believe  this.  But  do  I  have  any  reason  to  
believe that there is  actually  a diamond in  my yard that is thousands 
of times  larger  than  any  yet  discovered?  No.  Here  we  can  see  why  

THE    NATURE    OF    BELIEF          63          
Pascal's  wager,======================================================== it  was  asserted  
that  she  also  was  one  of the  cats  that  had  fared  so  ill  at the hands 
of the  carpenter.  The  latter,  when  informed  of the  popular  suspi-
cion, asserted that he distinctly remembered to have struck one of 
the  cats  a  blow with  the  back  of  his  broadsword,  which  ought  to  
have  broken  her  leg.  Nancy  was  immediately  dragged  from  her  

92        THE    END    OF    FAITH    
bed and thrown into prison. Before  she was put to the torture, she 
explained  in  a  very  natural  and  intelligible  manner  how  she  had  
broken  her  limb;  but  this  account  did  not  give  satisfaction.  The  
professional  persuasions  of the  torturer  made  her  tell  a  different  
tale,  and  she  confessed that  she  was  indeed  a witch,  and had been 
wounded  by  Montgomery  on  the  night  stated;  that  the  two  old  
women  recently deceased were witches  also, besides about a  score  
of  others  whom  she  named. The  poor  creature  suffered  so  much  
by  the  removal  from  her  own  home,  and  the  tortures  inflicted  
upon  her, that  she  died  the  next  day  in  prison.
26  
Apart  from  observing,  yet  again,  the  astonishing  consequences  of  
certain  beliefs,  we  should  take  note  of  the  reasonable  way  these  
witch-hunters  attempted  to  confirm  their  suspicions.  They  looked  
for  correlations  that  held  apparent  significance:  not  any  old  woman  
would  do;  they  needed one who  had  suffered  a wound  similar  to  the  
one  inflicted  upon  the  cat.  Once  you  accept  the  premise  that  old  
women  can  shape-shift  into  cats  and  back  again,  the  rest  is  practi-
cally  science.  
The church  did not  officially condemn  the  use  of torture  until  the  
bull  of Pope  Pius VII  in  1816.  
ANTI-SEMITISM
27
  is  as  integral  to  church  doctrine  as  the  flying  
buttress  is  to  a  Gothic  cathedral,  and  this  terrible  truth  has  been  
published  in  Jewish  blood  since  the  first  centuries  of  the  common  
era.  Like  that  of  the  Inquisition,  the  history  of  anti-Semitism  can  
scarcely  be  given  sufficient  treatment  in  the  context  of  this  book.  I  
raise  the  subject,  however  briefly,  because  the  irrational  hatred  of  
Jews  has  produced a  spectrum  of effects  that have  been  most acutely 
felt in  our own time. Anti-Semitism  is  intrinsic to both  Christianity  
and  Islam; both  traditions  consider  the  Jews  to  be  bunglers  of God's 
initial  revelation.  Christians  generally  also  believe  that  the  Jews  

IN    THE    SHADOW    OF    GOD          93          
murdered Christ, and their continued existence as  Jews  constitutes  a  
perverse  denial  of his  status  as  the  Messiah. Whatever  the  context,  
the hatred  of Jews  remains  a  product  of faith:  Christian,  Muslim,  as  
well  as  Jewish.  
Contemporary  Muslim  anti-Semitism  is  heavily  indebted  to  its  
Christian  counterpart.  The  Protocols  of the  Elders  of Zion,  a  Russian  
anti-Semitic  forgery  that  is  the  source  of  most  conspiracy  theories  
relating  to  the  Jews,  is  now  considered  an  authoritative  text  in  the  
Arab-speaking  world.
28
  A  recent  contribution  to  Al-Akhbar,  one  of  
Cairo's  mainstream  newspapers,  suggests  that  the  problem  of Mus-
lim  anti-Semitism  is  now  deeper  than  any  handshake  in  the  White  
House  Rose Garden  can  remedy:  "Thanks to Hitler, of blessed mem-
ory,  who  on  behalf  of  the  Palestinians  took  revenge  in  advance,  
against the most vile  criminals  on the  face of the Earth.... Although 
we   do  have   a  complaint  against  him,   for  his   revenge  was  not  
enough."
29
 This  is  from  moderate  Cairo, where  Muslims  drink alco-
hol, go  to the movies,  and watch belly dancing—and where the gov-
ernment  actively  represses  fundamentalism.  Clearly,  hatred  of  the  
Jews  is white-hot  in  the  Muslim  world.  
The  gravity  of Jewish  suffering  over  the  ages,  culminating  in  the  
Holocaust,  makes  it  almost  impossible  to  entertain  any  suggestion  
that  Jews  might  have  brought  their  troubles  upon  themselves. This 
is,  however,  in  a  rather  narrow  sense,  the  truth.  Prior  to  the  rise  of  
the  church,  Jews  became the  objects  of suspicion  and  occasional per-
secution  for  their  refusal  to  assimilate,  for  the  insularity  and  pro-
fessed  superiority  of their  religious  culture—that  is,  for  the  content  
of their own unreasonable,  sectarian beliefs. The dogma of a "chosen 
people," while  at least implicit in most faiths, achieved a stridence in 
Judaism  that  was  unknown  in  the  ancient  world.  Among  cultures  
that worshiped a plurality of Gods, the later monotheism  of the Jews 
proved  indigestible. And  while  their  explicit  demonization  as  a  peo-
ple  required  the  mad  work  of the  Christian  church,  the  ideology  of  
Judaism  remains  a  lightning  rod  for  intolerance  to  this  day.  As  a  
system  of  beliefs,  it  appears  among  the  least  suited  to  survive  in  a  

94        THE    END    OF    FAITH    
theological state  of nature.  Christianity  and  Islam both  acknowledge  
the  sanctity  of the  Old Testament  and  offer  easy  conversion  to  their  
faiths.  Islam  honors  Abraham,  Moses,  and  Jesus  as  forerunners  of  
Muhammad.  Hinduism  embraces  almost  anything  in  sight  with  its  
manifold  arms  (many  Hindus,  for  instance,  consider  Jesus  an  avatar  
of  Vishnu).  Judaism  alone  finds  itself  surrounded  by  unmitigated  
errors.  It  seems  little  wonder,  therefore,  that  it  has  drawn  so  much  
sectarian fire. Jews, insofar as they are religious, believe that they are 
bearers  of a unique covenant with God. As  a consequence, they have 
spent  the  last  two  thousand  years  collaborating  with  those  who  see  
them  as  different  by  seeing  themselves  as  irretrievably  so.  Judaism  
is  as  intrinsically  divisive,  as  ridiculous  in  its  literalism,  and  as  at  
odds  with  the  civilizing insights  of modernity  as  any other  religion.  
Jewish  settlers,  by  exercising  their  "freedom  of  belief"  on  contested  
land,  are  now  one  of the  principal  obstacles  to  peace  in  the  Middle  
East. They will  be  a  direct  cause  of war between  Islam  and the West 
should  one  ever  erupt  over  the  Israeli-Palestinian  conflict.
30  
THE  problem  for first-century Christians  was simple: they belonged 
to  a  sect  of  Jews  that  had  recognized  Jesus  as  the  messiah  (Greek  
christos),  while  the  majority  of  their  coreligionists  had  not.  Jesus  
was a Jew, of course, and his mother a Jewess. His apostles, to the last 
man, were also Jews. There is no evidence whatsoever, apart  from the 
tendentious writings  of the later church, that Jesus ever conceived of 
himself  as  anything  other  than  a  Jew  among  Jews,  seeking  the  ful-
fillment of Judaism—and,  likely,  the  return  of Jewish  sovereignty  in  
a  Roman  world.  As  many  authors  have  observed,  the  numerous  
strands  of Hebrew prophecy  that  were  made  to  coincide  with  Jesus'  
ministry  betray  the  apologetics,  and  often  poor  scholarship,  of  the  
gospel  writers.  
The  writers  of  Luke  and  Matthew,  for  instance,  in  seeking  to  
make  the  life  of  Jesus  conform  to  Old  Testament  prophecy,  insist  
that  Mary  conceived  as  a  virgin  (Greek  parthenos),  harking  to  the  

IN    THE    SHADOW    OF    GOD          95          
Greek   rendering   of   Isaiah   7:14.   Unfortunately   for   fanciers   of   
Mary's  virginity,  the  Hebrew  word  alma  (for  which  parthenos  is  an  
erroneous  translation)  simply  means  "young woman," without  any  
implication  of virginity.  It  seems  all but  certain that the  Christian  
dogma  of  the  virgin  birth,  and  much  of  the  church's  resulting  
anxiety  about  sex,  was  the  result  of  a  mistranslation   from  the  
Hebrew.
31 
Another  strike  against  the  doctrine  of the  virgin  birth  is  that  the  
other  evangelists,  Mark  and  John,  seem  to  know  nothing  about  it—  
though  both  appear  troubled  by  accusations  of Jesus'  illegitimacy.
32  
Paul  apparently  thinks  that  Jesus  is  the  son  of Joseph  and  Mary.  He  
refers  to  Jesus  as  being  "born  of the  seed  of  David  according  to  the  
flesh"  (Romans  1:3—meaning  Joseph  was  his  father),  and  "born  of  
woman"   (Galatians  4:4—meaning  that  Jesus  was  really  human),  
with  no  reference  to  Mary's  virginity.
33  
Mary's  virginity  has  always  been  suggestive  of  God's  attitude  
toward  sex:  it  is  intrinsically  sinful,  being  the  mechanism  through  
which  original  sin  was  bequeathed  to  the  generations  after Adam.  It  
would appear that Western  civilization  has  endured two millennia  of  
consecrated  sexual  neurosis  simply  because  the  authors  of Matthew 
and  Luke  could not  read  Hebrew.  For the  Jews,  the  true  descendants  
of Jesus  and the apostles, the dogma of the virgin birth has  served as 
a  perennial  justification  for  their  persecution,  because  it  has  been  
one  of the  principal  pieces  of "evidence"  demonstrating the  divinity  
of Jesus. 
We  should  note  that  the  emphasis  on  miracles  in  the  New Testa-
ment,  along  with  the  attempts  to  make  the  life  of  Jesus  conform  to  
Old  Testament  prophecy,  reveal  the  first  Christians'  commitment,  
however  faltering,  to  making  their  faith  seem  rational.  Given  the  
obvious  significance  of  any  miracle,  and  the  widespread  acceptance  
of prophecy,  it  would  have  been  only  reasonable  to  have  considered  
these  purported  events  to  be  evidence  for  Christ's  divinity.  Augus-
tine,  for  his  part,  came  right======================================================== experiment  have  shown  that human memory  comes  in  many  forms.  
Not  only  are  our  long-term  and  short-term  memories  the  products  
of distinct  and dissimilar  neural  circuits;  they  have  themselves  been  
divided  into  multiple  subsystems.
1
  To  speak  simply  of  "memory,"  
therefore,  is  now  rather  like  speaking  of  "experience."  Clearly,  we  
must be  more  precise  about what  our  mental  terms  mean  before  we  
attempt  to  understand  them  at  the  level  of the  brain.
2  
Even  dogs  and  cats,  insofar  as  they  form  associations  between  
people, places, and events, can be said to "believe" many things about 
the world. But this is not the sort of believing we  are  after. When we 
talk  about  the  beliefs  to  which  people  consciously  subscribe—"The  
house  is  infested  with  termites,"  "Tofu  is  not  a  dessert,"  "Muham-
mad  ascended  to  heaven  on  a  winged  horse"—we  are  talking  about  
50 

THE     NATURE     OF    BELIEF            51            
beliefs  that are  communicated,  and acquired,  linguistically.  Believing  
a  given  proposition  is  a  matter  of  believing  that  it  faithfully  repre-
sents  some  state  of  the  world,  and  this  fact  yields  some  immediate  
insights  into  the  standards  by  which  our  beliefs  should  function.
3
  In  
particular,  it  reveals  why  we  cannot  help  but  value  evidence  and  
demand  that  propositions  about  the  world  logically  cohere.  These  
constraints  apply  equally  to  matters  of religion.  "Freedom  of belief" 
(in  anything  but  the  legal  sense)  is  a myth.  We  will  see that we  are  
no  more  free  to  believe  whatever  we  want  about  God  than  we  are  
free  to  adopt  unjustified  beliefs  about  science  or  history,  or  free  to  
mean  whatever we want when  using words  like "poison"  or "north" 
or  "zero." Anyone who would lay  claim  to  such entitlements  should  
not  be  surprised  when  the  rest  of us  stop  listening  to  him.  
Beliefs    as    Principles    of  Action  
The  human  brain  is  a  prolific  generator  of  beliefs  about  the  world.  
In   fact,  the  very  humanness  of  any  brain  consists  largely  in  its  
capacity to evaluate  new statements  of propositional truth in light of 
innumerable others that it already  accepts.  By  recourse to intuitions 
of  truth   and   falsity,   logical   necessity  and  contradiction,  human  
beings  are  able  to  knit  together  private  visions  of  the  world  that  
largely  cohere.  What  neural  events  underlie  this  process?  What  
must  a  brain  do  in  order  to  believe  that  a  given  statement  is  true  or  
false?. We  currently  have  no  idea.  Language  processing  must  play  a  
large  role,  of  course,  but  the  challenge  will  be  to  discover  how  the  
brain  brings  the  products  of  perception,  memory,  and  reasoning  to  
bear  on  individual  propositions  and  magically  transforms  them  into  
the  very  substance  of our  living.  
It  was  probably  the  capacity  for  movement,  enjoyed  by  certain  
primitive  organisms,  that  drove  the  evolution  of  our  sensory  and  
cognitive  faculties.  This  follows  from  the  fact  that  if  no  creature  
could  do  anything  with  the  information  it  acquired  from  the  world,  

52          THE     END     OF     FAITH     
nature  could  not  have  selected  for  improvements  in  the  physical  
structures  that  gather,  store,  and  process  such  information.  Even  a  
sense as primitive  as vision, therefore,  seems  predicated on the exis-
tence  of  a  motor  system.  If  you  cannot  catch  food,  avoid  becoming  
food  yourself,  or  wander  off  a  cliff,  there  does  not  seem  to  be  much  
reason  to  see the world  in  the  first  place—and  certainly  refinements  
in  vision,  of  the  sort  found  everywhere  in  the  animal  kingdom,  
would never have  come  about  at  all.  
For  this  reason,  it  seems  uncontroversial  to  say  that  all  higher-
order  cognitive  states  (of which  beliefs  are  an  example)  are  in  some  
way  an  outgrowth  of  our  capacity  for  action.  In  adaptive  terms,  
belief  has  been  extraordinarily  useful.  It  is,  after  all,  by  believing  
various propositions about the world that we predict events  and con-
sider the  likely  consequences  of our actions.  Beliefs  are principles  of  
action: whatever they may be at the  level of the brain, they are pro-
cesses  by  which  our  understanding  (and  misunderstanding)  of  the  
world  is  represented  and  made  available  to  guide  our  behavior.
4  
THE  power  that  belief  has  over  our  emotional  lives  appears  to  be  
total.  For  every  emotion  that  you  are  capable  of  feeling,  there  is  
surely a belief that could invoke it in  a matter of moments.  Consider  
the  following  proposition:  
Your  daughter  is  being  slowly  tortured  in  an  English jail. 
What  is  it  that  stands  between  you  and  the  absolute  panic  that  
such  a  proposition  would  loose  in  the  mind  and  body  of  a  person  
who  believed  it?  Perhaps  you  do  not  have  a  daughter,  or  you  know  
her  to  be  safely  at  home,  or  you  believe  that  English  jailors  are  
renowned  for  their  congeniality.  Whatever  the  reason,  the  door  to  
belief  has  not  yet  swung  upon  its  hinges.  
The   link  between   belief  and   behavior   raises   the   stakes   con-
siderably.  Some  propositions  are  so  dangerous  that  it  may  even  be  

THE     NATURE     OF    BELIEF            53            
ethical  to  kill  people  for  believing  them. This  may  seem  an  extraor-
dinary  claim,  but  it  merely  enunciates  an  ordinary  fact  about  the  
world  in which we  live.  Certain  beliefs  place their adherents  beyond  
the  reach  of  every  peaceful  means  of  persuasion,  while  inspiring  
them  to  commit  acts  of extraordinary  violence  against  others. There 
is,  in  fact,  no talking  to  some  people.  If they cannot be captured,  and  
they  often  cannot,  otherwise  tolerant  people  may  be  justified  in  
killing   them   in   self-defense.   This   is   what   the   United   States   
attempted in Afghanistan,  and  it is what we  and other Western  pow-
ers  are bound  to  attempt,  at  an  even  greater  cost  to  ourselves  and to 
innocents  abroad,  elsewhere  in  the  Muslim  world. We  will  continue  
to  spill  blood  in what  is,  at bottom,  a war  of ideas.
5  
The    Necessity    for    Logical    Coherence    
The  first  thing  to  notice  about  beliefs  is  that  they  must  suffer  the  
company  of  their  neighbors.  Beliefs  are  both  logically  and  semanti-
cally related. Each constrains, and is in turn constrained by, many oth-
ers. A  belief  like  the  Boeing  747  is  the  world's  best  airplane  logically  
entails  many  other  beliefs  that  are  both  more  basic  (e.g.,  airplanes  
exist)  and more derivative  (e.g., 747s  are  better  than 757s). The belief 
that  some  men  are  husbands  demands  that  the  proposition  some  
women  are  wives also be  endorsed, because the very terms "husband" 
and  "wife" mutually  define one  another.
6
  In  fact,  logical  and semantic 
constraints  appear to be  two  sides  of the  same  coin,  because our need 
to understand what words mean in  each  new context requires that our 
beliefs be  free  from contradiction  (at least locally).  If I  am  to mean the 
same  thing  by  the  word  "mother"  from  one  instance  to  the  next,  I  
cannot  both  believe  my  mother  was  born  in  Rome  and  believe  my  
mother was  born  in  Nevada.  Even  if my mother were born  on  an  air-
plane  flying  at  supersonic  speeds,  these  propositions  cannot  both  be  
true. There are tricks to be played here—perhaps there is a town called 
"Rome"  somewhere  in  the  state  of  Nevada;  or  perhaps  "mother"  

54         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
means  "biological mother"  in  one  sentence  and  "adoptive mother"  in  
another—but  these  exceptions  only  prove  the  rule.  To  know  what  a  
given  belief  is  about,  I  must  know  what  my  words  mean;  to  know  
what my words mean, my beliefs must be generally consistent.
7
 There 
is just  no  escaping  the  fact  that  there  is  a  tight  relationship  between  
the words we use, the type of thoughts we can think, and what we can 
believe  to  be  true  about the world. 
And behavioral  constraints  are just  as  pressing. When  going  to  a  
friend's home  for dinner,  I  cannot both  believe that he  lives  north  of  
Main  Street  and  south  of  Main  Street  and  then  act  on  the  basis  of  
what  I believe. A normal  degree of psychological and bodily integra-
tion  precludes  my  being  motivated  to  head  in  two  opposing  direc-
tions  at  once.  
Personal  identity  itself  requires  such  consistency:  unless  a  per-
son's  beliefs are highly  coherent,  he  will  have  as  many  identities  as  
there  are  mutually  incompatible  sets  of beliefs  careening around  his  
brain. If you doubt this, just try to imagine the subjectivity of a man 
who believes that he spent the entire  day in bed with the  flu, but also 
played  a  round  of  golf;  that  his  name  is  Jim,  and  that  his  name  is  
Tom; that he has a young son, and that he is childless. Multiply these 
incompatible  beliefs  indefinitely,  and any  sense that their  owner  is  a  
single  subject entirely  disappears. There  is  a  degree  of logical  incon-
sistency  that  is  incompatible  with  our  notion  of  personhood.  
So it seems that the value we put on  logical  consistency is neither 
misplaced  nor  mysterious.  In  order  for  my  speech  to  be  intelligible  
to  others—and,  indeed,  to  myself—my  beliefs  about  the  world  must  
largely  cohere.  In  order======================================================== perspective  of Christian 
teaching,  Jews  are  even  worse  than  run-of-the-mill  heretics;  they  
are  heretics  who  explicitly  repudiate  the  divinity  of  Jesus  Christ.  
While the  stigmas  applied to witches  and Jews throughout Chris-
tendom  shared  curious  similarities—both  were  often  accused  of the 
lively  and  improbable  offense  of  murdering  Christian  infants  and  
drinking their blood
18
—their  cases  remain quite  distinct. Witches, in 
all  likelihood,  did  not  even  exist,  and  those  murdered  in  their  stead  
numbered  perhaps  40,000  to  50,000  over  three  hundred  years  of  
persecution;
19
  Jews  have  lived  side by  side with  Christians  for nearly 
two  millennia,  fathered  their  religion,  and  for  reasons  that  are  no  
more  substantial  than  those  underlying  the  belief  in  the  Resurrec-

88         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
tion  have  been  the  objects  of  murderous  intolerance  since  the  first  
centuries  after  Christ.  
THE  accounts  of witch  hunts  resemble,  in  most  respects,  the  more  
widespread   persecution   of   heretics   throughout   the   Inquisition:   
imprisonment  on  the  basis  of  accusations  alone,  torture  to  extract  
confession,  confessions  deemed  unacceptable  until  accomplices  were  
named,  death  by  slow  fire,  and  the  rounding  up  of  the   freshly   
accused. The  following anecdote  is  typical:  
In 1595, an  old woman residing in a village near Constance, angry 
at  not  being  invited  to  share  the  sports  of  the  country  people  on  
a  day  of  public  rejoicing,  was  heard  to  mutter  something  to  her-
self,   and   was   afterwards   seen   to   proceed   through   the   fields   
towards  a  hill,  where  she  was  lost  sight  of.  A  violent  thunder-
storm arose about two hours  afterwards, which wet the dancers to 
the  skin,  and  did  considerable  damage  to  the  plantations.  This  
woman,  suspected  before  of  witchcraft,  was  seized  and  impris-
oned,  and  accused  of  having  raised  the  storm,  by  filling  a  hole  
with wine,  and stirring  it about with  a  stick.  She was tortured till 
she  confessed,  and  burned  alive  the  next  evening.
20  
Though  it  is  difficult  to  generalize  about  the  many  factors  that  
conspired to make villagers  rise up against their neighbors, it is obvi-
ous  that  belief  in  the  existence  of  witches  was  the  sine  qua  non  of  
the  phenomenon.  But  what  was  it,  precisely,  that  people  believed?  
They  appear  to  have  believed  that  their  neighbors  were  having  sex  
with  the  devil,  enjoying  nocturnal  flights  upon  broomsticks,  chang-
ing  into  cats  and  hares,  and  eating the  flesh  of other human  beings.  
More  important,  they  believed  utterly  in  maleficium—that  is,  in  the  
efficacy of harming others by  occult  means. Among the many  disas-
ters that  could befall  a person  over the  course  of a  short and  difficult  
life,  medieval  Christians  seemed  especially  concerned  that  a  neigh-

IN    THE    SHADOW    OF    GOD          89          
bor  might  cast  a  spell  and  thereby  undermine  their  health  or  good  
fortune.  Only the  advent  of science  could  successfully undercut such 
an idea, along with the  fantastical displays of cruelty to which it gave 
rise.  We  must  remember  that  it  was  not  until  the  mid-nineteenth  
century  that  the  germ  theory  of  disease  emerged,  laying  to  rest  
much  superstition  about  the  causes  of illness. 
Occult  beliefs  of  this  sort  are  clearly  an  inheritance  from  our  
primitive, magic-minded  ancestors. The  Fore  people of New  Guinea,  
for  instance,  besides  being  enthusiastic  cannibals,  exacted  a  grue-
some  revenge  upon  suspected  sorcerers:  
Besides  attending  public  meetings,  Fore  men  also  hunted  down  
men they believed to be sorcerers  and killed them in reprisal. The 
hunters  used  a  specialized  attack  called  tukabu  against  sorcerers:  
they  ruptured  their  kidneys,  crushed  their  genitals  and  broke  
their  thigh  bones  with  stone  axes,  bit  into  their  necks  and  tore  
out  their  tracheas,  jammed  bamboo  splinters  into  their  veins  to  
bleed  them.
21  
No doubt  each  of these gestures  held metaphysical  significance. This 
behavior  seems  to  have  been  commonplace  among  the  Fore  at  least  
until  the  1960s.  The  horrible  comedy  of human  ignorance  achieves  
a  rare moment of transparency here: the  Fore were merely respond-
ing  to  an  epidemic  of  kuru—a  fatal  spongiform  infection  of  the  
brain—brought  on  not  by  sorcerers  in  their  midst but  by  their  own  
religious  observance  of eating the  bodies  and brains  of their  dead.
22  
Throughout  the  Middle  Ages  and  the  Renaissance,  it  was  per-
fectly  apparent  that  disease  could  be  inflicted  by  demons  and  black  
magic.  There  are  accounts  of  frail,  old  women  charged  with  killing  
able-bodied  men  and  breaking  the  necks  of  their  horses—actions  
which  they  were  made  to  confess  under  torture—and  few  people,  it  
seems,  found  such  accusations  implausible.  Even  the  relentless  tor-
ture  of the  accused  was  given  a  perverse  rationale:  the  devil,  it  was  
believed,  made  his  charges  insensible  to  pain,  despite  their  cries  for  

90  THE      END      OF      FAITH      
mercy. And  so  it  was  that,  for  centuries,  men  and women  who  were  
guilty  of  little  more  than  being  ugly,  old,  widowed,  or  mentally  ill  
were  convicted  of  impossible  crimes  and  then  murdered  for  God's  
sake. 
After  nearly   four   hundred   years   some   ecclesiastics   began   to   
appreciate how insane  all this was.  Consider the epiphany of Freder-
ick  Spee:  "Torture  fills  our  Germany  with  witches  and  unheard-of  
wickedness,  and  not  only  Germany  but  any  nation  that  attempts  
it.  .  .  .  If all  of us  have not  confessed  ourselves  witches,  that  is  only  
because  we  have  not  all  been  tortured."
23
  But  Spee  was  led  to  this  
reasonable   surmise   only   after   a   skeptical   friend,   the   duke   of   
Brunswick,  had  a  woman  suspected  of  witchcraft  artfully  tortured  
and interrogated  in  his  presence. This  poor woman  testified  that  she  
has  seen  Spee  himself  on  the  Brocken,  shape-shifting  into  a  wolf,  a  
goat,   and  other  beasts  and  fathering  numerous  children  by  the  
assembled  witches  born  with  the  heads  of toads  and  the  legs  of spi-
ders.  Spee, lucky indeed to be in the company of a  friend, and certain 
of his  own  innocence,  immediately  set  to  work  on  his  Cautio  Crim-
inalis  (1631),  which  detailed the  injustice  of witch  trials.
24  
Bertrand  Russell  observed,  however,  that  not  all  reasonable  men  
were  as  fortunate  as  Spee:  
Some  few  bold  rationalists  ventured,  even  while  the  persecution  
was  at  its  height,  to  doubt  whether  tempests,  hail-storms,  thun-
der  and  lightning  were  really  caused  by  the  machinations  of  
women.  Such  men  were  shown  no  mercy. Thus  towards  the  end  
of the sixteenth century  Flade,  Rector  of the University  of Treves, 
and  Chief  Judge  of  the  Electoral  Court,  after  condemning  count-
less  witches,  began  to  think  that  perhaps  their  confessions  were  
due  to the  desire  to  escape  from  the tortures  of the  rack, with  the  
result that he showed unwillingness to convict. He was  accused of 
having  sold  himself  to  Satan,  and  was  subjected  to  the  same  tor-
tures  as  he  had  inflicted  upon  others.  Like  them,  he  confessed his 
guilt,  and  in  1589  he  was  strangled  and  then  burnt.
25  

IN     THE      SHADOW      OF     GOD  91  
As  late  as  1718  (just  as  the  inoculation  against  smallpox  was  
being  introduced  to  England  and  the  English  mathematician  Brook  
Taylor  was  making  refinements  to  the  calculus),  we  find  the  mad-
ness  of  the  witch  hunt  still  a  potent  social  force.  Charles  Mackay  
relates  an  incident  in  Caithness  (northeast  Scotland):  
A  silly  fellow,  named  William  Montgomery,  a  carpenter,  had  a  
mortal  antipathy  to  cats;  and  somehow  or  other  these  animals  
generally chose his back-yard as the  scene  of their catterwaulings. 
He  puzzled  his  brains  for  a  long  time  to  know why  he,  above  all  
his  neighbors,  should  be  so  pestered. At  last  he  came  to  the  sage  
conclusion  that  his  tormentors  were  no  cats,  but  witches.  In  this  
opinion  he  was  supported  by  his  maid-servant,  who  swore  a  
round  oath  that  she  had  often  heard  the  aforesaid  cats  talking  
together  in  human  voices.  The  next  time  the  unlucky  tabbies  
assembled  in  his back-yard, the valiant carpenter was on the alert. 
Arming  himself with  an  axe,  a  dirk,  and  a broadsword,  he  rushed  
out  among  them.  One  of them  he  wounded  in the  back,  a  second  
in  the  hip,  and  the  leg  of  a  third  he  maimed with  his  axe;  but  he  
could  not  capture  any  of  them.  A  few  days  afterwards,  two  old  
women  of the  parish  died;  and  it  was  said, that when  their  bodies  
were  laid  out, there  appeared upon the  back of one the mark as  of  
a  recent  wound,  and  a  similar  scar upon the  hip  of the  other. The 
carpenter  and  his  maid  were  convinced  that  they  were  the  very  
cats,  and  the  whole  county  repeated  the  same  story.  Every  one  
was  upon  the  look-out  for  proofs  corroborative;  a  very  remark-
able one was  soon discovered. Nancy Gilbert,  a wretched old crea-
ture  upwards  of  seventy  years  of  age,  was  found  in  bed  with  her  
leg  broken.  As  she  was  ugly  enough  for  a  witch,======================================================== its  keep.  Given  our  beliefs  about  the  human  
mind,  the  success  of our widespread collaboration with  other human 
beings, and the degree to which we all rely on the  news, it is scarcely 
conceivable  that  a  respected  television  network  and  a  highly  paid  
anchorman  are  perpetrating  a  hoax,  or  that  thousands  of  firefight-
ers,  newsmen,  and  terrified  homeowners  have  mistaken  Texas  for  
Colorado.  Implicit in  such  commonsense judgments  lurks  an  under-
standing  of the  causal  connections  between  various  processes  in  the  
world,  the  likelihood  of different  outcomes,  and the  vested  interests,  
or  lack  thereof,  of those  whose  testimony  we  are  considering. What 
would  a  professional  news  anchor  stand  to  gain  from  lying  about  a  
fire  in  Colorado ? We  need  not go  into the details here; if the anchor 
on  the  evening  news  says  that  there  is  a  fire  in  Colorado  and  then  
shows  us  images  of  burning  trees,  we  can  be  reasonably  sure  that  
there  really  is  a  fire  in  Colorado.  
Proposition 2: What about the "truths" of science? Are they true'? 
Much  has  been  written  about  the  inherent  provisionality  of  scien-
tific  theories.  Karl  Popper  has  told  us  that  we  never  prove  a  theory  
right;  we  merely  fail  to  prove  it wrong.
32
 Thomas  Kuhn  has  told  us  
that  scientific  theories  undergo  wholesale  revision with  each  gener-
ation and therefore do not converge on the truth.
33
 There's no telling 
which  of  our  current  theories  will  be  proved  wrong  tomorrow,  so  
how  much  confidence  can  we  have  in  them?  Many  unwary  con-
sumers  of  these  ideas  have  concluded  that  science  is  just  another  
area  of  human  discourse  and,  as  such,  is  no  more  anchored  to  the  
facts  of  this  world  than  literature  or  religion  are.  All  truths  are  up  
for  grabs.  
But  all  spheres  of  discourse  are  not  on  the  same  footing,  for  the  
simple  reason  that  not  all  spheres  of discourse  seek  the  same  footing  
(or  any  footing  whatsoever).  Science  is  science  because  it  represents  

76         THE    END    OF   FAITH   
our  most  committed  effort  to  verify  that  our  statements  about  the  
world  are  true  (or  at  least  not  false).
34
  We  do  this  by  observation  
and  experiment  within  the  context  of  a  theory.  To  say  that  a  given  
scientific  theory  may  be  wrong  is  not  to  say  that  it  may  be  wrong  
in  its  every  particular,  or  that  any  other  theory  stands  an  equal  
chance  of  being  right.  What  are  the  chances  that  DNA  is  not  the  
basis  for  genetic  inheritance?  Well,  if  it  isn't,  Mother  Nature  sure  
has  a  lot  of  explaining  to  do.  She  must  explain  the  results  of  fifty  
years  of  experimentation,  which  have  demonstrated  reliable  corre-
lations   between  genotype   and  phenotype   (including  the   repro-
ducible   effects   of   specific   genetic   mutations).   Any   account   of   
inheritance  that  is  going  to  supersede  the  present  assumptions  of  
molecular  biology  will  have  to  account  for  the  ocean  of  data  that  
now  conforms  to  these  assumptions. What  are  the  chances  that  we  
will  one  day  discover  that  DNA  has  absolutely  nothing  to  do  with  
inheritance ?  They  are  effectively  zero.  
Proposition 3: Can we  rely on the authority of the pope?  Millions  
of Catholics  do,  of course.  He  is,  in  fact,  infallible  in matters  of faith 
and  morality.  Can  we  really  say  that  Catholics  are  wrong  to  believe  
that  the  pope  knows  whereof he  speaks?  We  surely  can.  
We  know  that  no  evidence  would  be  sufficient  to  authenticate  
many  of  the  pope's  core  beliefs.  How  could  anyone  born  in  the  
twentieth  century  come  to  know  that  Jesus  was  actually  born  of  a  
virgin?  What  process  of  ratiocination,  mystical  or  otherwise,  will  
deliver the  necessary  facts  about  a  Galilean woman's  sexual  history  
(facts  that  run  entirely  counter  to  well-known  facts  of human  biol-
ogy) ? There is  no such process.  Even  a time machine could not help 
us,  unless  we  were  willing  to  keep  watch  over  Mary  twenty-four  
hours  a day  for the months  surrounding the  probable time of Jesus' 
conception. 
Visionary  experiences,  in  and  of  themselves,  can  never  be  suffi-
cient  to  answer  questions  of historical  fact.  Let's  say  the  pope  had  a  
dream  about  Jesus,  and  Jesus  came  to  him  looking  fresh  from  Da  
Vinci's  brush. The  pope  would  not  even  be  in  a  position  to  say  that  

THE      NATURE      OF      BELIEF  77  
the  Jesus  of his  dream  looked  like  the  real  Jesus.  The  pope's  infalli-
bility,  no  matter  how  many  dreams  and  visions  he  may  have  had,  
does  not  even  extend to  making  a judgment  about whether  the  his-
torical  Jesus  wore  a  beard,  let  alone  whether  he  was  really  the  Son  
of God, born  of a virgin,  or able  to  raise the  dead. These  are just not 
the  kinds  of propositions  that  spiritual  experience  can  authenticate.  
Of  course,  we  could  imagine  a  scenario  in  which  we  would  give  
credence  to  the  pope's  visions,  or  to  our  own.  If Jesus  came  saying  
things  like  "The Vatican  Library  has  exactly thirty-seven thousand, 
two  hundred  and  twenty-six  books"  and  he  turned  out  to  be  right,  
we  would  then  begin  to  feel  that  we  were,  at the very  least,  in  dia-
logue  with  someone  who  had  something  to  say  about  the  way  the  
world   is.   Given   a   sufficient   number   of   verifiable   statements,   
plucked  from  the  ethers  of  papal  vision,  we  could  begin  speaking  
seriously  about  any  further  claims  Jesus  might  make.  The  point  is  
that  his  authority  would  be  derived  in  the  only  way  that  such  
authority  ever  is—by  making  claims  about  the  world  that  can  be  
corroborated  by  further  observation. As  far  as  proposition  3  is  con-
cerned,  it  is  quite  obvious  that  the  pope  has  nothing  to  go  on  but  
the  Bible  itself. This  document is  not  a  sufficient justification  for his 
beliefs,  given  the  standards  of evidence that prevailed at the time  of  
its  composition.  
WHAT  about  our much  championed  freedom  of religious  belief?  It  is  
no   different   from   our   freedoms   of   journalistic   and   biological   
belief—and  anyone  who  believes  that  the  media  are  perpetrating  a  
great  fire  conspiracy,  or  that  molecular  biology  is just  a  theory  that  
may  prove  totally  wrong,  has  merely  exercised  his  freedom  to  be  
thought  a  fool.  Religious  unreason  should  acquire  an  even  greater  
stigma  in  our  discourse,  given  that  it  remains  among  the  principal  
causes  of armed  conflict  in  our  world.  Before you  can  get  to  the  end  
of this  paragraph,  another  person  will  probably  die  because  of what 
someone  else  believes  about  God.  Perhaps  it  is  time  we  demanded  

78  THE      END      OF      FAITH      
that  our  fellow  human  beings  had  better  reasons  for  maintaining  
their  religious  differences,  if such  reasons  even  exist.  
We must  begin  speaking  freely about what  is  really  in  these holy 
books of ours, beyond the timid heterodoxies  of modernity—the gay 
and  lesbian  ministers,  the  Muslim  clerics  who  have  lost  their  taste  
for  public  amputations,  or  the  Sunday  churchgoers  who  have  never  
read their  Bibles quite through. A  close study of these  books,  and  of  
history, demonstrates that there is  no  act of cruelty so appalling that 
it  cannot  be justified,  or  even  mandated,  by  recourse  to  their  pages.  
It is  only by the  most  acrobatic  avoidance  of passages  whose  canon-
icity  has  never  been  in  doubt  that  we  can  escape  murdering  one  
another  outright  for  the  glory  of  God.  Bertrand  Russell  had  it  right  
when  he  made  the  following  observation:  
The  Spaniards  in  Mexico  and  Peru  used  to  baptize  Indian  infants  
and  then  immediately  dash  their  brains  out:  by  this  means  they  
secured these  infants went  to Heaven.  No orthodox  Christian  can  
find  any  logical  reason  for  condemning  their  action,  although  all  
nowadays   do   so.   In   countless  ways   the  doctrine   of  personal  
immortality  in  its  Christian  form  has  had  disastrous  effects  upon  
morals. . . .
35 
It  is  true  that  there  are  millions  of  people  whose  faith  moves  
them  to  perform extraordinary acts  of self-sacrifice  for the  benefit of 
others.  The  help  rendered  to  the  poor  by  Christian  missionaries  in  
the  developing  world  demonstrates  that  religious  ideas  can  lead  to  
actions  that  are  both  beautiful  and  necessary.  But  there  are  far  bet-
ter  reasons  for  self-sacrifice  than  those  that  religion  provides.  The  
fact that  faith  has motivated many people  to do good things  does  not  
suggest  that  faith  is  itself  a  necessary  (or  even  a  good)  motivation  
for  goodness.  It  can  be  quite  possible,  even  reasonable,  to  risk  one's  
life  to  save  others  without  believing  any  incredible  ideas  about  the  
nature  of the  universe.  
By  contrast,  the  most  monstrous  crimes  against  humanity  have  

THE      NATURE      OF      BELIEF  79  
invariably  been  inspired  by  unjustified  belief.  This  is  nearly  a  tru-
ism.  Genocidal  projects  tend  not  to  reflect  the  rationality  of  their  
perpetrators  simply  because  there  are  no  good reasons  to  kill  peace-
ful  people  indiscriminately.  Even where  such  crimes  have  been  sec-
ular, they  have required the======================================================== visionary   strata   of  the   mind—in   dreams,   or   trance,   or   psychedelic   
swoon—in  search  of  the  sacred.  While  I  have  no  doubt  that  remarkable  
experiences  are  lying  in  wait  for  the  initiate  down  each  of these  byways,  
the  fact  that  consciousness  is  always  the  prior  context  and  condition  of  
every  visionary  experience  is  a  great  clarifying  truth—and  one  which  
brands   all   such   excursions   as   fundamentally  unnecessary.  That  con-
sciousness  is  not  improved—not  made  emptier  of  self,  or  more  mysteri-
ous,  transcendental,  etc.—by  the  pyrotechnics  of  esotericism  is  a  fact,  
which  contemplatives  of  every  persuasion  could  confirm  in  their  own  
experience. 
The  modern  version  of the  visionary  impulse,  perhaps  best  exempli-
fied in the exquisite  ravings  of Terence  McKenna,  is the equation  of spir-
itual  transcendence  with  information  of  a  transcendental  kind. Thus,  any  
experience  (most effectively  invoked with the  aid of psychedelic drugs)  in  
which  the  mind  is  flooded  by  paradoxical  disclosures—visions  of  other  

NOTE       TO        PAGE        221  301  
realms,  ethereal  beings,  the  grammatology  of  alien  intelligences,  etc.—is  
considered  to  be  an  improvement  upon  ordinary  consciousness.  What  
such  a  romance  of the  subtle overlooks,  however,  is the sublimity of con-
sciousness  itself,  prior  to  subject/object  perception.  That  subtle  disclo-
sures  are  captivating  to  the  intellect  (whether  or  not  they  are  "true"),  
there  can  be  no  doubt.  But  their  impermanence—any  vision,  having  
arisen,  is  destined to pass  away—proves that such phenomena are not the 
basis  for  permanent  transformation.  
I  do  not  mean  to  suggest,  however,  that  these  "interior"  landscapes  
should  remain  unexplored.  Increasingly  subtle  appearances  hold  intrinsic  
interest  for  anyone  who  would  acquire  more  knowledge  about  the  body,  
the  mind,  or  the  universe  at  large.  I  am  simply  saying  that  to  seek free-
dom  amid  any  continuum  of  possible  disclosures  seems  a  mistake,  one  
that  only  the  nondual  schools  of  mysticism  have  adequately  criticized.  
What  is  more,  the  fascination  with  such  esoterica  is  largely  responsible  
for  the  infantilism  and  mere  credulity  that  attends  most  expressions  of  
spirituality  in   the  West.   Either  we   find  mere   belief,  wedded  to  the  
hideous  presumption  of  its  own  sufficiency,  or  we  are  met  by  the  fren-
zied   search   for   novelty—psychic   experience,   prophecies   of  doom   or   
splendor,  and  a thousand errant  convictions  about the personality of God. 
But  the  fact  remains  that  whatever  changes  occur  in  the  stream  of  our  
experience—whether  a  vision  of Jesus appears  to  each  of us,  or  the total-
ity  of  human  knowledge  can  one  day  be  downloaded  directly  onto  our  
synapses—in  spiritual  terms  we will be  consciousness  first,  and  only,  and  
already  free  of "I."  It  does  not  seem  too  soon  for  us  to  realize  this.  
24
 Whether mysticism  entails the  transcendence  of all  concepts  is  surely an 
open  question.  The  claim  here  is  merely  that  the  concepts  that  under-
write  our  dualistic  perception  of the  world  are  left  aside  by  mystics.  

Bibliography 
Aarons,  M.,  and  J.  Loftus.   Unholy  Trinity:  The  Vatican,  the  Nazis,  and  the  Swiss  
Banks.  Rev.  ed.  New York:  St. Martin's  Griffin,  1998.  
Abraham,  R.,  T.  McKenna,  and  R.  Sheldrake.  Trialogues  at  the  Edge  of  the  West:  
Chaos,  Creativity,  and  the  Resacralization  of  the  World.  Santa  Fe:  Bear  Publish-
ing, 1992. 
Adolphs,  R.,  D.  Tranel,  and  A.  R.  Damasio.  "The  Human Amygdala  in  Social  Judg-
ment."  Nature  393  (June 4,1998): 470-74. 
Ahmad,  Z.,  L.  M.  Balsamo,  B.  C.  Sachs,  B.  Xu,  and W.  D.  Gaillard.  "Auditory  Com-
prehension  of  Language  in  Young  Children:  Neural  Networks  Identified  with  
fMRI."  Neurology  60  (2003):  1598-605.  
Albert,  D.  Z.  Quantum  Mechanics  and  Experience.  Cambridge:  Harvard  Univ.  Press,  
1992. 
Allman,  J.  M.  Evolving  Brains.  New York:  Scientific American  Library,  1999.  
Anderson,  J.  R.  "The  New  Theoretical  Framework."  In  The  Adaptive  Character  of  
Thought.  Hillsdale,  N.J.:  Erlbaum,  1990.  
Andresen,  J.  "Meditation  Meets  Behavioral  Medicine:  The  Story  of  Experimental  
Research  on  Meditation."  Journal  of  Consciousness  Studies  7,  nos.  11-12  (2000):  
17-73. 
Anonymous.  Terrorist  Hunter.  New York:  HarperCollins,  2003.  
Anscombe,  G.  E.  M.  "The  First  Person."  In  Self-knowledge,  ed.  Q.  Cassam.  Oxford:  
Oxford Univ.  Press,  1975.  
Appleyard,  B.   Understanding  the  Present:  Science  and  the   Soul  of  Modern   Man.   
New York:  Doubleday,  1992.  
Armstrong,  K.  A  History  of  God.  New  York: Alfred A.  Knopf,  1994.  
Astavakra.  The  Ashtavakra  Gita.  Translated  by Thomas  Byrom.  Boston:  Shambhala,  
1990. 
Augustine,  Saint.  The  City  of God. Translated by  M. Dods. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago 
Press, 1952. 
——.       Confessions.  Translated  by  J.  G.  Pilkington.  Great  Britain:  Folio  Society,  
1993. 
303 

304            BIBLIOGRAPHY            
Austin,  J.  H.  Zen  and  the  Brain:  Toward  an  Understanding  of  Meditation  and  Con-
sciousness.  Cambridge:  MIT  Press,  1998.  
Austin,  J.  L.  Sense  and  Sensibilia.  London:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1962.  
Ayer, A.  J.  Wittgenstein.  New York:  Random  House,  1985.  
Bacovcin,  H.,  trans.  The  Way  of  a  Pilgrim  and  A  Pilgrim  Continues  His  Way.  New  
York: Doubleday, 1978. 
Baddeley,  A.  "The  Fractionation  of Working  Memory."  Proceedings  of  the  National  
Academy  of  Sciences  U.S.A.  93  (1996):  13468-72.  
Baier,  A.  C.  Moral  Prejudices:  Essays  on  Ethics.  Cambridge:  Harvard  Univ.  Press,  
1994. 
Baker,  L.  R.  Saving  Belief:  A   Critique  of  Physicalism.  Princeton:  Princeton  Univ.  
Press, 1987. 
Bankei.   The   Unborn:  The   Life   and  Teaching  of  Zen   Master  Bankei   (1622-1693).   
Translated by  N. Waddell.  San  Francisco:  North  Point  Press,  1984.  
Barnstone,  W.,  ed.  The  Other  Bible:  Jewish  Pseudepigrapha,   Christian  Apocrypha,  
Gnostic  Scriptures,  Kabbalah,  Dead  Sea  Scrolls.  San  Francisco:  Harper  San  Fran-
cisco, 1984. 
Barrett, W., and  H.  D. Aiken.,  eds.  Philosophy  in  the  20th  Century.  4 vols.  New York: 
Random  House,  1962.  
Baudrillard,  J.  The  Spirit  of  Terrorism.  Translated  by  C.  Turner.  New  York:  Verso,  
2002. 
Baumgartner,  P.,  and  S.  Payr,  eds.  Speaking  Minds:  Interviews  with  Twenty  Eminent  
Cognitive  Scientists.  Princeton:  Princeton  Univ.  Press,  1995.  
Bechara,  A.,  H.  Damasio,  D.  Tranel,  and  A.  R.  Damasio.  "Deciding  Advantageously  
before Knowing the Advantageous  Strategy."  Science  275  (1997):  1293-95.  
Becker,  E.  The  Denial  of Death.  New York:  Free  Press,  1973.  
Beedle,  A.   S.   "A  Philosopher   Looks   at   Neuroscience."   Journal   of  Neuroscience  
Research  55  (1999):  141-46.  
Beloff,  J.  "Minds  and  Machines:  A  Radical  Dualist  Perspective."  Journal  of  Con-
sciousness  Studies  1,  no.  1  (1994): 32-37. 
Bennet,  J.  "In  Israeli  Hospital,  Bomber  Tells  of  Trying  to  Kill  Israelis."  New  York  
Times, June  8,  2002.  
Bennett, J. "How  Is  Cognitive  Ethology  Possible?"  In  Cognitive  Ethology: The  Minds  
of  Other Animals,  ed.  C. A.  Ristau.  Hillsdale,  N.J.:  Erlbaum,  1991.  
Benson,  H.,  with  M.  Stark.  Timeless  Healing:  The  Power  and  Biology  of  Belief.  New  
York:  Charles  Scribner,  1996.  
Bergson,  H.  Time  and  Free  Will: An  Essay  on  the  Immediate  Data  of  Consciousness.  
Translated by F.  L. Pogson.  1910; reprint, London: George Allen  & Unwin, 1971. 
Berkow,  R.,  ed.  The  Merck  Manual  of Diagnosis  and  Therapy.  16th  ed.  Rahway,  N.J.:  
Merck  Research  Laboratories,  1992.  
Berman,  P.  "The  Philosopher  of  Islamic  Terror."  New  York  Times  Magazine,  March  
23,  2003.  

BIBLIOGRAPHY          305          
——.     Terror  and  Liberalism.  New York: W. W. Norton,  2003.  
Beyerstein,  B.  L.  "Neuropathology and the  Legacy of Spiritual  Possession."  Skeptical  
Inquirer 12, no. 3  (1998): 248-61. 
Binder,  L.  Islamic  Liberalism:  A  Critique  of  Development  Ideologies.  Chicago:  Univ.  
of Chicago  Press,  1988.  
Blake,  R.,  and  N.  K.  Logothetis.  "Visual  Competition."  Nature  Reviews  Neuroscience  
3,  no.  1  (2002): 13-21. 
Blakemore,  C,  and  S.  Jennett,  eds.  The  Oxford  Companion  to   the  Body.  Oxford:  
Oxford Univ. Press, 2001. 
Block,  N.  "Troubles  with  Functionalism."  In  The  Nature  of  Mind,  ed.  D.  Rosenthal.  
Oxford: Oxford Univ.  Press,  1991.  
——.      "The  Mind  as  the  Software  of the  Brain."  In  An  Invitation  to  Cognitive  Sci-
ence: Thinking,  ed. E.  E. Smith and D. N. Osherson. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995. 
Block,  N.,  O.  Flanagan,  and  G.  Güzeldere,  eds.  The  Nature  of  Consciousness:  Philo-
sophical  Debates.  Cambridge:  MIT  Press,  1997.  
Bloom,  H.  Omens  of  the  Millennium:  The  Gnosis  of Angels,  Dreams,  and  Resurrec-
tion.  New York:  Riverhead  Books,  1996.  
——,     ed.  The  Book  of J.  Translated by D.  Rosenberg. New York: Vintage,  1990.  
Bobrow,  R.  S.  "Paranormal  Phenomena  in  the  Medical  Literature:  Sufficient  Smoke  
to Warrant  a  Search  for  Fire."  Medical  Hypotheses  60  (2003):  864-68.  
Bogen  J.  E.  "Mental Duality  in the  Intact Brain."  Bulletin  of Clinical  Neuroscience 51 
(1986): 3-29. 
——.      "On  the  Neuropsychology  of  Consiousness:  Parts  I  and  II."  Consciousness  
and  Cognition  4======================================================== Edition.  Edited  by  J.  J.  
McDermott.  Chicago: Univ. of Chicago  Press,  1997.  
Jeannerod,  M.  "To Act or Not to Act:  Perspectives on the  Representation of Actions." 
Quarterly  Journal  of  Experimental  Psychology  52A,  no.  1  (1999):  1-29.  
——.      2001. "Neural Simulation of Action: A Unifying Mechanism  for Motor Cog-
nition."  Neurolmage  14  (2001):  S103-S109.  
Jenkins,  P.  "The  Next  Christianity."  Atlantic  Monthly,  Oct.  2002,  pp.  53-68.  
John  Paul  II  (pope).  Crossing  the  Threshold of Hope. New York: Alfred A.  Knopf,  1994.  
Johnson,  E.  "Grace  Halsell's  Prophecy  and  Politics:  Militant  Evangelists  on the  Road  
to  Nuclear War."  Journal  of  Historical  Review  7,  no.  4  (Winter  1986).  
Johnson,  P.  A  History  of  Christianity.  New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1976.  
Johnson-Laird, P. N., and R. M. J. Byrne. Deduction.  Hillsdale,  N.J.: Erlbaum, 1991. 
Jung,  C.  G.  Answer  to  Job.  Translated  by  R.  F.  C.  Hull.  Princeton:  Princeton  Univ.  
Press, 1958. 
Kafatos,  M.,  and  R.  Nadeau.  The  Conscious  Universe.  New  York:  Springer-Verlag,  
1990. 
Kahneman,  D.,  and A. Tversky.  "On  the  Reality  of Cognitive  Illusions."  Psychologi-
cal  Review  103  (1996): 582-91. 
Kaku,  M.  Hyperspace.  Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1994.  
Kalat,  J. W.  Biological  Psychology. 6th  ed.  Pacific Grove,  Calif.:  Brooks/Cole  Publish-
ing, 1998. 
Kandel,  E.  R.,  et  al.  Principles  of  Neural  Science.  4th  ed.  New  York:  McGraw-Hill,  
2000. 
Kant,  I.  The  Critique  of  Pure  Reason.  Translated  by  T.  K. Abbott.  Chicago:  Univ.  of  
Chicago Press, 1952. 
Kaplan,  R.  D.  The  Ends  of  the  Earth:  A  Journey  at  the  Dawn  of  the  21st  Century.  
New York:  Random House,  1996.  
——.      "Was  Democracy  Just  a  Moment?"  Atlantic  Monthly,  Dec.  1997,  pp. 55-80. 
——.       "The  Lawless  Frontier."  Atlantic  Monthly,  March  2000,  pp.  66-80.  
——.      "Looking  the World  in  the  Eye."  Atlantic  Monthly,  May  2001,  pp.  68-82.  
——.      "The  World  in  2005."  Atlantic  Monthly,  March  2002,  pp.  54-56.  
——.       "Supremacy  by  Stealth."  Atlantic  Monthly,  Jan.  2003,  pp.  65-83.  
Kaufmann,  W.  Existentialism  from  Dostoevsky  to  Sartre.  New  York:  New  American  
Library,  1956.  
——.       Critique  of Religion  and  Philosophy.  Princeton:  Princeton  Univ.  Press,  1958.  
——.         Nietzsche:   Philosopher,   Psychologist,   Anti-Christ.    Princeton:   Princeton   
Univ. Press, 1974. 
Kellehear,   A.   Experiences   near   Death:   Beyond   Medicine   and   Religion.   Oxford:   
Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1996.  
Keller,  B.  "The Thinkable."  New  York  Times  Magazine,  May  4,  2003.  
Kennedy,  P.  Preparing for  the  Twenty-first  Century.  New  York:  Vintage,  1993.  
Kershaw,  I.  Hitler,  1889-1936: Hubris.  New York: W. W.  Norton,  1998.  

BIBLIOGRAPHY           317           
Kertzer,  J.  I.  "The  Modern  Use  of Ancient  Lies."  New  York  Times,  May  9,  2002.  
Kim, J.  "Epiphenomenal  and  Supervenient  Causation."  In  The  Nature  of Mind,  ed.  D.  
Rosenthal. Oxford: Oxford Univ.  Press, 1991. 
——.       "The  Myth   of  Nonreductive  Materialism."   In   Supervenience  and  Mind.  
Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1993. 
——.       Mind  in  a  Physical  World: An  Essay  on  the  Mind-Body  Problem  and  Men-
tal  Causation.  Cambridge:  MIT  Press,  1998.  
Kircher, T. T. J., C. Senior, M. L. Phillips, P. J. Benson, E. T. Bullmore, M. Brammer, A. 
Simmons,  S.  C.  R. Williams,  M.  Bartels,  and A.  S.  David.  "Towards  a  Functional  
Neuroanatomy  of  Self  Processing:  Effects  of  Faces  and  Words."  Cognitive  Brain  
Research  10  (2000): 133-44. 
Kircher, T. T J., C. Senior, M. L. Phillips, S. Rabe-Hesketh, P. J. Benson, E. T. Bullmore, 
M.  Brammer, A.  Simmons,  M.  Bartels,  and A.  S.  David.  "Recognizing One's Own 
Face."  Cognition  78  (2001): B1-B15. 
Klagge,  J.  C.  "Wittgenstein  and  Neuroscience."  Synthese  78  (1989): 319-43. 
Klein,  E.  Conversations  with  the  Sphinx:  Paradoxes  in  Physics.  Translated  by  D.  Le  
Vay. London: Souvenir Press, 1996. 
Korsgaard,  C.  M.  The  Sources  of  Normativity.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  Univ.  Press,  
1996. 
Krakauer,  J.  Under  the  Banner  of Heaven: A  Story  of  Violent  Faith.  New  York:  Dou-
bleday,  2003.  
Kripke,  S.  "From  Naming  and  Necessity."  In  The  Nature  of  Mind,  ed.  D.  Rosenthal.  
Oxford: Oxford Univ.  Press, 1991. 
Krishnamurti,  J.,  and  D.  Bohm.  The  Ending of Time.  San  Francisco: Harper  San  Fran-
cisco, 1985. 
Kristof,  N.  "When  Prudery  Kills."  New  York  Times,  Oct.  8,  2003.  
Krugman,  P. "'Some  Crazy Guy.'"  New  York  Times,  June  13,  2003.  
Kuhn,  T.  S.  The  Structure  of  Scientific  Revolutions.  1962;  reprint,  Chicago:  Univ.  of  
Chicago  Press,  1970.  
Kurzweil,  R.  The  Age  of  Spiritual  Machines.  New  York:  Penguin,  1999.  
Lahav,  R. "The Conscious and the Non-conscious: Philosophical Implications of Neu-
ropsychology."  In  Mindscapes:  Philosophy,  Science,  and  the  Mind,  ed.  M.  Carrier  
and P. K. Machamer. Pittsburgh: Univ. of Pittsburgh Press, 1997. 
Lanier,  J.  "Death:  The  Skeleton  Key  of  Consciousness  Studies?"  Journal  of  Con-
sciousness  Studies  4,  no.  2  (1997): 181-85. 
Lazare,  D.  "False  Testament:  Archeology  Refutes  the  Bible's  Claim  to  History."  
Harper's,  March  2002, pp. 39-47. 
Lehrer,  K.  Self Trust.  Oxford:  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1997.  
Lelyveld,  J.  "All  Suicide  Bombers  Are  Not  Alike."  New  York  Times  Magazine,  Oct.  
28, 2001. 
Leslie,  J.  The  End  of  the  World:  The  Science  and  Ethics  of  Human  Extinction.  Lon-
don: Routledge, 1996. 

318           BIBLIOGRAPHY           
Levi,  P.  The  Drowned  and  the  Saved.  New  York: Vintage,  1989.  
Levine,  J.  "On  Leaving  Out What  It's  Like."  In  The  Nature  of  Consciousness:  Philo-
sophical  Debates,  ed.  N.  Block,  O.  Flanagan,  and  G.  Güzeldere.  Cambridge:  MIT  
Press, 1997. 
Levy,  L. W.  Blasphemy.  Chapel  Hill:  Univ.  of North  Carolina  Press,  1993.  
Lewis,  B.  "The  Roots  of Muslim  Rage."  Atlantic  Monthly,  March  1990,  pp.  47-60.  
——.     "The  Revolt  of Islam."  New  Yorker,  Nov.  19,  2001,  pp. 50-63. 
——.       The   Crisis  of  Islam:  Holy   War  and   Unholy  Terror.   New  York:  Modern  
Library, 2003. 
Lewis,  D.  "Mad  Pain  and  Martian  Pain."  In  The  Nature  of  Mind,  ed.  D.  Rosenthal.  
Oxford: Oxford Univ.  Press, 1991. 
——.      "What  Experience  Teaches."  In  The  Nature  of  Consciousness:  Philosophical  
Debates,  ed. N. Block, O. Flanagan, and G. Güzeldere. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1997. 
Lewontin,  R.  C. "The  Evolution  of Cognition: Questions We Will  Never Answer."  In  
Invitation  to  Cognitive  Science.  Vol.  4,  Methods,  Models,  and  Conceptual  Issues,  
ed. D. Scarborough and S. Sternberg. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1998. 
——.        It  Ain't  Necessarily  So:  The  Dream  of  the  Human  Genome  and  Other  Illu-
sions.  New York:  New York  Review  Books,  2000.  
Libet,  B.  "A Testable  Field Theory  of Mind-Brain  Interaction."  Journal  of  Conscious-
ness  Studies  1, no.  1  (1994): 119-26. 
——.       "Do  We  Have  Free  Will?"  Journal  of  Consciousness  Studies  6,  nos.  8-9  
(1999): 47-57. 
——.      "'Consciousness,  Free  Action  and  the  Brain':  Commentary  on  John  Searle's  
Article."  Journal  of  Consciousness  Studies  8,  no.  8  (2001):  59-65.  
——.      "The  Timing  of  Mental  Events:  Libet's  Experimental  Findings  and  Their  
Implications."  Consciousness  and  Cognition  11  (2002):  291-99.  
Lockwood, M. Mind, Brain  & the Quantum: The  Compound  "I." Oxford: Blackwell, 1989. 
——.       "Unsensed  Phenomenal  Qualities:  A  Defense."  Journal  of  Consciousness  
Studies 5, no. 4  (1998): 415-18. 
Logothetis,  N.  K.  "Vision: A Window on  Consciousness."  Scientific American  Special  
Edition  12, no. 1  (2002): 18-25. 
Logothetis,  N.  K.,  et  al.  "Neurophysiological  Investigation  of the  Basis  of the  fMRI  
Signal."  Nature  412  (July  12,  2001):  150-57.  
Longchenpa.  Kindly  Bent  to  Ease  Us.  3  vols. Translated by  H. V. Guenther.  Berkeley,  
Calif.:  Dharma  Publishing,  1975.  
——.       The  Four-Themed  Precious  Garland.  Translated  by  A.  Berzin.  Dharmsala:  
Library  of Tibetan Works  and Archives,  1978.  
——.        Buddha  Mind:  An  Anthology   of  Longchen   Rabjam's   Writings   on   Dzogpa   
Chenpo.  Translated  by  Tulku  Thondup  Rinpoche,  edited  by  H.  Talbott.  Ithaca,  
N.Y.:  Snow  Lion  Publications,  1989.  
Luria,  A.  R.  The  Mind  of  a  Mnemonist.  Translated  by  L.  Solotaroff.  1968;  reprint,  
Cambridge: Harvard Univ.  Press,  1987.  

BIBLIOGRAPHY            319            
Lyon,  J.,  and  P.  Corner.  Altered  Fates:  Gene  Therapy  and  the  Retooling  of  Human  
Life. New York: W. W. Norton, 1995. 
Lyons,  R,  J.  R.  Hanley,  and  J.  Kay.  "Anomia  for  Common  Names  and  Geographical  
Names  with  Preserved  Retrieval  of Names  of People: A Semantic Memory Disor-
der."  Cortex 38, no.  1  (2002): 23-35  [abstract].  
Maclntyre,  A.  The   Unconscious:  A   Conceptual  Analysis.  Bristol,  Eng.:  Thoemmes  
Press, 1958. 
Mackay,  C.   Extraordinary   Popular  Delusions   and   the   Madness   of  Crowds.  1841;  
reprint, New York: Barnes  &  Noble, 1993. 
Maguire, E. A., R. S. J. Frackowiak, and C. D. Frith. "Recalling Routes around London: 
Activation  of the  Right  Hippocampus  in Taxi Drivers."  Journal  of Neuroscience  17  
(1997):  7103-10.  
Maguire,  E.  A.,  C.  D.  Frith,  and  R.  G.  Morris.  "The  Functional  Neuroanatomy  of  
Comprehension  and  Memory:  The  Importance  of  Prior  Knowledge."  Brain  122  
(1999): 1839-50. 
Maha  Boowa  Nanasampanno.  Straight  from  the  Heart:  Thirteen  Talks  on  the======================================================== HAVING  seen  my  argument  against  faith  discussed,  attacked,  cele-
brated,  and misconstrued  in  blogs  and  book  reviews  throughout  the  

AFTE RWO  R  D             231             
world, I  would like  to  take the occasion  of its  release in  paperback as 
an  opportunity  to  respond  to  the  most  common  criticisms  and mis-
conceptions. These are by no means straw-man arguments; these are 
what  real  people  (and  the  occasional  book  reviewer)  believe  to  be  
devastating  retorts  to  my  basic  thesis:  
1.  Yes,  religion  occasionally  causes  violence,  but  the  greatest  crimes  
of  the  twentieth  century  were  perpetrated  by  atheists.  Godlessness—  
as  witnessed  by  the  regimes  of Hitler,  Stalin,  Mao,  Pol  Pot,  and  Kim  
Jong-Il—is  the  most  dangerous  condition  of all. 
This is one of the most common criticisms  I  encounter. It is also the 
most  depressing,  as  I  anticipate  and  answer  it  early  in  the  book  
(p.  79).  While  some  of  the  most  despicable  political  movements  in  
human history have been  explicitly  irreligious,  they were  not  espe-
cially  rational.  The  public  pronouncements  of  these  regimes  have  
been  mere  litanies  of  delusion—about  race,  economics,  national  
identity,  the  march  of history,  or  the  moral  dangers  of intellectual-
ism. Auschwitz, the gulag, and the killing  fields are not examples of 
what   happens   when   people   become   too   critical   of   unjustified   
beliefs;  to  the  contrary,  these  horrors  testify  to  the  dangers  of  not  
thinking  critically  enough  about  specific  secular  ideologies.  Need-
less  to  say,  my  argument  against  religious  faith  is  not  an argument 
for the  blind embrace  of atheism  as  a  dogma. The problem  I  raise  in  
the  book  is  none  other  than  the  problem  of dogma  itself—of which 
every  religion  has  more  than  its  fair  share.  I  know  of  no  society  
in  human  history  that  ever   suffered  because  its  people  became  
too  reasonable.  
As  I  argue  throughout  the  book,  certainty  without  evidence  is  
necessarily  divisive  and  dehumanizing.  In  fact,  respect  for  evidence  
and  rational  argument  is  what  makes  peaceful  cooperation  possible.  
As  human  beings,  we  live  in  a  perpetual  choice  between  conversa-
tion  and  violence;  what,  apart  from  a  fundamental willingness  to  be  
reasonable,  can  guarantee  that we  will  keep  talking  to one another? 

232           AFTERWO    RD    
2.  We  need faith  to  do  almost  anything.  It  is  absurd  to  think  that  we  
could  ever  do  without  it.  
One e-mail  I  received on this  subject began: "I  like your writing style 
but  you  are  an  idiot."  Fair  enough.  My  correspondent  then  went  on  
to point out, as many have, that each of us has to get out of bed in the 
morning  and  live  his  life,  and we  do  this  in  a  context  of uncertainty, 
and  in  the  context  of  terrible  certainties,  like  the  certainty  of  death.  
This  positive disposition,  this willingness  to  set  a course in  life with-
out any assurance that things will go one's  way, is  occasionally called 
"faith." Thus,  one  may  prop  up  a  disconsolate  friend with  the  words  
"have  faith  in yourself."  Such words  are almost never  facetious,  even  
on  the  forked  tongue  of an  atheist.  Let  me  state  for  the  record that  I  
see  nothing wrong  with  this  kind  of "faith." 
But  this  is  not  the  faith  that  has  given  us  religion.  It  would  be  
rather  remarkable  if a  positive attitude  in the  face  of uncertainty  led  
inevitably  to  ludicrous  convictions about the  divine  origin  of certain 
books,  to  bizarre  cultural  taboos,  to  the  abject  hatred  of  homosexu-
als,  and  to  the  diminished  status  of  women.  Adopt  too  positive  an  
outlook,  and  the next  thing you  know  architects  and  engineers  may  
start  flying  planes  into  buildings.  
As  I  do my best  to  spell out over the  course of the  book,  religious  
faith  is  the  belief  in  historical  and  metaphysical  propositions  with-
out  sufficient  evidence.  When  the  evidence  for  a  religious  proposi-
tion  is  thin  or  nonexistent,  or  there  is  compelling  evidence  against  
it,  people  invoke  faith.  Otherwise,  they  simply  cite  the  reasons  for  
their  beliefs   (e.g.,  "the   New  Testament  confirms  Old  Testament  
prophecy,"  "I  saw  the  face  of  Jesus  in  a  window,"  "We  prayed,  and  
our  daughter's  cancer  went  into  remission").  Such  reasons  are  gen-
erally  inadequate,  but  they  are  better  than  no  reasons  at  all.  People  
of faith naturally  recognize the  primacy of reasons  and  resort to  rea-
soning  whenever they  possibly  can.  Faith  is  simply the  license they 
give  themselves  to  keep  believing  when  reasons  fail.  When  rational  
inquiry  supports  the  creed  it  is  championed; when  it  poses  a threat, 

AFTE RWO  RD          233          
it  is  derided;  sometimes  in  the  same  sentence.  Faith  is  the  mortar  
that  fills the cracks in the evidence and the gaps in the logic, and thus 
it  is  faith  that  keeps  the  whole  terrible  edifice  of  religious  certainty  
still  looming  dangerously  over  our  world.  
3.  Islam  is  no  more  amenable  to  violence  than  any  other  religion  is.  
The  violence  we  see  in  the  Muslim  world  is  the  product  of  politics  
and  economics,  not  faith.  
The speciousness  of this  claim  is best glimpsed by the bright light of 
bomb  blasts.  Where  are  the  Palestinian  Christian  suicide  bombers?  
They, too,  suffer the daily indignity of the  Israeli occupation. Where, 
for  that  matter,  are  the  Tibetan  Buddhist  suicide  bombers?  The  
Tibetans  have  suffered an  occupation  far more  cynical  and repressive 
than  any that the  United  States  or  Israel  has  ever  imposed  upon  the  
Muslim  world.  Where  are  the  throngs  of  Tibetans  ready  to  perpe-
trate  suicidal  atrocities  against  Chinese  noncombatants?  They  do  
not  exist. What  is  the  difference  that  makes  the  difference?  The  dif-
ference  lies  in  the  specific  tenets  of  Islam.  This  is  not  to  say  that  
Buddhism  could  not  help  inspire  suicidal  violence.  It  can,  and  it  has  
(Japan,  World  War  II).  But  this  concedes  absolutely  nothing  to  the  
apologists  for  Islam. As  a  Buddhist,  one  has  to work extremely  hard  
to  justify  such  barbarism.  One  need  not  work  nearly  so  hard  as  
a  Muslim.  
Recent  events  in  Iraq  offer  further  corroboration  on  this  point.  It  
is  true,  of  course,  that  the  Iraqi  people  have  been  traumatized  by  
decades   of  war   and   repression.   But  war  and   repression   do   not   
account  for  suicidal  violence  directed  against  the  Red  Cross,  the  
United   Nations,   foreign   workers,   and   Iraqi   innocents.  War   and   
repression  would  not  have  attracted  an  influx  of  foreign  fighters  
willing  to  sacrifice  their  lives  merely  to  sow  chaos. The  Iraqi  insur-
gents  have  not  been  motivated  principally  by  political  or  economic  
grievances.  They  have  such  grievances,  of  course,  but  politics  and  
economics  do  not  get  a  man  to  intentionally  blow  himself  up  in  a  

234          AFTE  RWO  RD  
crowd  of children,  or  get  his  mother  to  sing  his  praises  for  it.  Mira-
cles  of this  order  generally  require  religious  faith.  
There  are  other  confounding  variables  here,   of  course—state  
sponsorship of terrorism, the occasional coercion  of reluctant  suicide  
bombers—but  we  cannot  let  them  blind  us  to  the  pervasive  and  
lunatic  influence  of  religious  belief.  The  truth  that  we  must  finally  
confront  is  that  Islam  contains  specific  doctrines  about  martyrdom  
and  jihad  that  now  directly  inspire  Muslim  terrorism.  Unless  the  
world's  Muslims  can  find some  way  of expunging  a  theology  that  is  
fast turning their religion into a cult of death, we will ultimately  face  
the  same  perversely  destructive  behavior  throughout  much  of  the  
world.  Wherever  these  events  occur,  we  will  find  Muslims  tending  
to  side with  other  Muslims,  no  matter  how  sociopathic  their behav-
ior.  This  is  the  malignant  solidarity  that  religion  breeds.  It  is  time  
that  sane  human  beings  stopped  making  apologies  for  it.  And  it  is  
time   for   Muslims—especially   Muslim   women—to   realize   that   
nobody  suffers  the  consequences  of  Islam  more  than  they  do.  
4.  The  End  of  Faith  is  not  a  truly  atheistic  book.  It  is  really  a  stalk-
ing  horse  for  Buddhism,  New-Age  mysticism,  or  some  other form  of  
irrationality. 
As  almost  every  page  of my  book is  dedicated to  exposing  the  prob-
lems  of religious  faith,  it  is  ironic that some  of the harshest  criticism  
has  come  from  atheists  who  feel that  I  have  betrayed  their  cause  on  
peripheral  issues.  If there  is  a book that takes  a harder swing at reli-
gion,  I'm  not  aware  of  it.  This  is  not  to  say  that  my  book  does  not  
have  many  shortcomings—but  appeasing  religious  irrationality  is  
not  among  them.  
Nevertheless,  atheists  have  found  much  to  complain  about  in  the  
book, especially in the last chapter where  I attempt to put meditation 
and  "spirituality"  on  a  rational  footing.  "Meditation,"  in  the  sense  
that  I  use the  term, merely  requires  that  a  person  pay  extraordinar-

AFTERWORD           235           
ily  close  attention  to  his  moment-by-moment  experience  of  the  
world. There  is nothing irrational  about doing this.  In  fact,  it consti-
tutes  the  only  rational  basis  for======================================================== quirks,  etc.—something  that  
originates  with  you?  Is  it  something  best  thought  of  as  residing  in  
you?  These  phenomena  are  the  direct  result  of your  embeddedness  
in a world of social  relationships  and culture  (as well  as  a product of 
your  genes).  Many  of them  seem  to  be  no  more  "you,"  ultimately,  
than  the  rules  of  English  grammar  are.  
And  yet,  this  feeling  of being  a  self persists.  If the term  "I"  refers  
to anything at all,  it does not  refer simply to the  body. After all, most 
of us  feel individuated as  a  self within the body. I  speak of "my" body 
more  or  less  as  I  speak  of "my"  car,  for the  simple  reason  that every 
act of perception  or cognition  conveys the tacit  sense that the knower 
is  something  other  than  the  thing  known.  Just  as  my  awareness  of  
my car demonstrates  that I, as  a  subject, am  something other than  it,  
as  an  object,  I  can  be  aware  of  my  hand,  or  an  emotion,  and  experi-
ence  the  same  cleavage  between  subject  and  object.  For  this  reason,  
the  self cannot simply be equated with the totality of a person's men-
tal  life  or with  his  personality  as  a  whole.
6
  Rather,  it  is  the  point  of  

212           THE     END     OF     FAITH     
view around  which  the  changing  states  of his  mind  and  body  appear  
to  be  constellated. Whatever the  relationship  between  consciousness  
and the  body actually  is,  in  experiential terms the body is  something  
to  which  the  conscious   self,  if  such  there  be,  stands   in   relation.   
Exactly when,  in  evolutionary  or  developmental  terms,  this  point  of  
view  emerges  is  not  known,  but  one  thing  is  clear:  at  some  point  in  
the  first  years  of  life  most  human  beings  are  christened  as  "I,"  the  
perennial  subject,  for whom  all  appearances,  inside  and  out,  become  
objects  of a kind, waiting to be known. And it is as  "I" that every  sci-
entist begins his inquiry into the nature  of the world and every pious 
man  folds  his  hands  in  prayer.
7  
THE  sense of self seems to be the product of the brain's representing 
its  own  acts  of  representation;  its  seeing  of  the  world  begets  an  
image  of a  one  who  sees.  It is important  to  realize that this  feeling—  
the  sense  that  each  of  us  has  of  appropriating,  rather  than  merely  
being,  a  sphere  of  experience—is  not  a  necessary  feature  of  con-
sciousness.  It  is,  after  all,  conceivable  that  a  creature  could  form  a  
representation  of  the  world  without  forming  a  representation  of  
itself in the world. And,  indeed, many spiritual  practitioners  claim  to  
experience  the  world  in just  this  way,  perfectly  shorn  of  self.  
A basic  finding  of neurophysiology  lends  credence  to  such  claims.  
It is not so much what they are but what they do that makes neurons 
see,  hear,  smell,  taste,  touch,  think,  and  feel.  Like  any other  function  
that emerges  from  the  activity  of the  brain,  the  feeling  of  self is  best  
thought  of  as  a  process.  It  is  not very  surprising,  therefore,  that  we  
can  lose  this  feeling,  because  processes,  by their very  nature,  can  be  
interrupted.  While  the  experience  of  selflessness  does  not  indicate  
anything   about   the   relationship   between   consciousness   and   the   
physical  world  (and  is  thus  mute  on  the  question  of  what  happens  
after death), it has broad implications  for the  sciences of mind,  for our 
approach  to  spirituality,  and  for  our  conception  of human  happiness.  
As  a mental phenomenon,  loss  of  self is  not  as  rare  as  our  schol-
arly  neglect  of  it  suggests.  This  experience  is  characterized  by  a  

EXPERIMENTS    IN    CONSCIOUSNESS            213            
sudden  loss  of  subject/object  perception:  the  continuum  of  experi-
ence  remains,  but  one  no  longer  feels  that  there  is  a  knower  stand-
ing  apart  from  the  known. Thoughts  may  arise,  but  the  feeling  that  
one  is  the  thinker  of  these  thoughts  has  vanished.  Something  has  
definitely  changed  at  the  level  of one's  moment-to-moment  experi-
ence,  and  this  change—the  disappearance  of anything  to  which  the  
pronoun  "\"  can  be  faithfully  attached—signals  that  there  had  been  
a  conscious  experience  of selfhood  all the  while,  however  difficult  it  
may be  to  characterize.  
Look  at  this  book  as  a  physical  object.  You  are  aware  of  it  as  an  
appearance  in  consciousness.  You  may  feel  that  your  consciousness  
is one thing—it is whatever illuminates your world from  some point 
behind your eyes, perhaps—and the book is another. This is the kind 
of dualistic  (subject/object)  perception  that  characterizes  our  normal  
experience of life. It is  possible, however,  to look  for your  self in such 
a  way as  to put  this  subject/object dichotomy in  doubt—and  even  to  
banish  it  altogether.  
The   contents   of   consciousness—sights,   sounds,   sensations,   
thoughts,  moods,  etc.—whatever  they  are  at  the  level  of the  brain,  
are  merely  expressions  of  consciousness  at  the  level  of  our  experi-
ence.  Unrecognized  as  such,  many  of  these  appearances  seem  to  
impinge  upon  consciousness  from  without,  and  the  sense  of  self  
emerges,   and  grows   entrenched,   as   the   feeling  that   that   which   
knows  is  circumscribed,  modified,  and  often  oppressed  by  that  which  
is  known.  Indeed,  it  is  likely  that  our  parents  found  us  in  our  cribs  
long  before  we  found  ourselves  there,  and  that  we  were  merely  led  
by  their  gaze,  and  their  pointing  fingers,  to  coalesce  around  an  
implied  center  of  cognition  that  does  not,  in  fact,  exist.
8
  Thereafter,  
every maternal  caress,  every  satisfaction  of hunger  or  thirst,  as  well  
as the diverse forms  of approval and rebuke that came in reply to the 
actions  of our  embodied  minds,  seemed  to  confirm  a  self-sense  that  
we,  by  example,  finally  learned  to  call  "I"—and thus  we  became  the  
narrow  locus  around  which   all  things   and  events,  pleasant  and  
unpleasant,  continue  to  swirl.  
In  subjective  terms,  the  search   for  the   self  seems  to  entail  a  

214          THE     END     OF     FAITH     
paradox: we are,  after  all, looking  for the very thing that is doing the 
looking. Thousands of years  of human experience suggests, however, 
that the paradox here is only apparent: it is not merely that the com-
ponent  of our  experience  that  we  call "I"  cannot  be  found;  it  is  that  
it  actually  disappears  when  looked  for  in  a  rigorous  way.  
THE  foregoing  is  just  a  gloss  on  the  phenomenology  here,  but  it  
should be  sufficient to  get  us  started. The  basic  (and,  I  think,  uncon-
testable)  fact is that almost every human being experiences the dual-
ity  of  subject  and  object  in  some  measure,  and  most  of  us  feel  it  
powerfully nearly every moment  of our  lives.  It  is  scarcely  an  exag-
geration  to  say  that  the  feeling  that  we  call  "I"  is  one  of  the  most  
pervasive  and  salient  features  of human  life:  and  its  effects  upon the 
world,  as  six  billion  "selves"  pursue  diverse  and  often  incompatible  
ends,  rival  those  that  can  be  ascribed  to  almost  any  other  phe-
nomenon  in nature.  Clearly, there  is  nothing optimal—or even  nec-
essarily   viable—about   our   present   form   of   subjectivity.   Almost   
every problem we have can be  ascribed to the  fact that human beings 
are  utterly  beguiled  by  their  feelings  of separateness.  It would  seem  
that  a  spirituality  that  undermined  such  dualism,  through  the  mere  
contemplation  of consciousness,  could  not  help  but  improve  our  sit-
uation. Whether  or not great numbers  of human  beings  will  ever be 
in  a position to explore this terrain depends on how our discourse on 
religion  proceeds.  There  is  clearly  no  greater  obstacle  to  a  truly  
empirical  approach  to  spiritual  experience  than  our  current  beliefs  
about  God.  
The   Wisdom   of   the   East   
Inevitably,  the  foregoing  will  strike  certain  readers  as  a  confusing  
eruption  of  speculative  philosophy. This  is  unfortunate,  for  none  of  
it  has  been  speculative  or  even  particularly  philosophical—at  least  

EXPERIMENTS  IN CONSCIOUSNESS        215        
not  in  the  sense  that  this  term  has  acquired  in  the West. Thousands 
of years  have  passed  since any Western  philosopher imagined that  a  
person should be made happy, peaceful, or even wise, in the ordinary 
sense,  by  his  search  for  truth.
9
  Personal  transformation,  or  indeed  
liberation  from  the  illusion  of the  self,  seems  to  have  been  thought  
too much to ask: or rather, not thought of at all.  Consequently, many 
of us in  the West are conceptually unequipped to understand empir-
ical  claims  of the  sort  adduced  above.  
In  fact, the  spiritual  differences between the  East and the West are 
every  bit  as  shocking  as  the  material  differences  between  the  North  
and the  South.  Jared  Diamond's  fascinating thesis, to  sum  it  up  in  a  
line, is that advanced civilization  did not arise  in sub-Saharan Africa, 
because one can't saddle a rhinoceros and ride it into battle.
10
 If there 
is  an  equally  arresting  image  that  accounts  for  why  nondualistic,  
empirical mysticism  seems  to have  arisen only in Asia,  I have yet to 
find  it.  But  I  suspect that the  culprit  has  been  the  Christian,  Jewish,  
and Muslim emphasis  on  faith  itself.  Faith  is rather like a rhinoceros, 
in  fact:  it won't  do======================================================== Kierkegaard's  leap  of faith,  and other  epistemological  
ponzi  schemes won't  do. To  believe  that  God exists  is  to believe that 
I  stand  in  some  relation  to  his  existence  such  that  his  existence  is  
itself  the  reason  for  my  belief.  There  must  be  some  causal  connec-
tion,  or  an  appearance  thereof,  between  the  fact  in  question  and  my  
acceptance  of  it.  In  this  way,  we  can  see  that  religious  beliefs,  to  be  
beliefs about the way the world is, must be as evidentiary in spirit as 
any  other.  
THE  moment  we  admit  that  our  beliefs  are  attempts  to  represent  
states of the  world, we  see  that they must  stand in the  right relation 
to the world to be valid.  It should be  clear that if a person believes in 
God because  he  has  had  certain  spiritual  experiences,  or  because  the  
Bible makes  so much  sense, or because he trusts  the authority of the 
church,  he  is  playing the  same  game  of justification  that  we  all  play  
when  claiming  to  know  the  most  ordinary  facts.  This  is  probably  a  
conclusion  that  many  religious  believers  will  want  to  resist;  but  
resistance  is  not only  futile but  incoherent. There  is  simply  no other 
logical  space  for  our  beliefs  about  the  world  to  occupy.  As  long  as  
religious  propositions  purport  to  be  about  the  way  the  world  is—  
God  can  actually  hear  your  prayers,  If  you  take  his  name  in  vain  
bad  things  will  happen  to  you,  etc.—they  must  stand  in  relation  to  
the  world,  and  to  our  other  beliefs  about  it. And  it  is  only  by  being  
so  situated  that  propositions  of  this  sort  can  influence  our  subse-
quent  thinking  or  behavior.  As  long  as  a  person  maintains  that  his  
beliefs  represent  an  actual  state  of  the  world  (visible  or  invisible;  
spiritual  or  mundane),  he  must  believe  that  his  beliefs  are  a  conse-
quence  of the  way  the  world  is.  This,  by  definition,  leaves  him  vul-
nerable to new evidence. Indeed, if there were no conceivable change 
in the  world  that  could get  a person  to  question  his  religious  beliefs,  
this   would  prove  that  his   beliefs  were  not  predicated  upon  his  
taking  any  state  of  the  world  into  account.  He  could  not  claim,  
therefore,  to  be  representing  the  world  at  all.
26  

64         THE    END    OF   FAITH   
ALTHOUGH  many  things  can  be  said  in  criticism  of  religious  faith,  
there  is  no discounting its  power.  Millions among  us,  even  now,  are  
quite  willing  to  die  for  our  unjustified  beliefs,  and  millions  more,  it  
seems,  are  willing to  kill  for them. Those who  are  destined  to  suffer  
terribly throughout their lives,  or upon the threshold of death,  often  
find  consolation  in  one  unfounded  proposition  or  another.   Faith   
enables  many  of  us  to  endure  life's  difficulties  with  an  equanimity  
that  would  be  scarcely  conceivable  in  a  world  lit  only  by  reason.  
Faith  also  appears  to  have  direct  physical  consequences  in  cases  
where  mere  expectations,  good  or  bad,  can  incline  the  body  toward  
health  or untimely  death.
27
  But  the  fact  that  religious  beliefs  have  a  
great  influence  on  human  life  says  nothing  at  all  about  their  valid-
ity.  For the paranoid, pursued by  persecutory  delusions, terror of the 
CIA  may  have  great  influence,  but  this  does  not  mean  that  his  
phones  are  tapped.  
What is faith, then? Is it something other than belief? The Hebrew 
term  'emûnâ  (verb  'mn)  is  alternately  translated  as  "to  have  faith,"  
"to  believe,"  or  "to  trust."  The  Septuagint,  the  Greek  translation  of  
the  Hebrew  Bible,  retains  the  same  meaning  in  the  term  pisteuein,  
and this Greek equivalent is  adopted in the New Testament. Hebrews 
11:1  defines  faith  as  "the  assurance  of  things  hoped  for,  the  convic-
tion of things not  seen."  Read in the  right way, this passage seems to 
render  faith  entirely  self-justifying:  perhaps  the  very  fact  that  one  
believes in something which has not yet come to pass  ("things  hoped  
for")  or  for  which  one  has  no  evidence  ("things  not  seen")  consti-
tutes  evidence   for  its  actuality   ("assurance").  Let's  see  how  this  
works:  I  feel  a  certain,  rather  thrilling  "conviction"  that  Nicole  Kid-
man is in love with me. As we have never met, my feeling is my only 
evidence  of  her  infatuation.  I  reason  thus:  my  feelings  suggest  that  
Nicole  and  I  must  have  a  special,  even  metaphysical,  connection—  
otherwise, how could  I have this  feeling in the  first place?  I  decide to 
set  up  camp  outside  her  house  to  make  the  necessary  introductions;  
clearly, this  sort  of faith  is  a  tricky business. 
Throughout this  book,  I am  criticizing  faith in  its  ordinary,  scrip-

THE    NATURE    OF    BELIEF          65          
tural  sense—as  belief in,  and  life  orientation  toward,  certain  histor-
ical and metaphysical propositions. The meaning of the term, both in 
the  Bible  and  upon  the  lips  of  the  faithful,  seems  to  be  entirely  
unambiguous.  It  is  true  that  certain  theologians  and  contemplatives  
have attempted  to  recast  faith as  a  spiritual principle that transcends 
mere  motivated  credulity.  Paul  Tillich,  in  his  Dynamics   of  Faith  
(1957),  rarefied  the  original  import  of  the  term  out  of  existence,  
casting away what  he  called  "idolatrous  faith"  and,  indeed,  all  equa-
tions  between  faith  and  belief.  Surely  other  theologians  have  done  
likewise. Of course, anyone  is  free  to  redefine the term  "faith" how-
ever  he  sees   fit  and  thereby  bring  it  into  conformity  with  some  
rational  or  mystical  ideal.  But  this  is  not  the  "faith"  that  has  ani-
mated  the  faithful  for  millennia.  The  faith  that  I  am  calling  into  
question  is  precisely  the  gesture  that  Tillich  himself  decried  as  "an  
act  of knowledge  that  has  a  low  degree  of evidence."  My argument, 
after  all,  is  aimed  at  the  majority  of  the  faithful  in  every  religious  
tradition,  not  at  Tillich's  blameless  parish  of one. 
Despite  the  considerable  exertions  of  men  like  Tillich  who  have  
attempted  to  hide  the  serpent  lurking  at  the  foot  of  every  altar,  the  
truth  is  that  religious  faith  is  simply  unjustified  belief  in  matters  of  
ultimate   concern—specifically  in  propositions  that  promise   some   
mechanism  by  which  human  life  can  be  spared  the  ravages  of  time  
and  death.  Faith  is  what  credulity  becomes  when  it  finally  achieves  
escape   velocity   from   the   constraints   of   terrestrial   discourse—   
constraints   like   reasonableness,   internal   coherence,   civility,   and   
candor.  However  far  you  feel  you  have  fled  the  parish  (even  if  you  
are  just  now  adjusting  the  mirror  on  the  Hubble  Space  Telescope),  
you  are  likely  to  be  the  product  of  a  culture  that  has  elevated  belief,  
in  the  absence  of  evidence,  to  the  highest  place  in  the  hierarchy  of  
human virtues.  Ignorance is the true coinage of this realm—"Blessed 
are  those  who  have  not  seen  and  have  believed"  (John  20:29)—and  
every child is instructed that it  is, at the very least, an  option, if not a 
sacred duty, to disregard the facts of this world out of deference to the 
God who  lurks  in  his  mother's  and  father's  imaginations.  

66         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
But  faith  is  an  impostor. This  can  be  readily  seen  in the  way that 
all  the  extraordinary  phenomena  of  the  religious  life—a  statue  of  
the Virgin weeps, a child casts his crutches to the ground—are  seized  
upon   by   the   faithful   as   confirmation   of   their   faith.   At   these   
moments,  religious  believers  appear  like  men  and  women  in  the  
desert  of  uncertainty  given  a  cool  drink  of  data.  There  is  no  way  
around  the  fact  that  we  crave  justification  for  our  core  beliefs  and  
believe  them  only  because we  think  such justification  is,  at the very 
least,  in  the  offing.  Is  there  a  practicing  Christian  in  the  West  who  
would be  indifferent to the appearance  of incontestable  physical  evi-
dence that attested to the literal truth  of the  Gospels? Imagine if car-
bon  dating  of  the  shroud  of  Turin
28
  had  shown  it  to  be  as  old  as  
Easter  Sunday, AD  29:  Is  there any  doubt that this  revelation would 
have occasioned a  spectacle of awe, exultation, and zealous remission 
of  sins  throughout  the  Christian  world?  
This  is  the  very  same  faith  that  will  not  stoop  to  reason  when  it  
has   no   good   reasons   to   believe.   If  a  little   supportive   evidence   
emerges,  however,  the  faithful  prove  as  attentive  to  data  as  the  
damned.  This  demonstrates  that  faith  is  nothing  more  than  a  will-
ingness  to  await  the  evidence—be  it  the  Day  of  Judgment  or  some  
other  downpour  of  corroboration.  It  is  the  search  for  knowledge  on  
the installment plan: believe now, live an untestable hypothesis until 
your  dying  day,  and you  will  discover  that  you  were  right.  
But  in  any  other  sphere  of  life,  a  belief  is  a  check that  everyone  
insists  upon  cashing  this  side  of  the  grave:  the  engineer  says  the  
bridge  will  hold;  the  doctor  says  the  infection  is  resistant  to  peni-
cillin—these  people  have  defeasible  reasons  for  their  claims  about  
the  way  the  world  is. The  mullah,  the  priest,  and  the  rabbi  do  not.  
Nothing  could  change  about  this  world,  or  about  the  world  of======================================================== need  add  to  each  level  of  our  
being by way of antidote comes  likewise in equal proportions. The import 
of the passage is  clear: the body, mind, and spirit need to be tended to with 
the  same  care.  
Salt  and  freshly  ground  black  pepper:  here  we  have  the  perennial  
invocation  of  opposites—the  white  and  the  black  aspects  of  our  nature.  
Both  good  and  evil  must  be  understood  if we  would  fulfill  the  recipe  for  
spiritual  life.  Nothing,  after  all,  can  be  excluded  from  the human  experi-
ence  (this  seems to be a Tantric text). What is more, salt and pepper come 
to  us  in  the  form  of grains,  which  is  to  say that  our  good  and  bad  quali-
ties  are  born  of the  tiniest  actions. Thus,  we  are  not  good  or  evil  in  gen-
eral,  but only by virtue of innumerable moments,  which  color the stream 
of our  being  by  force  of  repetition.  
A  dash  of cayenne pepper:  clearly, being of such robust color and  flavor,  
this  signifies the  spiritual  influence of an enlightened adept. What shall we 
make  of the ambiguity  of its  measurement?  How large  is  a dash?  Here we 
must  rely  upon  the  wisdom  of the  universe  at  large.  The  teacher  himself  
will  know  precisely  what  we  need  by  way  of instruction. And  it  is  at just 
this  point in the  text that the  ingredients  that bespeak the  heat  of spiritual 
endeavor  are  added  to the  list—for after  a  dash  of cayenne  pepper,  we  find  
two  teaspoons  of  chopped fresh  ginger  and  one  teaspoon  of  minced garlic. 
These  form an isosceles trinity of sorts, signifying the two sides of our spir-
itual  nature  (male  and  female)  united  with  the  object  meditation.  

298         NOTES    TO    PAGES    217-220    
Next   comes   eight  shrimp—peeled,   deveined,   and   cubed.  The   eight   
shrimp,  of course,  represent  the  eight  worldly  concerns  that  every  spiri-
tual  aspirant  must  decry:  fame  and  shame;  loss  and  gain;  pleasure  and  
pain;  praise  and  blame.  Each  needs  to  be  deveined,  peeled,  and  cubed—  
that  is,  purged  of  its  power  to  entrance  us  and  incorporated  on  the  path  
of  practice.  
That  such  metaphorical  acrobatics  can  be  performed  on  almost  any  
text—and  that they  are  therefore  meaningless—should be  obvious.  Here  
we  have  scripture  as  Rorschach  blot:  wherein  the  occultist  can  find  his  
magical  principles  perfectly  reflected;  the  conventional  mystic  can  find  
his  recipe  for  transcendence;  and the  totalitarian  dogmatist  can  hear  God  
telling  him  to  suppress  the  intelligence  and  creativity  of  others.  This  is  
not  to  say  that  no  author  has  ever  couched  spiritual  or  mystical  infor-
mation  in  allegory  or  ever  produced  a  text  that  requires  a  strenuous  
hermeneutical  effort  to  be  made  sense   of.   If  you   pick  up  a  copy  of  
Finnegans  Wake,  for  instance,  and  imagine  that  you  have  found  therein  
allusions  to  various  cosmogonic myths  and  alchemical  schemes,  chances  
are that  you  have,  because  Joyce  put  them  there.  But  to  dredge  scripture  
in  this  manner and  discover  the  occasional  pearl  is  little  more  than  a  lit-
erary  game.  
16
  For  a  recent  scholarly  treatment  of  the  phenomenology  of  Buddhist  
meditation  that  is  compatible  with  my  usage  here,  see  B.  A.  Wallace,  
"Intersubjectivity  in  Indo-Tibetan  Buddhism,"  Journal  of  Consciousness  
Studies  8, nos. 5-7  (2001): 209-30.  For extensive discussion  of meditation 
by  neuroscientists,  see  J.  H. Austin,  Zen  and  the  Brain  (Cambridge:  MIT  
Press,  1998),  and  C.  deCharms,  Two  Views  of  Mind:  Abhidharma  and  
Brain  Science  (Ithaca,  N.Y.:  Snow  Lion  Publications,  1998).  
17
 I believe this  metaphor  comes  from  Sri  Nisargadatta  Maharaj, but  I  have  
forgotten  where  in  his  many  discourses  I  read  it.  
18
  It  is  often  said  that  a  person  cannot  learn  these  things  from  reading  a  
book.  In  the  general  case,  this  is  undoubtedly  true.  1  would  add  that  one  
is  by  no  means  guaranteed  to  recognize  the  intrinsic  nonduality  of  con-
sciousness  simply  by  having  an  eminent  meditation  master  point  it  out.  
The  conditions  have  to be just  right:  the  teacher  has  to  be  really deliver-
ing the goods,  leaving no conceptual doubt as  to what is to be  recognized;  
and  the  student  has  to  be  endowed  with  sufficient  concentration  of mind 
to  follow his instructions  and notice what there  is  to notice.  In  this  sense,  
meditation  is  undoubtedly  an  acquired  skill.  
19
 The  recognition  of the  nonduality  of  consciousness  is  not  susceptible  to  

NOTES    TO     PAGE    220            299            
a  linguistically  oriented  analysis.  While  it  is  perfectly  natural  that  men  
who  knew  only  their  thoughts  would  attempt  to  reduce  everything  to  
language,  the  efforts  of Wittgenstein  and  his  imitators  in  philosophy  do  
not  cut  deeply  enough  to  shed  any  light  upon  this  terrain.  Perhaps  an  
intuition  of  these  things  could  be  read  into  Wittgenstein's  celebrated  
statement  "What  we  cannot  speak  about  we  must  pass  over  in  silence."  
But  the  true  mystery, whereof we  cannot  speak,  can  nevertheless  be  rec-
ognized. 
20
  Meditation  has,  in  fact,  been  the  subject  of  scientific  study  for  many  
years.  See  J.  Andresen,  "Meditation  Meets  Behavioral  Medicine:  The  
Story  of  Experimental  Research  on  Meditation,"  journal  of  Conscious-
ness  Studies  7, nos. 11-12  (2000): 17-73, for an exhaustive  review. Much 
of this  research  has employed  EEG  and physiological  measures  and,  in  so  
doing, has  not attempted to localize changes in brain function. Most stud-
ies  that  have  utilized  modern  techniques  of neuroimaging have  not stud-
ied  meditation  relative  to  the  self-sense  per  se.  See A.  B.  Newberg  et  al.,  
"The  Measurement  of  Regional  Cerebral  Blood  Flow  during  the  Com-
plex  Cognitive  Task  of  Meditation:  A  Preliminary  SPECT  Study,"  Psy-
chiatry  Research:  Neuroimaging  Section  106  (2000  and  2001):  113-22,  
for  the  results  of a  SPECT  study.  To  my  knowledge,  only  one  group  has  
begun  working  with  meditators  who  are  producing  the  specific,  subjec-
tive  effect  of losing their sense  of  self;  a preliminary  report  on  these  stud-
ies   can   be   found   in   D.   Goleman,   Destructive   Emotions:  A   Scientific   
Dialogue  with  the  Dalai  Lama  (New  York:  Bantam,  2003).  
21
  F.  Varela,  "Neurophenomenology,"  Journal  of  Consciousness  Studies  3,  
no.  4  (1996): 330-49,  makes  this  point with  regard to the  scientific valid-
ity  of "subjective"  data:  "The  line  of separation—between  rigor  and  lack  
of  it—is  not  to  be  drawn  between  first  and  third  person  accounts,  but  
determined  rather  by  whether  there  is  a  clear  methodological  ground  
leading  to  a  communal  validation  and  shared  knowledge."  
22
  I  would  like  to  briefly  address  the  concern  that  the  experience  of  non-
duality  brought  on  by  meditation  is  entirely  private,  and  therefore  not  
amenable  to  independent  verification.  Are  we  obliged  merely  to  take  a  
meditator's  word  for  it? And  if  so,  is  this  a  problem?  
Those  who  would  demand  an  independent  measure  of  mental  events  
should  first  consider  two  things:  (1)  many  features  of human  experience  
are  irretrievably  private  and,  as  a  consequence,  self-report  remains  our  
only  guide  to  their  existence:  depression,  anger,  joy,  visual  and  auditory  
hallucinations,  dreams,  and  even  pain  are  among  the  innumerable  "first-

300         NOTE    TO     PAGE    221    
person"  facts  that  can  be  finally  verified only  by  self-report;  (2)  in  those  
cases  where  independent  measures  of internal  states  do  exist,  they  exist  
only  by  virtue  of  their  reliable  correlation  with  self-report.  Even  fear,  
which  is  now dependably  linked  to  a variety  of physiological  and  behav-
ioral measures—increased  startle  response,  rising  Cortisol,  increased  skin  
conductance,  etc.—cannot  be  taken  off  the  gold  standard  of  self-report.  
Imagine  what  would  happen  if  subjective  ratings  of  fear  ever  broke  free  
of such  "independent" measures:  if,  say,  50 percent of subjects  claimed  to  
feel  no  fear  when  their  Cortisol  levels  rose  and  to  feel  terror  when  they  
fell.  These  measures  would  cease  to  be  of any  use  at  all  in  the  study  of  
fear.  It  is  important  that  we  not  lose  sight  of the  cash  value  that physio-
logical  and behavioral  variables  have  in  the  study  of mental  events:  they  
are  only  as  good  as  the  subjects  say  they  are.  (I  do  not  mean  to  suggest  
that  people  are  subjectively  incorrigible,  or  that  every  mental  event  is  
best  studied  by  recourse  to  self-report. When  the  topic  under  considera-
tion  is  how  things  seem  to  the  subject,  however,  self-report  will  be  our  
only  compass.)  
23
  Indeed, the  future  looks  rather  like  the  past in  this  respect. We  may  live  
to  see  the  technological  perfection  of  all  the  visionary  strands  of  tradi-
tional  mysticism: shamanism  (Siberian  or  South American),  Gnosticism,  
Kabbalah,  Hermetism and  its  magical  Renaissance  spawn  (Hermeticism),  
and  all  the  other  byzantine  paths  whereby  man  has  sought  the  Other  in  
every  guise  of its  conception.  But  all  these  approaches  to  spirituality  are  
born  of  a  longing  for  esoteric  knowledge  and  a  desire  to  excavate  the======================================================== articles  of  faith  regularly  pro-
duces  utterances  of this  sort:  "Islam  is  a  religion  of peace. The  very  
word 'Islam,'  after  all,  means  'peace.' And  suicide  is  forbidden in  the  
Koran.  So  there  is  no  scriptural  basis  whatsoever  for  the  actions  of  
these  terrorists."  To  such  magician's  patter,  we  might  add  that  the  
phrase  "dirty  bomb"  does  not  appear  anywhere  in  the  text  of  the  
Koran. Yes, the Koran seems to say something that can be construed 
as   a   prohibition   against   suicide—"Do   not   destroy   yourselves"   
(4:29)—but  it  leaves  many  loopholes  large  enough  to   fly  a  767  
through: 
Let those who  would  exchange  the  life  of this world  for the here-
after,  fight  for  the  cause  of  God;  whoever  fights  for  the  cause  of  

34         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
God, whether he  dies or triumphs, We shall richly reward him 
The true believers  fight  for the cause of God, but the  infidels  fight  
for the  devil.  Fight then against the  friends of Satan.... Say: "Tri-
fling  are the pleasures  of this  life. The  hereafter is better  for those 
who would keep  from  evil.  .  .  ."  (Koran 4:74-78) 
When the  above  invitations  to  martyrdom  are  considered in  light  
of the  fact that  Islam  does not distinguish between  religious and  civil  
authority,
15
  the  twin  terrors  of  Koranic  literalism  spring  into  view:  
on  the  level  of  the  state,  a  Muslim  aspiration  for  world  domination  
is  explicitly  enjoined  by  God;  on  the  level  of  the  individual,  the  
metaphysics  of  martyrdom  provides  a  rationale  for  ultimate  self-
sacrifice  toward this  end. As  Bernard  Lewis  observes,  since  the  time  
of the  Prophet,  Islam  has  been  "associated  in  the  minds  and memo-
ries  of Muslims with  the  exercise  of political  and military  power."
16  
The  metaphysics  of  Islam  are  particularly  inauspicious  where  toler-
ance  and  religious  diversity  are  concerned,  for  martyrdom  is  the  
only  way that  a Muslim  can bypass  the painful  litigation that  awaits  
us  all  on  the  Day  of  Judgment  and  proceed  directly  to  paradise.  
Rather  than  spend  centuries  moldering  in  the  earth  in  anticipation  
of  being   resurrected   and   subsequently   interrogated   by   wrathful   
angels,  the  martyr  is  immediately  transported  to  Allah's  Garden,  
where  a  flock  of "dark-eyed"  virgins  awaits  him.  
Because  they  are  believed  to  be  nothing  less  than  verbatim  tran-
scripts  of  God's  utterances,  texts  like  the  Koran  and  the  Bible  must  
be  appreciated,  and  criticized,   for  any  possible  interpretations  to  
which  they  are  susceptible—and  to  which  they  will  be  subjected,  
with varying  emphases  and elisions, throughout the  religious world. 
The problem  is  not that  some  Muslims  neglect to  notice the  few  ref-
erences  to  nonaggression  that  can  be  found  in  the  Koran,  and  that  
this  leads  them  to  do  terrible  things  to  innocent  unbelievers;  the  
problem  is  that  most  Muslims  believe  that  the  Koran  is  the  literal  
word  of God. The corrective  to  the worldview of Osama  bin  Laden  is  
not  to  point  out  the  single  line  in  the  Koran  that  condemns  suicide,  

REASON         IN         EXILE  35  
because  this  ambiguous  statement  is  set  in  a  thicket  of  other  pas-
sages  that  can  be  read  only  as  direct  summons  to  war  against  the  
"friends  of  Satan."  The  appropriate  response  to  the  bin  Ladens  of  
the  world  is  to  correct  everyone's  reading  of  these  texts  by  making  
the  same  evidentiary  demands  in  religious  matters  that  we  make  in  
all  others.  If we  cannot  find  our  way  to  a  time  when  most  of us  are  
willing  to  admit  that,  at  the  very  least,  we  are  not  sure  whether  or  
not  God wrote  some of our books, then we  need only count the  days  
to  Armageddon—because  God  has  given  us  far  many  more  reasons  
to  kill  one  another  than  to  turn  the  other  cheek.  
We live in an age in which most people believe that mere words— 
"Jesus,"  "Allah,"  "Ram"—can  mean  the  difference  between  eternal  
torment  and  bliss  everlasting.  Considering  the  stakes  here,  it  is  not  
surprising  that  many  of  us  occasionally  find  it  necessary  to  murder  
other  human  beings  for  using  the  wrong  magic  words,  or  the  right  
ones  for  the  wrong  reasons.  How  can  any  person  presume  to  know  
that  this  is  the  way  the  universe  works?  Because  it  says  so  in  our  
holy  books.  How  do  we  know  that  our  holy  books  are  free  from  
error?  Because  the  books  themselves  say  so.  Epistemological  black  
holes  of this  sort  are  fast  draining  the  light  from  our  world.  
There  is,  of course,  much that  is  wise  and  consoling  and beautiful 
in  our  religious  books.  But  words  of  wisdom  and  consolation  and  
beauty  abound  in  the  pages  of  Shakespeare,  Virgil,  and  Homer  as  
well,  and  no  one  ever  murdered  strangers  by the  thousands  because  
of the  inspiration  he  found  there.  The  belief that  certain  books were 
written  by  God  (who,  for  reasons  difficult  to  fathom,  made  Shake-
speare   a   far  better  writer  than   himself)   leaves   us   powerless   to   
address  the most potent  source  of human  conflict, past and present.
17 
How is it that the absurdity of this  idea does not bring us, hourly,  to  
our  knees?  It  is  safe  to  say  that  few  of  us  would  have  thought  so  
many  people  could  believe  such  a  thing,  if  they  did  not  actually  
believe  it.  Imagine  a  world  in  which  generations  of  human  beings  
come  to  believe  that  certain films  were  made  by  God  or  that  specific  
software  was  coded  by  him.  Imagine  a  future  in  which  millions  of  

36          THE    END    OF    FAITH    
our  descendants murder  each other  over  rival  interpretations  of Star 
Wars  or Windows  98.  Could  anything—anything—be  more  ridicu-
lous? And  yet,  this  would  be  no  more  ridiculous  than  the  world  we  
are  living  in.  
Death:   The    Fount    of   Illusions   
We  live  in  a  world  where  all  things,  good  and  bad,  are  finally  
destroyed  by  change. The  world  sustains  us,  it  would  seem,  only  to  
devour us at its leisure. Parents  lose their children and children their 
parents.  Husbands  and  wives  are  separated  in  an  instant,  never  to  
meet  again.  Friends  part  company  in  haste,  without  knowing  that  it  
will  be  for  the  last  time.  This  life,  when  surveyed  with  a  broad  
glance,  presents  little more than  a vast  spectacle  of loss. 
But it seems that there is a  cure  for all this.  If we live rightly—not 
necessarily  ethically,  but  within  the  framework  of  certain  ancient  
beliefs  and  stereotyped  behaviors—we  will  get  everything  we  want  
after we  die. When  our  bodies  finally  fail  us,  we just  shed our  corpo-
real  ballast  and  travel  to  a  land where  we  are  reunited with  everyone  
we  loved while alive.  Of course, overly  rational  people  and other  rab-
ble will be kept out of this happy place, and those who suspended their 
disbelief while  alive  will  be  free  to  enjoy  themselves  for  all  eternity.  
We  live  in  a  world  of  unimaginable  surprises—from  the  fusion  
energy  that  lights  the  sun  to  the  genetic  and  evolutionary  conse-
quences  of this  light's  dancing  for  eons  upon  the  earth—and yet par-
adise conforms to our most superficial concerns with all the  fidelity of 
a Caribbean cruise. This is wondrously strange. If one didn't know bet-
ter,  one  would  think  that  man,  in  his  fear  of  losing  all  that  he  loves,  
had  created  heaven,  along with  its  gatekeeper  God,  in  his  own  image.  
IMAGINE  that  you  have  gone  to  your  doctor  for  a  routine  checkup,  
and he gives you terrible news: you have contracted a virus that kills 

REASON         IN         EXILE  37  
100  percent  of  those  it  infects.  The  virus  mutates  so  often  that  its  
course  is  totally  unpredictable.  It  can  lie  dormant  for  many  years,  
even  decades,  or  it  can  kill  you  outright  in  an  hour.  It  can  lead  to  
heart  attack,  stroke,  myriad  forms  of cancer,  dementia,  even  suicide;  
in  fact,  there  seems  to  be  no  constraints  upon  what  its  terminal  
stages  might  be.  As  for  strategies  of  avoidance—diet  and  health  
regimes, sequestration  to  one's bed—nothing avails.  You  can  be  cer-
tain  that  even  if  you  live  with  no  other  purpose  than  to  keep  the  
progress  of this  virus  in  check,  you  will  die,  for  there  is  no  cure  for  
it  in  sight,  and  the  corruption  of your  body  has  already  begun.  
Surely, most people would consider this report to be terrible news 
indeed—but would it be  news,  in  fact?  Isn't the  inevitability of death 
just  such  a  prognosis?  Doesn't  life  itself  have  all  the  properties  of  
our  hypothetical  virus?  
You  could  die  at any moment.  You might not even  live  to  see the 
end  of this  paragraph.  Not  only  that,  you  will  definitely  die  at  some  
moment  in  the  future.  If  being  prepared  for  death  entails  knowing  
when  and  where  it  will  happen,  the  odds  are  you  will  not  be  pre-
pared.  Not  only  are  you  bound  to  die  and  leave  this  world;  you  are  
bound  to  leave  it  in  such  a  precipitate  fashion  that  the  present  sig-
nificance of anything—your relationships, your plans  for the  future,  
your  hobbies,  your  possessions—will  appear  to  have  been  totally  
illusory.  While  all  such  things,  when  projected  across  an  indefinite======================================================== of  
"facts"  our  moral  intuitions  can  be  said  to  track—if,  indeed,  they  
track  anything  of the  kind.  
A  rational  approach  to  ethics  becomes  possible  once  we  realize  
that  questions  of  right  and  wrong  are  really  questions  about  the  
170 

A     SCIENCE      OF     GOOD     AND      EVIL  171  
happiness  and  suffering  of sentient  creatures.  If we  are  in  a  position  
to  affect the happiness  or suffering of others, we have ethical respon-
sibilities  toward  them
2
—and  many  of  these  responsibilities  are  so  
grave  as  to  become  matters  of  civil  and  criminal  law.  Taking  happi-
ness  and  suffering  as  our  starting  point,  we  can  see  that  much  of  
what people worry  about under the  guise  of morality  has  nothing to 
do  with  the  subject.  It  is  time  we  realized  that  crimes  without  vic-
tims  are  like  debts  without  creditors.  They  do  not  even  exist.
3
 Any 
person who  lies  awake at night worrying about the private pleasures 
of other consenting adults  has  more  than just  too  much  time  on  his  
hands;  he  has  some  unjustifiable  beliefs  about  the  nature  of  right  
and  wrong.  
The  fact that  people  of different times  and cultures  disagree about 
ethical  questions  should  not  trouble  us.  It  suggests  nothing  at  all  
about  the  status  of  moral  truth.  Imagine  what  it  would  be  like  to  
consult  the  finest thinkers  of antiquity on questions  of basic science: 
"What,"  we  might  ask,  "is  fire?  And  how  do  living  systems  repro-
duce  themselves?  And  what  are  the  various  lights  we  see  in  the  
night  sky?"  We  would  surely  encounter  a  bewildering  lack  of  con-
sensus  on these matters.  Even though there was  no  shortage  of bril-
liant minds  in the ancient world, they simply lacked the physical and 
conceptual  tools  to  answer  questions  of  this  sort. Their  lack  of con-
sensus  signified  their  ignorance  of  certain  physical  truths,  not  that  
no  such  truths  exist.  
If  there  are  right  and  wrong  answers  to  ethical  questions,  these  
answers  will  be  best  sought  in  the  living  present.  Whether  our  
search  takes  us  to  a  secluded  cave  or  to  a  modern  laboratory  makes  
no  difference  to  the  existence  of the  facts  in  question.  If  ethics  rep-
resents  a  genuine  sphere  of  knowledge,  it  represents  a  sphere  of  
potential  progress  (and  regress).  The  relevance  of  tradition  to  this  
area  of  discourse,  as  to  all  others,  will  be  as  a  support  for  present  
inquiry. Where our traditions  are not  supportive, they become mere 
vehicles  of  ignorance.  The  pervasive  idea  that  religion  is  somehow  
the  source  of  our  deepest  ethical  intuitions  is  absurd.  We  no  more  

172         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
get our  sense  that cruelty  is wrong  from  the  pages  of the  Bible than 
we  get  our  sense  that  two  plus  two  equals  four  from  the  pages  of a 
textbook  on  mathematics. Anyone  who  does  not  harbor  some  rudi-
mentary  sense that cruelty  is wrong is  unlikely to  learn that it is by 
reading—and,  indeed,  most  scripture  offers  rather  equivocal  testi-
mony to this  fact in any  case. Our ethical intuitions  must  have their 
precursors  in  the  natural  world,  for  while  nature  is  indeed  red  in  
tooth  and  claw,  it  is  not  merely  so.  Even  monkeys  will  undergo  
extraordinary  privations  to  avoid  causing  harm  to  another  member  
of  their  species.
4
  Concern  for  others  was  not  the  invention  of  any  
prophet. 
The  fact  that  our  ethical  intuitions  have  their  roots  in  biology  
reveals  that  our  efforts  to  ground  ethics  in  religious  conceptions  of  
"moral  duty"  are  misguided.  Saving  a  drowning  child  is  no  more  a  
moral duty than understanding a syllogism is  a logical one. We  sim-
ply  do  not  need  religious  ideas  to  motivate  us  to  live  ethical  lives.  
Once we begin thinking  seriously about happiness  and  suffering, we 
find  that  our  religious  traditions  are  no  more  reliable  on  questions  
of ethics  than  they  have  been  on  scientific  questions  generally.  
The  anthropocentrism  that  is  intrinsic  to  every  faith  cannot  help  
appearing   impossibly   quaint—and    therefore    impossible—given    
what  we  now  know  about  the  natural  world.  Biological  truths  are  
simply not commensurate  with  a  designer  God,  or even  a  good  one.  
The  perverse wonder of evolution  is this:  the very  mechanisms  that  
create  the  incredible  beauty  and  diversity  of  the  living  world  guar-
antee  monstrosity  and  death.  The  child  born  without  limbs,  the  
sightless   fly,  the  vanished   species—these   are  nothing   less   than   
Mother  Nature  caught  in  the  act  of  throwing  her  clay.  No  perfect  
God  could  maintain  such  incongruities.  It  is  worth  remembering  
that  if  God  created  the  world  and  all  things  in  it,  he  created  small-
pox, plague,  and  filariasis. Any person who intentionally loosed such 
horrors  upon  the  earth  would  be  ground  to  dust  for  his  crimes.  
The  deity  who  stalked  the  deserts  of  the  Middle  East  millennia  
ago—and  who  seems  to  have  abandoned  them  to  bloodshed  in  his  

A     SCIENCE      OF     GOOD     AND     EVIL  173  
name ever since—is no one to consult on questions of ethics. Indeed, 
to judge  him  on  the  basis  of his  works  is  a  highly  invidious  under-
taking.  Bertrand  Russell  got  here  first:  "Apart  from  logical  cogency,  
there  is  to  me  something  a  little  odd about the  ethical valuations  of  
those  who  think  that  an  omnipotent,  omniscient,  and  benevolent  
Deity,  after preparing the  ground by many millions  of years  of life-
less  nebulae,  would  consider  Himself  adequately  rewarded  by  the  
final emergence of Hitler and Stalin and the H bomb."
5
 This is a dev-
astating observation,  and there is  no retort to it.  In the  face of God's 
obvious  inadequacies,  the  pious  have  generally  held that one  cannot  
apply  earthly  norms  to  the  Creator  of  the  universe.  This  argument  
loses  its  force  the  moment we  notice  that  the  Creator who  purports  
to  be  beyond  human judgment  is  consistently  ruled  by human  pas-
sions—jealousy,  wrath,  suspicion,  and  the  lust  to  dominate.  A  close  
study of our holy books  reveals that the  God of Abraham  is  a ridicu-
lous  fellow—capricious,  petulant,  and  cruel—and  one  with  whom  a  
covenant  is  little  guarantee  of health  or  happiness.
6
  If  these  are  the  
characteristics  of  God,  then  the  worst  among  us  have  been  created  
far  more  in  his  image  than  we  ever  could  have  hoped.  
The problem  of vindicating an omnipotent and omniscient  God in 
the  face  of  evil  (this  is  traditionally  called  the  problem  of  theodicy)  
is  insurmountable.  Those  who  claim  to  have  surmounted  it,  by  
recourse to notions  of free will and other incoherencies, have merely 
heaped  bad  philosophy  onto  bad  ethics.
7
  Surely  there  must  come  a  
time  when  we  will  acknowledge  the  obvious:  theology  is  now  little  
more  than  a  branch  of  human  ignorance.  Indeed,  it  is  ignorance  
with  wings.  
Ethics   and   the   Sciences   of   Mind   
The  connection  between  ethics  and  the  scientific  understanding  of  
consciousness,  while  rarely  made,  is  ineluctable,  for  other  creatures  
become   the   objects   of   our   ethical   concern   only   insofar   as   we   

174         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
attribute   consciousness   (or   perhaps   potential   consciousness)   to   
them.  That  most  of  us  feel  no  ethical  obligations  toward  rocks—to  
treat them with  kindness,  to  make  sure  they  do not  suffer unduly— 
can be derived  from the  fact that most of us  do not believe that there 
is anything that it  is  like  to  be  a  rock.
8
 While  a  science  of conscious-
ness  is  still  struggling  to  be  born,  it  is  sufficient  for  our  purposes  to  
note that the problem  of ascertaining our  ethical  obligations  to non-
human  animals  (as  well  as  to  humans  who  have  suffered  neurolog-
ical  injury,  to  human  fetuses,  to  blastocysts,  etc.)  requires  that  we  
better  understand  the  relationship  between  mind  and  matter.  Do  
crickets  suffer?  I  take  it  as  a  given  that  this  question  is  both  coher-
ently  posed  and  has  an  answer,  whether  or  not  we  will  ever  be  in  a  
position  to  answer  it  ourselves.  
This  is  the  point  at  which  our  notions  about  mind  and  matter  
directly  influence  our  notions  of  right  and  wrong.  We  should  recall  
that  the  practice  of  vivisection  was  given  new  life  by  certain  mis-
steps  in  the  philosophy  of mind—when  Descartes,  in  thrall  to  both  
Christian  dogma  and  mechanistic  physics,  declared  that  all  nonhu-
man  animals  were  mere  automata,  devoid  of  souls  and  therefore  
insensible  to  pain.
9
  One  of  his  contemporaries  observed  the  imme-
diate  consequences  of this  view:  
The  scientists  administered  beatings  to  dogs  with  perfect  indif-
ference  and  made  fun  of those  who  pitied  the  creatures  as  if they 
felt  pain.  They  said  the  animals  were  clocks;  that  the  cries  they  
emitted  when  struck  were  only  the  noise  of  a  little  spring  that  
had  been  touched,  but  that  the  whole  body  was  without  feeling.  
They  nailed  the  poor  animals  up  on  boards  by  their  four  paws  to  
vivisect  them  to  see  the  circulation  of  blood,  which  was  a  great  
subject  of  controversy.
10  
Cognitive chauvinism of this  sort  has not merely been  a  problem  for======================================================== who  apparently  speak  of  their  intuitions  without  
the least embarrassment—rather like travelers  to exotic places in the 
developing  world  who  can  often  be  heard  discussing  the  misadven-
tures  of their  colon over breakfast.  But, as we  know,  mathematicians  

A    SCIENCE    OF   GOOD    AND    EVIL          183          
travel  to very exotic places  indeed. We might also note that many of 
them  admit  to  being  philosophical  Platonists,  without  feeling  any  
apparent  need  to  consult  a  trained  philosopher  for  an  exorcism.  
Whatever  its  stigma,  "intuition"  is  a term that we  simply cannot 
do without, because  it denotes the  most  basic constituent  of our  fac-
ulty of understanding. While this is true in matters of ethics, it is  no  
less  true  in  science.  When  we  can  break  our  knowledge  of  a  thing  
down  no  further,  the  irreducible  leap  that  remains  is  intuitively  
taken. Thus,  the traditional  opposition between  reason  and intuition 
is  a  false  one:  reason  is  itself intuitive  to the  core,  as  any judgment 
that  a  proposition  is  "reasonable"  or  "logical"  relies  on  intuition  to  
find  its  feet.  One  often  hears  scientists  and  philosophers  concede  
that something or other is  a "brute fact"—that is, one that admits  of  
no  reduction. The  question  of why physical  events  have  causes,  say,  
is  not one  that  scientists  feel the  slightest temptation  to  ponder.  It is 
just so. To demand an accounting of so basic a  fact is like asking how 
we  know  that  two  plus  two  equals  four.  Scientists  presuppose  the  
validity  of  such  brutishness—as,  indeed,  they  must.  
The  point,  I  trust,  is  obvious: we  cannot  step out  of the  darkness  
without  taking  a  first   step.  And   reason,  without  knowing   how,   
understands  this  axiom  if  it  would  understand  anything  at  all.  The  
reliance  on  intuition,  therefore,  should  be  no  more  discomfiting  for  
the  ethicist  than  it  has  been  for the  physicist.  We  are  all  tugging  at  
the  same bootstraps. 
It is  also true that our intuitions  have been  known  to  fail.  Indeed,  
many  of the  deliverances  of  reason  do  not  seem  reasonable  at  first  
glance. When  asked  how  thick  a  piece  of newspaper would  be  if one 
could  fold  it  upon  itself one  hundred  times  in  succession,  most  of us 
imagine  something  about  the  size  of  a  brick.  A  little  arithmetic  
reveals,  however, that  such  an  object would be as  thick as the known 
universe.  If we've  learned  anything  in  the  last  two  thousand  years,  
it  is  that  a  person's  sense  of what  is  reasonable  sometimes  needs  a  
little  help  finding  its  feet.  
Or  consider  the  unreliable   species  of  intuition  that  might  be  

184          THE    END    OF    FAITH    
summed  up  in  the  statement  "Like  breeds  like"—yielding  sympa-
thetic magic and other obvious  affronts  to  reason.  Is  it  reasonable to 
believe,  as  many  Chinese  apparently  do,  that  tiger-bone  wine  leads  
to virility? No, it is not.  Could it become reasonable?  Indeed it could. 
We need only be confronted with  a well-run,  controlled study yield-
ing   a   significant   correlation   between   tiger   bones   and   human   
prowess.  Would  a  reasonable  person  expect  to  find  such  a  correla-
tion?  It  does  not  seem  very  likely.  But  if  it  came,  reason  would  be  
forced  to  yield  its  present  position,  which  is  that  the  Chinese  are  
destroying  a wondrous  species  of animal  for  no  reason  at  all.  
But  notice  that  the  only  manner  in  which  we  can  criticize  the  
intuitive  content  of  magical  thinking  is  by  resort  to  the  intuitive  
content  of  rational  thinking.  "Controlled  study"?  "Correlation"?  
Why  do  these  criteria  persuade us  at  all?  Isn't  it just  "obvious"  that  
if one  doesn't  exclude  other  possible  causes  of  increased  potency—  
the  placebo  effect,  delusion,  environmental  factors,  differences  in  
health  among  the  subjects,  etc.—one  will  have  failed  to  isolate  the  
variable  of  tiger  bone's  effects  on  the  human  body?  Yes,  it's just  as  
obvious as  a poke  in the  eye. Why is it  obvious?  Once  again, we hit 
bedrock. As Wittgenstein  said, "Our  spade  is  turned."  
The  fact that we must  rely  on  certain  intuitions  to  answer  ethical  
questions  does  not in the  least  suggest  that there  is anything insub-
stantial,  ambiguous,  or  culturally  contingent  about  ethical truth. As 
in any other  field, there will be  room  for intelligent dissent on ques-
tions  of  right  and wrong,  but  intelligent  dissent  has  its  limits.  Peo-
ple who  believe  that the  earth  is  flat are not dissenting geographers; 
people  who  deny  that  the  Holocaust  ever  occurred  are  not  dissent-
ing  historians;  people  who  think  that  God  created  the  universe  in  
4004  BC are  not dissenting  cosmologists;  and we will  see that  people  
who practice barbarisms  like "honor killing"  are  not  dissenting  ethi-
cists.  The  fact  that  good  ideas  are  intuitively  cashed  does  not  make  
bad  ideas  any  more  respectable.  

A    SCIENCE    OF    GOOD    AND    EVIL           185           
Ethics,     Moral    Identity,     and     Self-interest     
While our ethical concerns are necessarily bound up with the under-
standing  that  others  experience  happiness  and  suffering,  there  is  
more to  ethics  than the mere knowledge that we are not alone in the 
world.  For  ethics  to matter  to  us, the happiness  and  suffering of oth-
ers  must matter to  us.  It  does  matter  to  us, but why? 
Strict  reductionism  does  not  seem   to   offer  us  much  hope  of  
insight  into  ethics. The  same,  of course,  can  be  said  of most  higher-
level  phenomena.  Economic  behavior  necessarily  supervenes  upon  
the behavior of atoms, but we will not approach an understanding of 
economics through particle physics.  Fields like game theory and evo-
lutionary  biology,  for  instance,  have  some  plausible  stories  to  tell  
about  the  roots  of what  is  generally  called  "altruistic  behavior"  in  
the  scientific  literature,  but  we  should  not  make  too  much  of  these  
stories. The  finding  that  nature  seems  to  have  selected  for our ethi-
cal  intuitions  is  relevant only  insofar  as  it  gives  the  lie  to  the  ubiq-
uitous  fallacy  that  these  intuitions  are  somehow  the  product  of  
religion.  But  nature  has  selected  for  many  things  that  we  would  
have done well  to  leave behind us  in the jungles  of Africa. The prac-
tice  of  rape  may  have  once  conferred  an  adaptive  advantage  on  our  
species—and  rapists  of  all  shapes  and  sizes  can  indeed  be  found  in  
the  natural  world  (dolphins,  orangutans,  chimpanzees,  etc.).  Does  
this mean that rape is any less  objectionable in human society?  Even  
if we  concede  that  some  number  of  rapes  are  inevitable,  given  how  
human beings  are wired, how is  this  different  from  saying that some 
number  of  cancers  are  inevitable?  We  will  strive  to  cure  cancer  in  
any  case.  
To  say  that  something  is  "natural,"  or  that  it  has  conferred  an  
adaptive  advantage  upon  our  species,  is  not  to  say  that  it  is  "good"  
in the required sense of contributing to human happiness in the pre-
sent.
24
 Admittedly,  the  problem  of  adjudicating what  counts  as  hap-
piness,  and  which  forms  of  happiness  should  supersede  others,  is  
difficult—but  so  is  every  other  problem  worth  thinking  about.  We  

l86          THE    END    OF    FAITH    
need  only  admit  that the  happiness  and  suffering  of sentient  beings  
(including  ourselves)  concerns  us,  and the  domain  of such  concerns  
is the  domain  of ethics,  to  see the  possibility that much that is "nat-
ural"  in human  nature will be  at  odds with what  is  "good."  Appeals  
to  genetics  and  natural  selection  can  take  us  only  so  far,  because  
nature has not adapted us to do anything more than breed.  From the 
point  of  view  of  evolution,  the  best  thing  a  person  can  do  with  his  
life   is   have   as   many   children   as   possible.   As   Stephen   Pinker   
observes,  if  we  really  took  a  gene's  eye  view  of  the  world  "men  
would  line  up  outside  sperm  banks  and  women  would  pray  to  have  
their  eggs  harvested and given  away to  infertile  couples."
25
 After  all,  
from  my  genome's  point  of  view,  nothing  could  be  more  gratifying  
than  the  knowledge  that  I  have  fathered  thousands  of  children  for  
whom  I  now bear no  financial responsibility. This,  needless  to  say, is 
not how most of us  seek happiness  in  this  world.  
Nor  are  most  of  us  resolutely  selfish,  in  the  narrowest  sense  of  
the  term.  Our  selfishness  extends   to  those  with  whom  we  are  
morally  identified:  to  friends  and  family,  to  coworkers  and  team-
mates,  and—if  we  are  in  an  expansive  mood—to  humans  and  ani-
mals  in  general.  As  Jonathan  Glover  writes:  "Our  entanglements  
with   people   close   to   us   erode   simple   self-interest.   Husbands,   
wives,  lovers,  parents,  children  and  friends  all  blur  the  boundaries  
of   selfish   concern.   Francis   Bacon   rightly   said  that   people  with  
children  have  given  hostages  to  fortune.  Inescapably, other  forms  of  
friendship  and  love  hold  us  hostage  too.  .  .  .  Narrow  self-interest  
is  destabilized."
26  
To  treat  others  ethically  is  to  act  out  of  concern  for  their  happi-
ness  and  suffering.  It  is,  as  Kant  observed,  to  treat  them  as  ends  in  
themselves  rather than  as  a  means======================================================== future,  seem  to  be  acquisitions  of  a  kind,  death  proves  that  they  are  
nothing  of  the  sort.  When  the  stopper  on  this  life  is  pulled  by  an  
unseen  hand, there  will  have been,  in  the  final  reckoning,  no  acqui-
sition  of anything  at  all.  
And  as  if this  were  not  insult  enough,  most  of us  suffer the  quiet  
discomposure,   if  not   frank  unhappiness,   of  our  neuroses   in  the  
meantime.  We  love  our  family  and  friends,  are  terrified  of  losing  
them, and yet are not in the  least  free  merely to  love them while our 
short  lives  coincide. We  have, after  all, our  selves  to worry about. As 
Freud  and  his  descendants  never  tired  of  pointing  out,  each  of  us  is  
dragged  and sundered by diametrical  urges: to merge with  the world 

38          THE    END    OF    FAITH    
and  disappear,  or  to  retreat within  the  citadel  of our  apparent  sepa-
rateness.  Either impulse,  taken  to  its  extreme,  seems  to  condemn  us  
to unhappiness. We are terrified of our  creaturely insignificance,  and  
much of what we do with our lives is  a rather transparent attempt to 
keep  this  fear  at  bay. While  we  try  not  to  think  about  it,  nearly  the  
only thing we  can be  certain of in this  life is that we will one day  die  
and  leave everything behind;  and yet,  paradoxically,  it  seems  almost  
impossible  to  believe  that  this  is  so.  Our  felt  sense  of what  is  real  
seems  not  to  include our  own death. We  doubt the  one thing that  is  
not  open  to  any  doubt  at  all.  
What one  believes  happens  after  death  dictates  much  of what one 
believes  about  life,  and  this  is  why  faith-based  religion,  in  presum-
ing  to  fill  in  the  blanks  in  our  knowledge  of the  hereafter,  does  such  
heavy  lifting  for  those  who  fall  under  its  power.  A  single  proposi-
tion—you  will  not  die—once  believed,  determines  a  response  to  life  
that  would  be  otherwise  unthinkable.  
Imagine  how  you  would  feel  if your  only  child  suddenly  died  of  
pneumonia. Your  reaction to  this  tragedy  will  be largely determined 
by what you think happens  to human  beings  after they  die.  It would 
undoubtedly  be  comforting   to  believe  something  like:  "He  was  
God's  little  angel,  and  God  took  him  back  early  because  he  wanted  
him  close  to  Jesus.  He'll  be  waiting  for  us  when  we  get  to  heaven."  
If  your  beliefs  are  those  of  a  Christian  Scientist,  obliging  you  to  
forgo  all  medical  interventions,  you  may  even  have  collaborated  
with  God  by  refusing  to  give  your  child  antibiotics.  
Or  consider how you  would  feel  if you  learned that  a  nuclear war 
had  erupted  between  Israel  and  its  neighbors  over  the  ownership  of  
the  Temple  Mount.  If  you  were  a  millennium-minded  Christian,  
you  would  undoubtedly  view  this  as  a  sign  of  Christ's  imminent  
return  to  earth.  This  would  be  nothing  if  not  good  news,  no  matter  
what the death toll. There's  no denying that a person's conception  of  
the  afterlife  has  direct  consequences  for  his  view  of the  world.  
Of  course,  religious  moderation  consists  in  not  being  too  sure  
about  what  happens  after  death.  This  is  a  reasonable  attitude,  given  

REASON    IN    EXILE         39          
the  paucity  of evidence  on  the  subject.  But  religious  moderation  still  
represents  a  failure to criticize the unreasonable  (and dangerous)  cer-
tainty of others. As a consequence of our silence on these matters, we 
live  in  a country  in  which  a  person  cannot get  elected president  if he 
openly doubts the existence of heaven and hell. This is truly remark-
able,  given  that  there  is  no  other  body  of  "knowledge"  that  we  
require our  political  leaders  to  master.  Even  a hairstylist must  pass  a  
licensing  exam  before  plying  his  trade  in  the  United  States,  and  yet  
those given the power to make war and national policy—those whose 
decisions  will  inevitably  affect  human  life  for  generations—are  not  
expected  to  know anything in particular before  setting to work. They 
do  not  have  to  be  political  scientists,  economists,  or  even  lawyers;  
they  need  not  have  studied  international  relations,  military  history,  
resource management,  civil engineering,  or any other  field of knowl-
edge  that  might  be  brought  to  bear  in  the  governance  of  a  modern  
superpower;  they  need  only  be  expert  fund-raisers,  comport  them-
selves  well  on  television,  and  be  indulgent  of  certain  myths.  In  our  
next presidential  election, an  actor who  reads  his  Bible would almost 
certainly  defeat  a  rocket  scientist  who  does  not.  Could there  be  any  
clearer  indication  that  we  are  allowing  unreason  and  otherworldli-
ness  to  govern our  affairs ? 
Without  death,  the  influence  of  faith-based  religion  would  be  
unthinkable.  Clearly,  the  fact  of death  is  intolerable  to  us,  and  faith  
is  little  more  than  the  shadow  cast  by  our  hope  for  a  better  life  
beyond  the  grave.  
The    World    beyond    Reason    
As  we  will  see  in  the  last  chapter  of  this  book,  there  is  little  doubt  
that   a   certain   range  of  human  experience   can  be  appropriately  
described  as  "spiritual"  or  "mystical"—experiences  of  meaningful-
ness,  selflessness,  and  heightened  emotion  that  surpass  our  narrow  
identities  as  "selves"  and  escape  our  current  understanding  of  the  

40          THE     END     OF     FAITH     
mind  and  brain.  But  nothing  about  these  experiences  justifies  arro-
gant  and  exclusionary  claims  about  the  unique  sanctity  of any  text.  
There  is  no  reason  that  our  ability  to  sustain  ourselves  emotionally  
and  spiritually  cannot  evolve  with  technology  politics,  and  the  rest  
of culture.  Indeed,  it  must  evolve,  if we  are  to  have  any  future  at  all.  
The  basis  of our  spirituality  surely  consists  in  this:  the  range  of  
possible  human  experience  far  exceeds  the  ordinary  limits  of  our  
subjectivity.  Clearly,  some  experiences  can  utterly  transform  a  per-
son's  vision  of  the  world.  Every  spiritual  tradition  rests  on  the  
insight  that  how  we  use  our  attention,  from  moment  to  moment,  
largely  determines  the  quality  of  our  lives.  Many  of  the  results  of  
spiritual practice are genuinely  desirable,  and we  owe it to ourselves 
to  seek  them  out.  It  is  important  to  note  that  these  changes  are  not  
merely  emotional  but  cognitive  and  conceptual  as  well.  Just  as  it  is  
possible  for  us  to have  insights  in  fields  like mathematics  or biology, 
it is  possible  for us to have insights about the very nature of our own 
subjectivity.  A  variety  of  techniques,  ranging  from  the  practice  of  
meditation  to  the  use  of  psychedelic  drugs,  attest  to  the  scope  and  
plasticity  of  human  experience.  For  millennia,  contemplatives  have  
known that ordinary people  can divest themselves  of the  feeling that 
they  call  "I"  and thereby  relinquish  the  sense  that  they  are  separate  
from  the  rest  of  the  universe.  This  phenomenon,  which  has  been  
reported  by  practitioners  in  many  spiritual  traditions,  is  supported  
by  a  wealth  of  evidence—neuroscientific,  philosophical,  and  intro-
spective.  Such  experiences  are  "spiritual"  or  "mystical,"  for want  of  
better  words,  in  that  they  are  relatively  rare  (unnecessarily  so),  sig-
nificant  (in  that  they  uncover  genuine  facts  about  the  world),  and  
personally  transformative. They  also  reveal  a  far  deeper  connection  
between  ourselves  and  the  rest  of the  universe  than  is  suggested  by  
the  ordinary  confines  of  our  subjectivity.  There  is  no  doubt  that  
experiences  of this  sort  are  worth  seeking, just  as  there  is  no  doubt  
that  the  popular  religious  ideas  that  have  grown  up  around  them,  
especially  in  the  West,  are  as  dangerous  as  they  are  incredible.  A  
truly rational approach  to this dimension  of our lives would allow us 

REASON         IN         EXILE  41  
to  explore  the  heights  of our  subjectivity  with  an  open  mind,  while  
shedding  the  provincialism  and  dogmatism  of  our  religious  tradi-
tions  in  favor  of  free  and  rigorous  inquiry.  
There  also  seems  to  be  a  body  of  data  attesting  to  the  reality  of  
psychic  phenomena,  much  of  which  has  been  ignored  by  main-
stream  science.
18
  The  dictum  that   "extraordinary  claims  require  
extraordinary  evidence"  remains  a  reasonable  guide  in  these  areas,  
but  this  does  not  mean  that  the  universe  isn't  far  stranger  than  
many  of  us  suppose.  It  is  important  to  realize  that  a  healthy,  scien-
tific  skepticism  is  compatible  with  a  fundamental  openness  of mind. 
The  claims  of mystics  are  neurologically  quite  astute.  No human 
being  has  ever  experienced an  objective world,  or  even  a  world at  all.  
You  are,  at  this  moment,  having  a  visionary  experience.  The  world  
that  you  see  and  hear  is  nothing  more  than  a  modification  of your 
consciousness,  the  physical status  of which  remains  a mystery.  Your  
nervous  system  sections  the  undifferentiated  buzz  of  the  universe  
into separate channels of sight, sound, smell, taste, and touch, as well 
as   other   senses   of   lesser   renown—proprioception,   kinesthesia,   
enteroreception,  and  even  echolocation.
19
 The  sights  and sounds  and  
pulsings  that  you  experience  at  this  moment  are  like  different  spec-
tra  of  light======================================================== would  have  died  
in  the  hopes  that  the  Nazis  would  have  one  day  doubted  the  good-
ness  of their Thousand  Year  Reich.  Ours  is  a  world  in  which  bombs  
must  occasionally  fall  where  such  doubts  are  in  short  supply.  Here  
we  come upon a terrible  facet of ethically asymmetric warfare: when 
your  enemy  has  no  scruples,  your  own  scruples  become  another  
weapon  in  his  hand.  
It  is,  as  yet,  unclear what  it will  mean  to  win  our war  on  "terror-
ism"—or  whether  the  religious  barbarism  that  animates  our  ene-

A    SCIENCE     OF    GOOD    AND     EVIL            203            
mies  can  ever  be  finally  purged  from  our  world—but  it  is  all  too  
obvious what  it would mean  to  lose  it.  Life under the Taliban is,  to  a  
first  approximation,  what  millions  of  Muslims  around  the  world  
want  to  impose  on the  rest  of us. They  long  to  establish  a  society  in  
which—when  times  are  good—women  will  remain  vanquished  and  
invisible,  and anyone  given  to  spiritual,  intellectual,  or  sexual  free-
dom  will  be  slaughtered  before  crowds  of  sullen,  uneducated  men.  
This, needless  to  say, is a vision of life worth resisting. We cannot let 
our qualms  over  collateral  damage  paralyze  us  because  our  enemies  
know  no  such  qualms. Theirs  is  a  kill-the-children-first  approach  to  
war,  and  we  ignore  the  fundamental  difference  between  their  vio-
lence  and  our  own  at  our  peril.  Given  the  proliferation  of weaponry 
in  our world,  we  no  longer  have  the  option  of waging  this  war with 
swords.  It  seems  certain  that  collateral  damage,  of various  sorts, will 
be  a  part  of our  future  for many  years  to  come.  

7 
Experiments     in     Consciousness     
AT  THE   CORE  of  every  religion  lies  an  undeniable  claim  about  the  
human condition: it is possible to have one's experience of the world 
radically  transformed. Although  we  generally  live  within  the  limits  
imposed  by  our  ordinary  uses  of  attention—we  wake,  we  work,  
we  eat,  we  watch  television,  we  converse  with  others,  we  sleep,  
we  dream—most  of  us  know,  however  dimly,  that  extraordinary  
experiences  are  possible.  
The  problem  with  religion  is  that  it  blends  this  truth  so  thor-
oughly  with  the  venom  of unreason.  Take  Christianity  as  an  exam-
ple:  it  is  not  enough  that  Jesus  was  a man  who  transformed  himself  
to  such  a  degree that the  Sermon  on the  Mount  could be  his  heart's  
confession.  He  also  had  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  born  of  a  virgin,  and  
destined to return  to earth trailing clouds  of glory. The  effect of such 
dogma  is  to  place  the  example  of  Jesus  forever  out  of  reach.  His  
teaching  ceases  to  be  a  set  of  empirical  claims  about  the  linkage  
between  ethics  and  spiritual  insight  and  instead  becomes  a  gratu-
itous,  and  rather  gruesome,  fairy  tale.  According  to  the  dogma  of  
Christianity,  becoming  just  like  Jesus  is  impossible.  One  can  only  
enumerate  one's  sins,  believe  the  unbelievable,  and  await the  end  of  
the  world.  
But  a  more  profound  response  to  existence  is  possible  for  us,  and  
the  testimony  of  Jesus,  as  well  as  that  of  countless  other  men  and  
women  over the  ages, attests  to this. The  challenge  for us  is  to begin 
talking  about  this  possibility  in  rational  terms.  
204 

EXPERIMENTS     IN     CONSCIOUSNESS             205             
The    Search    for    Happiness    
Though  the  lilies  of the  field  are  admirably  clothed, you  and  I  were  
driven  from  the  womb  naked  and  squalling. What  do  we  need  to  be  
happy?  Almost  everything  we  do  can  be  viewed  as  a  reply  to  this  
question. We need  food,  shelter, and clothing. We need the company 
of others. Then  we  need  to  learn  countless  things  to  make  the  most  
of  this  company.  We  need  to  find  work  that  we  enjoy,  and  we  need  
time  for leisure. We  need  so many things,  and there  seems  no  alter-
native but  to  seek  and  maintain  them,  one  after  the  next,  hour  after  
hour. 
But  are  such  things  sufficient  for  happiness?  Is  a  person  guaran-
teed to be happy merely by virtue of having health, wealth, and good 
company? Apparently  not. Are  such  things  even  necessary  for  hap-
piness ?  If so, what  can we make of those Indian yogis who renounce 
all  material  and  familial  attachments  only  to  spend  decades  alone  in  
caves  practicing meditation ?  It  seems  that  such  people  can  be happy 
as  well.  Indeed,  some  of them  claim  to  be  perfectly  so.  
It is  difficult  to  find  a word  for that human  enterprise which  aims  
at  happiness  directly—at  happiness  of  a  sort  that  can  survive  the  
frustration  of all conventional desires. The term "spirituality"  seems  
unavoidable  here—and  I  have  used  it  several  times  in  this  book  
already—but  it  has  many connotations  that  are,  frankly, embarrass-
ing.  "Mysticism"  has  more  gravitas,  perhaps, but  it  has unfortunate 
associations  of  its  own.  Neither  word  captures  the  reasonableness  
and  profundity  of  the  possibility  that  we  must  now  consider:  that  
there  is  a  form  of well-being that  supersedes  all  others,  indeed,  that  
transcends  the  vagaries  of experience  itself.  I  will  use  both  "spiritu-
ality"   and  "mysticism"   interchangeably  here,  because  there   are   
no  alternatives,  but  the  reader  should  remember  that  I  am  using  
them  in  a  restricted  sense. While  a  visit  to  any  New Age  bookstore  
will  reveal  that  modern  man  has  embraced  a  daunting  range  of  
"spiritual"   preoccupations—ranging   from   the   healing   power   of   
crystals  and  colonic  irrigation  to  the  ardors  of  alien  abduction—our  

206         THE    END     OF    FAITH    
discussion  will  focus  on  a  specific  insight  that  seems  to  have  special  
relevance  to  our pursuit  of happiness. 
Most  spiritual  teachings  agree  that  there  is  more  to  happiness  
than  becoming  a  productive member  of society,  a  cheerful  consumer  
of  every  licit  pleasure,  and  an  enthusiastic  bearer  of  children  dis-
posed  to  do  the  same.  Indeed,  many  suggest  that  it  is  our  search  for  
happiness—our  craving   for   knowledge   and   new  experience,  our  
desire  for  recognition,  our  efforts  to  find the  right  romantic partner, 
even  our  yearning  for  spiritual  experience  itself—that  causes  us  to  
overlook  a  form  of  well-being  that  is  intrinsic  to  consciousness  in  
every  present  moment.  Some  version  of  this  insight  seems  to  lie  at  
the  core  of many  of our  religions,  and  yet  it  is  by  no  means  always  
easy  to  discern  among  the  articles  of  faith.  
While many  of  us  go  for  decades  without  experiencing  a  full  day  
of solitude, we  live every moment in the  solitude  of our own minds. 
However close we may be to others, our pleasures and pains are ours 
alone.  Spiritual  practice  is  often  recommended  as  the  most  rational  
response  to  this  situation.  The  underlying  claim  here  is  that  we  can  
realize  something about the  nature  of consciousness  in this  moment  
that  will  improve  our  lives. The  experience  of countless  contempla-
tives  suggests  that  consciousness—being  merely  the  condition  in  
which  thought, emotion,  and  even  our  sense  of self arises—is  never  
actually  changed by  what  it  knows. That  which  is  aware  of joy  does  
not  become joyful;  that  which  is  aware  of  sadness  does  not  become  
sad.  From  the  point  of  view  of  consciousness,  we  are  merely  aware  
of  sights,  sounds,  sensations,  moods,  and  thoughts.  Many  spiritual  
teachings  allege  that  if we  can  recognize  our  identity  as  conscious-
ness  itself,  as  the  mere  witness  of  appearances,  we  will  realize  that  
we  stand  perpetually  free  of the  vicissitudes  of experience. 
This  is  not  to  deny  that  suffering  has  a  physical  dimension.  The  
fact  that  a  drug  like  Prozac  can  relieve  many  of  the  symptoms  of  
depression  suggests  that  mental  suffering  can  be  no  more  ethereal  
than  a  little  green  pill.  But  the  arrow  of  influence  clearly  flies  both  
ways.  We  know  that  ideas  themselves  have  the  power  to  utterly  

EXPERIMENTS    IN    CONSCIOUSNESS           207           
define  a  person's  experience  of the  world.
1
  Even  the  significance  of  
intense  physical  pain  is  open  to  subjective  interpretation.  Consider  
the  pain  of  labor:  How  many  women  come  away  from  the  experi-
ence  traumatized?  The  occasion  itself  is  generally  a  happy  one,  
assuming  all  goes  well  with  the  birth.  Imagine  how  different  it  
would  be  for  a  woman  to  be  tortured  by  having  the  sensations  of  a  
normal  labor  inflicted  upon  her  by  a  mad  scientist.  The  sensations  
might be  identical,  and yet this  would certainly be  among the worst 
experiences  of her  life. There  is  clearly more  to  suffering even phys-
ical  pain  than  painful  sensation  alone.  
Our  spiritual  traditions  suggest  that  we  have  considerable  room  
here to change our relationship to the contents of consciousness, and 
thereby  to  transform  our  experience  of the world.  Indeed,  a vast lit-
erature  on  human  spirituality  attests  to  this.
2
  It  is  also  clear  that  
nothing need be believed  on  insufficient  evidence  for  us  to  look into 
this  possibility with  an  open  mind.  
Consciousness 
Like  Descartes,  most  of  us  begin  these  inquiries  as  thinkers,  con-
demned by the======================================================== the  federal  level,  the  average  sentence  for  
a  drug  offense  in  the  U.S.  is  6¼  years  (from  the  Office  of National Drug 
Control   Policy   [ONDCP]   Drug  Data   Summary,  www.whitehousedrug-
policy.gov). 
30
 And  yet,  this  mountain  of  imponderables  reaches  higher  still.  In  many  
states,  a  person  who  has  been  merely  accused  of  a  drug  crime  can  have  
his property  seized, and  those who informed against him  can be rewarded 
with  up  to  25  percent  of  its  value.  The  rest  of  these  spoils  go  to  police  
departments,  which  now  rely  upon  such  property  seizures  to  meet  their  
budgets.  This  is  precisely  the  arrangement  of  incentives  that  led  to  this  
sort  of corruption  during the  Inquisition  (if one  can  even  speak  of such  a  
process  being  "corrupted").  Like  the  heretic,  the  accused  drug  offender  
has  no  hope  but  to  trade  information  for  a  reduced  sentence.  The  person  
who  can't  (or  won't)  implicate  others  inevitably  faces  punishments  of  
fantastical  severity.  Information  has  grown  so  valuable,  in  fact,  that  a  
black  market  for  it  has  emerged.  Defendants  who  have  no  information  to  
trade  can  actually  buy  drug  leads  from  professional  informers  (and  they  
do  not  come  cheap). The  net  result  of  all  this  is  that  police  departments  
have  learned  to target property  rather than  crime.  Property  can  be  seized  
and  forfeited  even  if  a  defendant  is  ultimately  found  innocent  of  any  
criminal  offense.  One  national  survey  found  that  80  percent  of  property  
seizures  occur  without  any  criminal  prosecution  whatsoever  (www.drug  
warfacts.com).  Under  these  enlightened  laws,  couples  in  their  eighties  
have permanently  lost their homes  because  a grandchild  was  caught with 
marijuana.  For  more  facts  of this  sort  see  Schlosser,  Reefer  Madness.  
The war on drugs has clearly done much  to erode our civil  liberties. In 
particular,  the  standards  for  search  and seizure,  pretrial  release,  and judi-

NOTES    TO    PAGES    162-163            269            
cial  discretion  in  sentencing  have  all  been  revised  in  an  attempt  to  make  
this  unwinnable  war  easier  to  prosecute.  Since  drug  offenses  are  covered  
by local, state, and  federal jurisdictions, people can be tried multiple times 
for  the  same  crime—some  have  been  found  not  guilty  at  one  level,  only  
to  receive  life  sentences  upon  subsequent prosecution. On more than  one  
occasion,  members  of  Congress  have  introduced  legislation  seeking  to  
apply  the  death  penalty  to  anyone  caught  selling  drugs.  Unsurprisingly,  
our  attempts  to  eradicate  the  supply  of  drugs  in  other  countries  have  
been  even  more  detrimental  to  the  liberties  of others.  In  Latin  America,  
we have  become  a  tireless  benefactor  of human  rights violators.  (See,  for  
example,  the  Human  Rights Watch  website:  www.hrw.org.)  
In  environmental  terms,  the  war  on  drugs  has  been  no  more  auspi-
cious.  The  aerial  spraying  of  herbicides  has  hastened  the  destruction  of  
the  rainforest  as  well  as  contaminated  water  supplies,  staple  crops,  and  
people. The U.S. government has recently sought approval to use a genet-
ically  engineered   "killer  fungus,"   designed   to   attack  marijuana  crops  
domestically  and  coca  and  opium  plants  abroad.  For  the  moment,  some  
rather  obvious  environmental   concerns  have  prevented   its  use.   (See   
www.lindesmith.org.) 
31
 From  the  ONDCP  Drug  Data  Summary  (March  2003). The war on  drugs  
has  also become  a  great  engine  of racial  inequity,  for while  blacks  consti-
tute  only  12  percent  of the  U.S.  population  and  13  percent  of  U.S.  drug  
users,  38  percent  of those  arrested  and  59  percent  of  those  convicted  for  
drug crimes are  black. Our drug  laws have contributed to the  epidemic of 
fatherlessness  in  the  black  community,  and  this—along  with  the  profits  
and  resultant  criminality  of  the  drug  trade—has  devastated  our  inner  
cities.  (See  www.drugwarfacts.com.)  
32
  Ibid.  
33
 M.  S. Gazzaniga, "Legalizing Drugs: Just  Say Yes,"  National  Review, July 
10,1995, pp. 26-37, makes a similar estimate. Needless to say, the cost has 
only  grown  with  time.  
34
 W.  F.  Buckley  Jr., "The War  on Drugs  Is  Lost,"  National  Review,  Feb.  12,  
1996. 
35
  www.lindesmith.org.  
36
 when  was  the  last  time  someone  was  killed  over  an  alcohol  or  tobacco  
deal  gone  awry?  We  can  be  confident  that  the  same  normalcy  would  be  
achieved  if drugs  were  regulated  by  the  government. At the  inception  of  
the  modern  "war  on  drugs,"  the  economist  Milton  Friedman  observed  
that  "legalizing  drugs  would  simultaneously  reduce the  amount  of crime 

270         NOTES    TO    PAGE    164    
and  raise  the  quality  of law  enforcement."  He  then  invited  the  reader  to  
"conceive  of  any  other  measure  that  would  accomplish  so  much  to  pro-
mote  law  and  order"  (Friedman,  "Prohibition  and  Drugs,"  Newsweek,  
May  1,  1972).  What  was  true  then  remains  true  after  three  decades  of  
pious  misrule;  the  criminality  associated  with  the  drug  trade  is  the  
inescapable  consequence  of our  drug  laws  themselves.  
37
  According  to  the  U.S.  government,  twelve  of  the  twenty-eight  groups  
that  have  been  officially  classed  as  terrorist  organizations  finance  their  
activities,  in  whole  or  in  part,  by  the  drug  trade.  (See  www.theantidrug.  
com/drugs_terror/terrorgroups.html.) 
38
  S.  Weinberg,  "What  Price  Glory,"  New  York  Review  of  Books,  Nov.  6,  
2003, pp. 55-60. 
39
 All  of this  folly  persists,  even  though  the  legalized  and  regulated  sale  of  
drugs  would  most  effectively  keep  them  out  of  the  hands  of  minors  
(when  was  the  last  time  someone  was  caught  selling  vodka  in  a  school-
yard?),  eradicate  organized  crime,  reduce  the  annual  cost  of law  enforce-
ment  by  tens  of billions  of dollars,  raise billions  more  in  new  sales  taxes,  
and  free  hundreds  of  thousands  of  police  officers  for  the  job  of  fighting  
violent crime and terrorism. Against these  remarkable  benefits stands the 
fear  that  the  legalization  of  drugs  would  lead  to  an  epidemic  of  drug  
abuse and addiction. Common  sense,  as  well  as  comparisons between  the  
United  States  and  places  like  Holland,  reveals  this  fear  to  be  unfounded.  
As  more  than  100  million  of  the  estimated  108  million  Americans  who  
have  used  illegal  drugs  can  attest,  addiction  is  a  phenomenon  distinct  
from  mere  use,  and  users  merely  require  good  information  to  keep  from  
becoming  addicts. Addicts  require  treatment,  of  course—for  which  there  
are  at  present  insufficient  funds.  
This  is  not  to  deny  that  a  small  percentage  of  people  who  use  drugs  
(both  legal and illegal)  have their lives  powerfully disrupted by them. We 
generally think  of this  problem  as  having two  stages  of severity: "abuse" 
and  "addiction."  It  remains  true,  however,  that  most  people  who  use  
drugs  do  not  abuse  them,  and many  illegal  drugs  do  not  readily  become  
sources  of addiction  even  in  the hands  of abusers  (marijuana,  LSD,  psilo-
cybin,  mescaline,  etc.). To  say that  a  drug  is  addictive  is  to  say  that  peo-
ple  develop  both  tolerance  to  it   (and  therefore  require  progressively  
higher  doses  to  achieve  the  same  effect)  and  withdrawal  symptoms  upon  
stoppage.  It  is  not  hard  to  see why well-intentioned  people  would  worry  
that others might  become inadvertent  slaves  of such  biochemistry. While 
opium  and  its  derivatives   (like  heroin  and  morphine)   are  the  classic  

NOTES    TO    PAGES   165-168          271          
examples  of drugs  of this  sort,  nicotine  and  alcohol  can  fall  into  this  cat-
egory as well  (depending on usage). Given our laws, however, all users of 
illicit  drugs—whether  dysfunctional  or  not,  addicted  or  not—are  consid-
ered  criminals  and  subject  to  arrest, imprisonment, property  seizure,  and  
other  punishments  by the  state.  
Our   drug   policy   has   created   arbitrary   and   illusory   distinctions   
between  biologically  active  substances,  while  obscuring  valid  ones.  No  
one  doubts  that  the  use  of  certain  drugs  can  destroy  the  lives  of certain 
people.   But  the  same   can  be   said  of  almost  any  commodity.  People  
destroy  their  lives  and  the  lives  of  their  dependents  by  simply  overeat-
ing.  In  2003  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  declared  obesity  to  be  the  
greatest  public  health  problem  in  the  United  States,  and  yet  few  of  us  
imagine  that  new  criminal  laws  should  be  written  to  control  the  use  of  
cheeseburgers.  Where  drugs  are  a  problem,  they  are  a  problem  whose  
remedy is  better education  and better health  care, not incarceration. Sim-
ply  observe  the  people  in  public  life  who  are  incapable  of having  a  ratio-
nal  discussion  on  these  matters  (start  with  John Ashcroft  and  work your 
way  down),  and  you  will  find  that  religious  faith  does  much  to  inform  
their  view  of the  world.  
40
 See, e.g., D. Kahneman and A. Tversky, "On the Reality of Cognitive Illu-
sions,"  Psychological  Review  103  (1996): 582-91. 
41
 "Misguided  Faith on AIDS"  (editorial),  New  York  Times,  Oct.  15,  2003.  
42
  N.  Kristof,  "When  Prudery  Kills,"  New  York  Times,  Oct.  8,  2003.  
43
  Ibid.  
44
  Kristof  also  misinterprets======================================================== experiment  have  shown  that human memory  comes  in  many  forms.  
Not  only  are  our  long-term  and  short-term  memories  the  products  
of distinct  and dissimilar  neural  circuits;  they  have  themselves  been  
divided  into  multiple  subsystems.
1
  To  speak  simply  of  "memory,"  
therefore,  is  now  rather  like  speaking  of  "experience."  Clearly,  we  
must be  more  precise  about what  our  mental  terms  mean  before  we  
attempt  to  understand  them  at  the  level  of the  brain.
2  
Even  dogs  and  cats,  insofar  as  they  form  associations  between  
people, places, and events, can be said to "believe" many things about 
the world. But this is not the sort of believing we  are  after. When we 
talk  about  the  beliefs  to  which  people  consciously  subscribe—"The  
house  is  infested  with  termites,"  "Tofu  is  not  a  dessert,"  "Muham-
mad  ascended  to  heaven  on  a  winged  horse"—we  are  talking  about  
50 

THE     NATURE     OF    BELIEF            51            
beliefs  that are  communicated,  and acquired,  linguistically.  Believing  
a  given  proposition  is  a  matter  of  believing  that  it  faithfully  repre-
sents  some  state  of  the  world,  and  this  fact  yields  some  immediate  
insights  into  the  standards  by  which  our  beliefs  should  function.
3
  In  
particular,  it  reveals  why  we  cannot  help  but  value  evidence  and  
demand  that  propositions  about  the  world  logically  cohere.  These  
constraints  apply  equally  to  matters  of religion.  "Freedom  of belief" 
(in  anything  but  the  legal  sense)  is  a myth.  We  will  see that we  are  
no  more  free  to  believe  whatever  we  want  about  God  than  we  are  
free  to  adopt  unjustified  beliefs  about  science  or  history,  or  free  to  
mean  whatever we want when  using words  like "poison"  or "north" 
or  "zero." Anyone who would lay  claim  to  such entitlements  should  
not  be  surprised  when  the  rest  of us  stop  listening  to  him.  
Beliefs    as    Principles    of  Action  
The  human  brain  is  a  prolific  generator  of  beliefs  about  the  world.  
In   fact,  the  very  humanness  of  any  brain  consists  largely  in  its  
capacity to evaluate  new statements  of propositional truth in light of 
innumerable others that it already  accepts.  By  recourse to intuitions 
of  truth   and   falsity,   logical   necessity  and  contradiction,  human  
beings  are  able  to  knit  together  private  visions  of  the  world  that  
largely  cohere.  What  neural  events  underlie  this  process?  What  
must  a  brain  do  in  order  to  believe  that  a  given  statement  is  true  or  
false?. We  currently  have  no  idea.  Language  processing  must  play  a  
large  role,  of  course,  but  the  challenge  will  be  to  discover  how  the  
brain  brings  the  products  of  perception,  memory,  and  reasoning  to  
bear  on  individual  propositions  and  magically  transforms  them  into  
the  very  substance  of our  living.  
It  was  probably  the  capacity  for  movement,  enjoyed  by  certain  
primitive  organisms,  that  drove  the  evolution  of  our  sensory  and  
cognitive  faculties.  This  follows  from  the  fact  that  if  no  creature  
could  do  anything  with  the  information  it  acquired  from  the  world,  

52          THE     END     OF     FAITH     
nature  could  not  have  selected  for  improvements  in  the  physical  
structures  that  gather,  store,  and  process  such  information.  Even  a  
sense as primitive  as vision, therefore,  seems  predicated on the exis-
tence  of  a  motor  system.  If  you  cannot  catch  food,  avoid  becoming  
food  yourself,  or  wander  off  a  cliff,  there  does  not  seem  to  be  much  
reason  to  see the world  in  the  first  place—and  certainly  refinements  
in  vision,  of  the  sort  found  everywhere  in  the  animal  kingdom,  
would never have  come  about  at  all.  
For  this  reason,  it  seems  uncontroversial  to  say  that  all  higher-
order  cognitive  states  (of which  beliefs  are  an  example)  are  in  some  
way  an  outgrowth  of  our  capacity  for  action.  In  adaptive  terms,  
belief  has  been  extraordinarily  useful.  It  is,  after  all,  by  believing  
various propositions about the world that we predict events  and con-
sider the  likely  consequences  of our actions.  Beliefs  are principles  of  
action: whatever they may be at the  level of the brain, they are pro-
cesses  by  which  our  understanding  (and  misunderstanding)  of  the  
world  is  represented  and  made  available  to  guide  our  behavior.
4  
THE  power  that  belief  has  over  our  emotional  lives  appears  to  be  
total.  For  every  emotion  that  you  are  capable  of  feeling,  there  is  
surely a belief that could invoke it in  a matter of moments.  Consider  
the  following  proposition:  
Your  daughter  is  being  slowly  tortured  in  an  English jail. 
What  is  it  that  stands  between  you  and  the  absolute  panic  that  
such  a  proposition  would  loose  in  the  mind  and  body  of  a  person  
who  believed  it?  Perhaps  you  do  not  have  a  daughter,  or  you  know  
her  to  be  safely  at  home,  or  you  believe  that  English  jailors  are  
renowned  for  their  congeniality.  Whatever  the  reason,  the  door  to  
belief  has  not  yet  swung  upon  its  hinges.  
The   link  between   belief  and   behavior   raises   the   stakes   con-
siderably.  Some  propositions  are  so  dangerous  that  it  may  even  be  

THE     NATURE     OF    BELIEF            53            
ethical  to  kill  people  for  believing  them. This  may  seem  an  extraor-
dinary  claim,  but  it  merely  enunciates  an  ordinary  fact  about  the  
world  in which we  live.  Certain  beliefs  place their adherents  beyond  
the  reach  of  every  peaceful  means  of  persuasion,  while  inspiring  
them  to  commit  acts  of extraordinary  violence  against  others. There 
is,  in  fact,  no talking  to  some  people.  If they cannot be captured,  and  
they  often  cannot,  otherwise  tolerant  people  may  be  justified  in  
killing   them   in   self-defense.   This   is   what   the   United   States   
attempted in Afghanistan,  and  it is what we  and other Western  pow-
ers  are bound  to  attempt,  at  an  even  greater  cost  to  ourselves  and to 
innocents  abroad,  elsewhere  in  the  Muslim  world. We  will  continue  
to  spill  blood  in what  is,  at bottom,  a war  of ideas.
5  
The    Necessity    for    Logical    Coherence    
The  first  thing  to  notice  about  beliefs  is  that  they  must  suffer  the  
company  of  their  neighbors.  Beliefs  are  both  logically  and  semanti-
cally related. Each constrains, and is in turn constrained by, many oth-
ers. A  belief  like  the  Boeing  747  is  the  world's  best  airplane  logically  
entails  many  other  beliefs  that  are  both  more  basic  (e.g.,  airplanes  
exist)  and more derivative  (e.g., 747s  are  better  than 757s). The belief 
that  some  men  are  husbands  demands  that  the  proposition  some  
women  are  wives also be  endorsed, because the very terms "husband" 
and  "wife" mutually  define one  another.
6
  In  fact,  logical  and semantic 
constraints  appear to be  two  sides  of the  same  coin,  because our need 
to understand what words mean in  each  new context requires that our 
beliefs be  free  from contradiction  (at least locally).  If I  am  to mean the 
same  thing  by  the  word  "mother"  from  one  instance  to  the  next,  I  
cannot  both  believe  my  mother  was  born  in  Rome  and  believe  my  
mother was  born  in  Nevada.  Even  if my mother were born  on  an  air-
plane  flying  at  supersonic  speeds,  these  propositions  cannot  both  be  
true. There are tricks to be played here—perhaps there is a town called 
"Rome"  somewhere  in  the  state  of  Nevada;  or  perhaps  "mother"  

54         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
means  "biological mother"  in  one  sentence  and  "adoptive mother"  in  
another—but  these  exceptions  only  prove  the  rule.  To  know  what  a  
given  belief  is  about,  I  must  know  what  my  words  mean;  to  know  
what my words mean, my beliefs must be generally consistent.
7
 There 
is just  no  escaping  the  fact  that  there  is  a  tight  relationship  between  
the words we use, the type of thoughts we can think, and what we can 
believe  to  be  true  about the world. 
And behavioral  constraints  are just  as  pressing. When  going  to  a  
friend's home  for dinner,  I  cannot both  believe that he  lives  north  of  
Main  Street  and  south  of  Main  Street  and  then  act  on  the  basis  of  
what  I believe. A normal  degree of psychological and bodily integra-
tion  precludes  my  being  motivated  to  head  in  two  opposing  direc-
tions  at  once.  
Personal  identity  itself  requires  such  consistency:  unless  a  per-
son's  beliefs are highly  coherent,  he  will  have  as  many  identities  as  
there  are  mutually  incompatible  sets  of beliefs  careening around  his  
brain. If you doubt this, just try to imagine the subjectivity of a man 
who believes that he spent the entire  day in bed with the  flu, but also 
played  a  round  of  golf;  that  his  name  is  Jim,  and  that  his  name  is  
Tom; that he has a young son, and that he is childless. Multiply these 
incompatible  beliefs  indefinitely,  and any  sense that their  owner  is  a  
single  subject entirely  disappears. There  is  a  degree  of logical  incon-
sistency  that  is  incompatible  with  our  notion  of  personhood.  
So it seems that the value we put on  logical  consistency is neither 
misplaced  nor  mysterious.  In  order  for  my  speech  to  be  intelligible  
to  others—and,  indeed,  to  myself—my  beliefs  about  the  world  must  
largely  cohere.  In  order======================================================== Israeli settlers demonstrates—it is not difficult  to  find great swaths 
of the  Good  Book,  as well  as  Christian and Jewish  exegesis, that offer 
counterarguments. The  Christian  who  wants  to  live  in  the  full pres-
ence of rationality and modernity  can keep the Jesus  of Matthew ser-
monizing  upon  the  mount  and  simply  ignore  the  world-consuming  

138  THE      END      OF      FAITH      
rigmarole of Revelation.  Islam appears to  offer no  such  refuge  for one 
who would live peacefully  in  a pluralistic world.  Of course, glimmers 
of hope  can be  found in even the shadiest of places:  as Berman points 
out,  the  diatribes  of Muslim  orthodoxy  are  predicated  upon  the  fear  
that  Western  liberalism  is  in  the  process  of  invading  the  Muslim  
mind and "stealing his loyalty"—indicating that  Muslims,  like  other  
people,  are  susceptible  to  the  siren's  song  of  liberalism.
39
  We  must  
surely hope  so. The character of their religious  beliefs,  however, sug-
gests  that they will be  less  susceptible than the  rest of us. 
For reasons we have already begun to explore, there is a deep bias 
in  our  discourse  against  conclusions  of  this  sort.  With  respect  to  
Islam, the liberal tendency is  to blame the West  for raising the ire of 
the  Muslim  world,  through  centuries  of  self-serving  conquest  and  
meddling,  while  conservatives  tend  to  blame  other  contingent  fea-
tures  of  Middle  East, Arab,  or  Muslim  history.  The  problem  seems  
to  have  been  located  everywhere  except  at  the  core  of  the  Muslim  
faith—but  faith  is  precisely  what  differentiates  every  Muslim  from  
every  infidel.  Without  faith,  most  Muslim  grievances  against  the  
West would be  impossible  even  to  formulate,  much  less  avenge.  
Leftist    Unreason    and    the    Strange    Case    of   Noam    Chomsky    
Nevertheless,  many  people  are  now  convinced  that  the  attacks  of  
September  11  say little  about  Islam  and much about  the  sordid  career  
of the West—in particular, about the failures of U.S. foreign policy. The 
French  philosopher  Jean  Baudrillard  gives  these  themes  an  especially  
luxuriant  expression,  declaring  that  terrorism  is  a  necessary  conse-
quence  of American  "hegemony."  He goes  so  far as  to suggest that we 
were  secretly hoping that  such  devastation  would be  visited  upon us: 
At  a  pinch  we  can  say  that  they  did  it,  but  we  wished for  it.  .  .  .  
When  global  power  monopolizes  the  situation  to  this  extent,  
when  there  is  such  a  formidable  condensation  of  all  functions  in  

THE    PROBLEM    WITH    ISLAM          139          
the  technocratic  machinery,  and  when  no  alternative  form  of  
thinking  is  allowed,  what  other  way  is  there  but  a  terroristic  
situational  transfer.  It  was  the  system  itself  which  created  the  
objective  conditions  for this brutal  retaliation.  .  .  . This  is  terror  
against  terror—there  is  no  longer  any  ideology  behind  it.  We  
are  far  beyond  ideology  and  politics  now. ...  As  if  the  power  
bearing  these  towers  suddenly  lost  all  energy,  all  resilience;  as  
though   that   arrogant   power   suddenly   gave   way   under   the   
pressure  of  too  intense  an  effort:  the  effort  always  to  be  the  
unique  world  model.
40  
If  one  were  feeling  charitable,  one  might  assume  that  something  
essential  to  these  profundities  got  lost  in  translation.  I  think  it  far  
more  likely,  however,  that  it  did  not  survive  translation  into  French.  
If Baudrillard had been  obliged to  live  in Afghanistan  under the  Tal-
iban,  would  he  have  thought  that  the  horrible  abridgments  of  his  
freedom were  a matter of the United  States's  "effort always  to be the 
unique world model" ? Would the  peculiar halftime entertainment at 
every  soccer  match—where  suspected  fornicators,  adulterers,  and  
thieves  were  regularly  butchered  in  the  dirt  at  centerfield—have  
struck  him  as  the  first  rumblings  of  a  "terroristic  situational  trans-
fer" ? We may be beyond politics, but we are not in the least "beyond 
ideology"  now.  Ideology  is  all  that our enemies  have.
41  
And yet,  thinkers  far more  sober than  Baudrillard view the  events  
of  September  11  as  a  consequence  of American  foreign  policy.  Per-
haps  the  foremost  among  them  is  Noam  Chomsky.  In  addition  to  
making  foundational  contributions  to  linguistics  and the  psychology  
of language, Chomsky has been a persistent critic of U.S.  foreign pol-
icy  for  over  three  decades.  He  has  also  managed  to  demonstrate  a  
principal  failing  of the  liberal  critique  of  power.  He  appears  to  be  an  
exquisitely moral  man whose  political views  prevent  him  from  mak-
ing the most basic moral distinctions—between types of violence, and 
the variety of human  purposes  that  give  rise  to  them.  
In his book 9-11, with rubble  of the World Trade  Center still piled 

140          THE    END    OF    FAITH    
high and smoldering,  Chomsky urged us not to  forget that "the U.S. 
itself is  a leading terrorist state."  In  support  of this  claim  he  catalogs  
a  number  of  American  misdeeds,  including  the  sanctions  that  the  
United  States  imposed  upon  Iraq,  which  led  to  the  death  of "maybe 
half a million  children," and the  1998 bombing of the Al-Shifa phar-
maceuticals plant in  Sudan, which may have set the  stage  for tens of 
thousands  of innocent  Sudanese  to  die  of  tuberculosis,  malaria,  and  
other  treatable  diseases.  Chomsky  does  not  hesitate  to  draw  moral  
equivalences  here:  "For the  first  time in modern  history,  Europe  and  
its  offshoots  were  subjected,  on  home  soil,  to  the  kind  of  atrocity  
that  they  routinely  have  carried  out  elsewhere."
42  
Before  pointing  out just  how  wayward  Chomsky's  thinking  is  on  
this  subject,  I  would  like  to  concede  many  of  his  points,  since  they  
have  the  virtue  of  being  both  generally  important  and  irrelevant  to  
the matter at hand. There is no doubt that the United States has much 
to  atone  for,  both  domestically  and  abroad.  In  this  respect,  we  can  
more  or less  swallow Chomsky's  thesis whole. To produce  this  horri-
ble  confection  at  home,  start  with  our  genocidal  treatment  of  the  
Native Americans,  add  a  couple  hundred  years  of  slavery,  along with 
our  denial  of entry  to  Jewish  refugees  fleeing  the  death  camps  of the 
Third  Reich,  stir  in  our  collusion  with  a  long  list  of modern  despots  
and   our   subsequent   disregard   for   their   appalling   human   rights   
records,  add  our  bombing  of  Cambodia  and  the  Pentagon  Papers  to  
taste,  and then top with our  recent refusals  to  sign the  Kyoto protocol 
for  greenhouse  emissions,  to  support  any  ban  on  land  mines,  and  to  
submit  ourselves  to  the  rulings  of  the  International  Criminal  Court.  
The  result  should  smell  of death,  hypocrisy,  and  fresh  brimstone.  
We  have  surely  done  some  terrible  things  in  the  past.  Undoubt-
edly, we are poised to do terrible things in the future. Nothing I have 
written  in this  book should be  construed as  a  denial  of these  facts,  or  
as defense of state practices that are manifestly abhorrent. There may 
be  much  that  Western  powers,  and  the  United  States  in  particular,  
should  pay  reparations  for. And  our  failure  to  acknowledge  our  mis-
deeds  over  the  years  has  undermined  our  credibility  in  the  interna-
tional   community.   We   can   concede   all   of  this,   and   even   share   

THE    PROBLEM    WITH    ISLAM          141          
Chomsky's  acute  sense  of outrage,  while  recognizing  that  his  analy-
sis  of  our  current  situation  in  the  world  is  a  masterpiece  of  moral  
blindness. 
Take  the  bombing  of  the  Al-Shifa  pharmaceuticals  plant:  accord-
ing  to  Chomsky,  the  atrocity  of  September  11  pales  in  comparison  
with  that perpetrated by  the  Clinton administration  in August  1998.  
But let us  now  ask some very basic questions that Chomsky  seems to 
have neglected to  ask himself: What  did the U.S. government think it 
was  doing  when  it  sent  cruise  missiles  into  Sudan?  Destroying  a  
chemical  weapons  site  used  by  Al  Qaeda.  Did  the  Clinton  adminis-
tration  intend  to  bring  about  the  deaths  of  thousands  of  Sudanese  
children? No. Was our goal to kill as many Sudanese as we could? No. 
Were  we  trying  to  kill  anyone  at  all?  Not  unless  we  thought  mem-
bers of Al Qaeda would be at the Al-Shifa  facility in the middle of the 
night. Asking  these  questions  about  Osama bin  Laden  and the  nine-
teen  hijackers  puts  us  in  a  different  moral  universe  entirely.  
If  we  are  inclined  to  follow  Chomsky  down  the  path  of  moral  
equivalence  and  ignore  the  role  of human  intentions,  we  can  forget  
about the bombing of the Al-Shifa plant, because many of the things 
we  did  not  do  in  Sudan  had  even  greater  consequences. What  about  
all   the   money   and   food  we   simply   never  thought   to   give  the  
Sudanese prior to  1998?  How many  children  did we  kill  (that  is,  not  
save) just by  living in  blissful  ignorance  of the  conditions  in  Sudan?  
Surely  if we had all made it  a priority to  keep death out of Sudan  for  
as  long  as  possible,  untold  millions  could  have  been  saved  from  
whatever  it  was  that  wound  up  killing  them.  We  could  have  sent  
teams of well-intentioned men  and women into Khartoum to ensure 
that  the  Sudanese  wore  their  seatbelts.  Are  we  culpable  for  all  the======================================================== group  of about  30  embryonic  stem  cells.  
These  cells  have  two  properties  that  make  them  of  such  abiding  
interest  to  scientists:  as  stem  cells, they  can  remain  in  an  unspecial-

l66          THE    END     OF    FAITH    
ized  state,  reproducing  themselves  through  cell  division  for  long  
periods  of time  (a population  of such  cells  living in culture  is known 
as a cell line); stem  cells are also pluripotent, which means they have 
the  potential  to  become  any  specialized  cell  in  the  human  body—  
neurons  of the  brain  and  spinal  cord,  insulin-producing  cells  of the 
pancreas,  muscle  cells  of the  heart,  and  so  forth.  
Here  is  what  we  know. We  know  that  much  can  be  learned  from  
research  on  embryonic  stem  cells.  In  particular,  such  research  may  
give  us  further insight  into the  processes  of cell division  and  cell  dif-
ferentiation.  This  would  almost  certainly  shed  new  light  on  those  
medical  conditions,  like  cancer  and  birth  defects,  that  seem  to  be  
merely  a  matter  of  these  processes  gone  awry.  We  also  know  that  
research  on embryonic  stem  cells  requires  the destruction  of human 
embryos  at  the  150-cell  stage.  There  is  not  the  slightest  reason  to  
believe,  however,  that such embryos  have  the capacity to sense pain, 
to  suffer,  or  to  experience  the  loss  of  life  in  any  way  at  all. What  is  
indisputable  is that there are millions  of human  beings  who do have 
these  capacities,  and  who  currently  suffer  from  traumatic  injuries  to  
the brain  and  spinal cord.  Millions  more  suffer  from  Parkinson's  and  
Alzheimer's  diseases.  Millions  more  suffer  from  stroke  and  heart  
disease,  from  burns,  from  diabetes,  from  rheumatoid  arthritis,  from  
Purkinje  cell  degeneration,  from  Duchenne muscular dystrophy,  and  
from  vision  and  hearing  loss.  We  know  that  embryonic  stem  cells  
promise  to  be  a  renewable  source  of  tissues  and  organs  that  might  
alleviate  such  suffering  in  the  not  too  distant  future.  
Enter  faith:  we  now  find  ourselves  living  in  a  world  in  which  
college-educated  politicians  will  hurl  impediments  in  the  way  of  
such  research  because  they  are  concerned  about  the  fate  of  single  
cells.  Their  concern  is  not  merely  that  a  collection  of  150  cells  may  
suffer its destruction.  Rather, they believe that  even  a human zygote 
(a  fertilized  egg)  should  be  accorded  all  the  protections  of  a  fully  
developed  human  being.  Such  a  cell,  after  all,  has  the  potential  to  
become   a   fully   developed   human   being.   But   given   our   recent   
advances  in  the  biology  of  cloning,  as  much  can  be  said  of  almost  

WEST    OF    EDEN           l67           
every  cell  in  the  human  body.  By  the  measure  of  a  cell's  potential,  
whenever  the  president  scratches  his  nose  he  is  now  engaged  in  a  
diabolical  culling  of souls. 
Out  of deference  to  some  rather  poorly  specified tenets  of Chris-
tian  doctrine  (after  all,  nothing  in  the  Bible  suggests  that  killing  
human  embryos,  or even human  fetuses,  is  the  equivalent of killing 
a human being), the  U.S.  House  of Representatives voted  effectively  
to ban  embryonic  stem-cell  research  on  February  27,  2003.  
No  rational  approach  to  ethics  would  have  led  us  to  such  an  
impasse. Our present policy on human stem  cells has been shaped by 
beliefs  that  are  divorced  from  every  reasonable  intuition  we  might  
form  about  the  possible  experience  of living  systems.  In  neurologi-
cal  terms, we  surely visit more  suffering upon this  earth by killing a 
fly  than  by  killing  a  human  blastocyst,  to  say  nothing  of  a  human  
zygote  (flies,  after  all,  have  100,000  cells  in  their  brains  alone).  Of  
course,  the  point  at  which  we  fully  acquire  our  humanity,  and  our  
capacity to  suffer,  remains an open question. But anyone who would 
dogmatically  insist  that  these  traits  must  arise  coincident  with  the  
moment  of  conception  has  nothing  to  contribute,  apart  from  his  
ignorance,  to  this  debate.  Those  opposed  to  therapeutic  stem-cell  
research  on  religious  grounds  constitute  the  biological  and  ethical  
equivalent  of  a   flat-earth   society.  Our  discourse  on  the   subject   
should  reflect  this.  In  this  area  of public policy alone, the  accommo-
dations  that  we  have  made  to  faith  will  do  nothing  but  enshrine  a  
perfect  immensity  of human  suffering  for  decades  to  come.  
BUT  the  tendrils  of unreason  creep  further.  President Bush  recently  
decided  to  cut  off  funding  to  any  overseas  family-planning  group  
that  provides  information  on  abortion.  According  to  the  New  York  
Times,  this  "has  effectively  stopped  condom  provision  to  16  coun-
tries  and  reduced  it  in  13  others,  including  some  with  the  world's  
highest  rates  of AIDS  infection."
41
  Under the  influence  of Christian 
notions  of  the  sinfulness  of  sex  outside  of  marriage,  the  U.S.  gov-

l68          THE    END     OF    FAITH    
ernment  has  required  that  one-third  of  its  AIDS  prevention  funds  
allocated  to Africa be  squandered  on  teaching  abstinence  rather than 
condom use.  It  is  no exaggeration  to  say that millions  could  die  as  a  
direct  result  of  this  single  efflorescence  of  religious  dogmatism.  As  
Nicholas  Kristof points out, "sex kills, and so does this kind of blush-
ing  prudishness."
42  
And yet,  even  those  who  see  the  problem  in  all  its  horror  find it 
impossible  to  criticize  faith  itself.  Take  Kristof as  an  example:  in  the  
very  act  of  exposing  the  medievalism  that  prevails  in  the  U.S.  gov-
ernment,  and  its  likely  consequences  abroad,  he  goes  on  to  chastise  
anyone  who  would  demand  that  the  faithful  be  held  fully  account-
able  for  their  beliefs:  
I  tend  to  disagree  with  evangelicals  on  almost  everything,  and  I  
see  no  problem  with  aggressively pointing out  the  dismal  conse-
quences  of this  increasing  religious  influence.  For example,  evan-
gelicals'  discomfort  with  condoms  and  sex  education  has  led  the  
administration  to  policies  that  are  likely  to  lead  to  more  people  
dying  of AIDS  at  home  and  abroad,  not  to  mention  more  preg-
nancies  and  abortions.  
But  liberal  critiques  sometimes  seem  not just  filled  with  out-
rage  at  evangelical-backed  policies,  which  is  fair,  but  also  to  have  
a   sneering   tone   about   conservative   Christianity   itself.   Such   
mockery  of religious  faith  is  inexcusable. And  liberals  sometimes  
show  more  intellectual  curiosity  about  the  religion  of  Afghan-
istan  than  that  of  Alabama,  and  more  interest  in  reading  the  
Upanishads  than  in  reading  the  Book  of  Revelation.
43  
This is reason in ruins.  Kristof condemns the "dismal consequences" 
of  faith while honoring  their  cause.
44
  It  is true that  the  rules  of civil 
discourse  currently  demand  that  Reason  wear  a  veil  whenever  she  
ventures  out  in  public.  But the  rules  of  civil  discourse  must  change.  
Faith  drives  a  wedge between  ethics  and  suffering. Where  certain  
actions  cause  no  suffering  at  all,  religious  dogmatists  still  maintain  

WEST    OF    EDEN           l69           
that  they  are  evil  and  worthy  of  punishment  (sodomy,  marijuana  
use,  homosexuality,  the  killing  of blastocysts,  etc.). And  yet,  where  
suffering  and  death  are  found  in  abundance  their  causes  are  often  
deemed  to  be  good  (withholding  funds  for  family  planning  in  the  
third   world,   prosecuting   nonviolent   drug   offenders,   preventing   
stem-cell  research,  etc). This  inversion  of priorities  not  only  victim-
izes  innocent  people  and  squanders  scarce  resources;  it  completely  
falsifies  our  ethics.  It  is  time  we  found  a  more  reasonable  approach  
to  answering  questions  of right  and wrong. 

6 
A   Science   of  Good  and  Evil  
Is  THE  difference  between  good  and  evil just  a  matter  of what  any  
particular group of human beings says it is ?  Consider that one of the 
greatest  sources  of  amusement  in  sixteenth-century  Paris  was  cat  
burning.   At   the   midsummer's   fair   an   impresario   would   gather   
dozens  of  cats  in  a  net,  hoist  them  high  into  the  air  from  a  special  
stage,  and  then,  to  everyone's  delight,  lower  the  whole  writhing  
bundle  onto  a  bonfire.  The  assembled  spectators  "shrieked  with  
laughter as the animals, howling with pain, were singed, roasted, and 
finally  carbonized."
1
  Most  of  us  would  recoil  from  such  a  spectacle  
today. But would we be  right to do  so?  Can we say that there are eth-
ical  truths  of which  all  avid torturers  of  cats  are  ignorant?  
Many  people  appear  to  believe  that  ethical  truths  are  culturally  
contingent in  a way that  scientific truths  are  not.  Indeed,  this  loss  of  
purchase  upon  ethical  truth  seems  to  be  one  of the  principal  short-
comings  of  secularism.  The  problem  is  that  once  we  abandon  our  
belief  in  a  rule-making  God,  the  question  of  why  a  given  action  is  
good or bad becomes  a matter of debate. And  a statement  like "Mur-
der is wrong," while being uncontroversial in  most circles,  has  never  
seemed  anchored  to  the  facts  of  this  world  in  the  way  that  state-
ments  about  planets  or  molecules  appear  to  be.  The  problem,  in  
philosophical  terms,  has  been  one of characterizing just what  sort======================================================== terms of our subjectivity to maneuver in  a world that 
appears  to  be  other  than  what  we  are.  Descartes  accentuated  this  
dichotomy  by  declaring  that  two  substances  were  to  be  found  in  
God's  universe:  matter  and  spirit.  For  most  of  us,  a  dualism  of this 
sort  is  more  or  less  a  matter  of  common  sense  (though  the  term  
"spirit"  seems  rather  majestic,  given how our minds  generally  com-
port  themselves).  As  science  has  turned  its  reifying  light  upon  the  
mysteries  of  the  human  mind,  however,  Descartes'  dualism  (along  
with  our  own  "folk psychology")  has  come  in  for  some  rough  treat-
ment.  Bolstered  by  the  undeniable  successes  of  three  centuries  of  
purely  physical   research,  many  philosophers   and   scientists   now   
reject  Descartes'  separation  of  mind  and  body,  spirit  and  matter,  as  
the  concession to Christian piety that it surely was,  and imagine that 

208          THE    END     OF    FAITH    
they  have  thereby  erased the  conceptual  gulf between  consciousness  
and the  physical world. 
In the last chapter we saw that our beliefs  about consciousness are 
intimately  linked  to  our  ethics.  They  also  happen  to  have  a  direct  
bearing upon our view  of death. Most  scientists  consider  themselves  
physicalists;  this  means,  among  other  things,  that  they  believe  that  
our mental  and  spiritual  lives  are  wholly  dependent  upon  the  work-
ings  of our  brains.  On  this  account,  when  the  brain  dies,  the  stream  
of our  being  must  come  to  an  end.  Once  the  lamps  of  neural  activ-
ity  have  been  extinguished,  there  will  be  nothing  left  to  survive.  
Indeed,  many  scientists  purvey  this  conviction  as  though  it  were  
itself  a  special  sacrament,  conferring  intellectual  integrity  upon  any  
man, woman,  or  child who  is  man  enough  to  swallow  it.  
But  the  truth  is  that  we  simply  do  not  know  what  happens  after  
death. While there is much  to be  said against a  naive  conception of a 
soul  that  is  independent  of the  brain,
3
  the  place  of consciousness  in  
the  natural  world  is  very  much  an  open  question.  The  idea  that  
brains  produce  consciousness  is  little  more  than  an  article  of  faith  
among  scientists  at  present,  and  there  are  many  reasons  to  believe  
that the methods  of science will be insufficient to either prove or dis-
prove  it.  
Inevitably,  scientists  treat  consciousness  as  a  mere  attribute  of  
certain large-brained animals. The problem, however, is that nothing 
about  a brain, when  surveyed  as  a  physical  system,  declares  it  to  be  
a  bearer  of that  peculiar,  interior  dimension  that  each  of  us  experi-
ences   as   consciousness   in   his   own   case.   Every   paradigm   that   
attempts  to  shed  light  upon  the  frontier  between  consciousness  and  
unconsciousness,  searching  for  the  physical  difference  that  makes  
the phenomenal  one,  relies  upon  subjective  reports  to  signal  that an 
experimental  stimulus  has  been  observed.
4
  The  operational  defini-
tion  of  consciousness,  therefore,  is  reportability.  But  consciousness  
and  reportability  are  not  the  same.  Is  a  starfish  conscious?  No  sci-
ence  that  conflates  consciousness  with  reportability  will  deliver  an  
answer  to  this  question.  To  look  for  consciousness  in  the  world  on  

EXPERIMENTS  IN  CONSCIOUSNESS          209          
the  basis  of  its  outward  signs  is  the  only  thing  that  we  can  do.  To  
define  consciousness  in terms  of its outward  signs,  however,  is  a  fal-
lacy.  Computers  of the  future,  sufficiently  advanced  to  pass  the Tur-
ing  test,*  will  offer  up  a  wealth  of  self-report—but  will  they  be  
conscious?  If we  don't  already  know,  their  eloquence  on  the  matter  
will  not  decide  the  issue.  Consciousness  may  be  a  far  more  rudi-
mentary  phenomenon  than  are  living  creatures  and  their  brains.  
And  there  appears  to  be  no  obvious  way  of  ruling  out  such  a  thesis  
experimentally.
5 
And  so,  while  we  know many  things  about  ourselves  in  anatom-
ical,  physiological,  and  evolutionary  terms,  we  currently  have  no  
idea why  it  is  "like  something"  to  be what  we  are. The  fact  that  the  
universe is  illuminated where you  stand, the  fact that your thoughts 
and moods and sensations  have a qualitative character, is  an absolute 
mystery—rivaled  only  by  the  mystery,  famously  articulated  by  the  
philosopher  Schelling,  that  there  should  be  anything  at  all  in  this  
universe  rather than nothing. The  problem  is  that  our  experience  of  
brains,  as  objects  in  the  world,  leaves  us  perfectly  insensible  to  the  
reality  of  consciousness,  while  our  experience  as  brains  grants  us  
knowledge  of  nothing  else.  Given  this  situation,  it  is  reasonable  to  
conclude  that  the  domain  of  our  subjectivity  constitutes  a  proper  
(and  essential)  sphere  of  investigation  into  the  nature  of  the  uni-
verse: as some  facts will be discovered only in consciousness, in first-
person  terms,  or  not  discovered  at  all.  
Investigating  the  nature  of  consciousness  directly,  through  sus-
tained introspection, is  simply another name  for spiritual practice.  It  
should  be  clear  that  whatever  transformations  of  your  experience  
are  possible—after  forty  days  and  forty  nights  in  the  desert,  after  
*  The  mathematician  Alan  Turing  once  proposed  a  test  for  the  adequacy  of  a  com-
puter  simulation  of  the  human  mind  (and  this  has  since  been  promoted  in  the  liter-
ature  to  a  test  for  computer  "consciousness").  The  proposed  test  requires  that  a  
human  subject  interrogate  another  person  and  a  computer  by  turns,  without  know-
ing which  is  which.  If,  at the  end  of the  experiment,  he  cannot  identify the  computer  
with  any  confidence,  it  is  said  to  have  "passed"  the Turing test. 

210          THE    END     OF    FAITH    
twenty years  in  a  cave,  or after some new serotonin agonist has  been  
delivered to your synapses—these will  be a matter of changes occur-
ring  in  the  contents  of  your  consciousness.  Whatever  Jesus  experi-
enced,  he  experienced  as  consciousness.  If  he  loved  his  neighbor  as  
himself,  this  is  a  description  of what  it  felt  like  to  be  Jesus  while  in  
the  presence  of  other human  beings. The  history  of human  spiritu-
ality  is  the  history  of our  attempts  to  explore  and  modify  the  deliv-
erances  of  consciousness  through  methods  like  fasting,  chanting,  
sensory  deprivation, prayer, meditation,  and  the use  of psychotropic 
plants. There is no question that experiments of this sort  can be con-
ducted  in  a  rational  manner.  Indeed,  they  are  some  of  our  only  
means  of  determining  to  what  extent  the  human  condition  can  be  
deliberately   transformed.   Such   an   enterprise   becomes   irrational   
only when  people  begin  making  claims  about  the  world  that  cannot  
be  supported  by  empirical  evidence.  
What   Are    We    Calling    "I"?    
Our  spiritual  possibilities  will  largely  depend  on  what  we  are  as  
selves.  In  physical  terms,  each  of us  is  a  system,  locked  in  an unin-
terrupted  exchange  of matter  and  energy  with  the  larger  system  of  
the earth. The  life of your very cells is built upon  a network of barter 
and  exchange  over  which  you  can  exercise  only  the  crudest  con-
scious  influence—in  the  form  of  deciding  whether  to  hold  your  
breath  or  take  another  slice  of  pizza  out  of the  fridge.  As  a  physical  
system, you are no more independent of nature  at this moment than 
your  liver  is   of  the  rest   of  your  body.  As   a   collection   of  self-
regulating  and  continually  dividing  cells,  you  are  also  continuous  
with  your  genetic  precursors:  your  parents,  their  parents,  and  back-
ward  through  tens  of  millions  of  generations—at  which  point  your  
ancestors begin  looking less  like men  and women with bad teeth  and  
more like pond scum. It is true enough  to say that, in physical terms, 
you  are  little  more  than  an  eddy  in  a  great  river  of life. 

EXPERIMENTS     IN     CONSCIOUSNESS               211               
But,  of  course,  your  body  is  itself  an  environment  teeming  with  
creatures,  in  relation  to  which  you  are  sovereign  in  name  alone. To 
examine  the  body  of  a  person,  its  organs  and  tissues,  cells  and  
intestinal  flora  (sometimes  fauna,  alas),  is  to  be  confronted  by  a  
world  that  bears  no  more  evidence  of an  overriding  conscious  intel-
ligence than  does  the  world  at large.  Is  there  any  reason  to  suspect,  
when  observing  the  function  of  mitochondria  within  a  cell,  or  the  
twitching  of  muscle  fibers  in  the  hand,  that  there  is  a  mind,  above  
and beyond  such  processes,  thinking,  "L'état  c'est moi"?  Indeed,  any  
privilege  we might  be  tempted  to  accord the boundary  of the  skin  in  
our  search  for  the  physical  self  seems  profoundly  arbitrary.  
The  frontiers  of  the  mental  self  are  no  easier  to  discern:  memes,  
taboos,  norms  of decorum,  linguistic  conventions,  prejudices,  ideals,  
aesthetic  biases,  commercial  jingles—the  phenomena  that  populate  
the  landscape  of our  minds  are  immigrants  from  the  world  at  large.  
Is  your  desire  to  be  physically  fit—or  your  taste  in  clothing,  your  
sense  of  community,  your  expectation  of  reciprocal  kindness,  your  
shyness,  your  affability,  your  sexual======================================================== dearest of suspected terrorists—their 
wives,  mothers,  and  daughters—and  torture  them  as  well, assuming 
anything  profitable  to  our  side  might  come  of  it.  Admittedly,  this  
would  be  a  ghastly  result  to  have  reached  by  logical  argument,  and  
we  will want  to  find  some way  of escaping  it.
34  
In  this  context, we  should note  that many  variables  influence our 

A    SCIENCE    OF   GOOD    AND    EVIL           195           
feelings  about  an  act  of  physical  violence,  as  well  as  our  intuitions  
about  its  ethical  status. As  Glover  points  out,  "in  modern  war, what 
is  most  shocking is  a  poor  guide  to what is  most harmful." To learn 
that  one's  grandfather  flew  a  bombing  mission  over  Dresden  in  the  
Second World War is one thing; to hear that he killed  five little girls 
and  their  mother  with  a  shovel  is  another.  We  can  be  sure  that  he  
would  have  killed  more  women  and  girls  by  dropping  bombs  from  
pristine  heights,  and  they  are  likely  to  have  died  equally  horrible  
deaths,  but  his  culpability  would  not  appear  the  same.  Indeed,  we  
seem  to  know,  intuitively,  that  it  would  take  a  different  kind  of per-
son to perpetrate violence of the latter sort. And, as we might expect, 
the  psychological  effects  of  participating  in  these  types  of  violence  
are  generally  distinct.  Consider  the  following  account  of  a  Soviet  
soldier  in  Afghanistan:  "It's  frightening  and  unpleasant  to  have  to  
kill,  you  think, but you  soon  realize that what you  really  find  objec-
tionable  is  shooting  someone  point-blank.  Killing  en  masse,  in  a  
group,  is  exciting,  even—and  I've  seen  this  myself—fun."
35
  This  is  
not  to  say that no  one  has  ever enjoyed killing  people  up  close;  it is 
just  that  we  all  recognize  that  such  enjoyment  requires  an  unusual  
degree  of callousness  to  the  suffering  of others. 
It  is  possible  that  we  are  simply  unequipped  to  rectify  this  dis-
parity—to  be,  in  Glover's  terms,  most  shocked  by  what  is  most  
harmful.  A  biological  rationale  is  not  hard  to  find,  as  millions  of  
years  on  the  African  veldt  could  not  possibly  have  selected  for  an  
ability to make  emotional  sense of twenty-first-century horror. That 
our  Paleolithic  genes  now  have  chemical,  biological,  and  nuclear  
weapons  at their disposal is, from  the point  of view of our evolution, 
little  different  from  our  having  delivered  this  technology  into  the  
hands of chimps. The  difference between killing one man and killing 
a  thousand just  doesn't  seem  as  salient  to  us  as  it  should.  And,  as  
Glover observes, in many cases we will  find the former  far more dis-
turbing.  Three  million  souls  can  be  starved  and  murdered  in  the  
Congo,  and  our  Argus-eyed  media  scarcely  blink.  When  a  princess  
dies  in  a  car  accident,  however,  a  quarter  of  the  earth's  population  

196          THE    END    OF   FAITH   
falls  prostrate  with  grief.  Perhaps  we  are  unable  to  feel  what  we  
must  feel  in  order  to  change  our  world.  
What  does  it  feel  like  to  see  three  thousand  men,  women,  and  
children incinerated and crushed to ash in the  span  of a  few seconds? 
Anyone who owned a television on September 11, 2001, now knows. 
But most of us know nothing of the sort. To have watched the World 
Trade  Center absorbing  two jet planes,  along with  the  lives  of thou-
sands,  and  to  have  felt,  above  all  things,  disbelief,  suggests  some  
form  of  neurological  impairment.  Clearly,  there  are  limits  to  what  
the  human  mind  can  make  of the  deliverances  of its  senses—of the 
mere  sight  of an  office building,  known  to  be  full  of people,  dissolv-
ing into  rubble.  Perhaps  this  will  change.  
In any  case, if you think the equivalence between torture  and col-
lateral  damage  does  not  hold,  because  torture  is  up  close  and  per-
sonal  while  stray  bombs  aren't,  you  stand  convicted  of  a  failure  of  
imagination  on  at  least  two  counts:  first,  a  moment's  reflection  on  
the horrors  that must have been  visited upon innocent Afghanis  and  
Iraqis  by  our  bombs  will  reveal  that  they  are  on  par  with  those  of  
any dungeon. That such an exercise of the imagination  is  required to 
bring torture  and  collateral  damage  to  parity  accounts  for the  disso-
ciation  between  what  is  most  shocking  and  what  is  most  harmful  
that  Glover notes.  It  also demonstrates  the  degree  to which we have 
been bewitched by our own euphemisms. Killing people at a distance 
is  easier,  but  perhaps  it  should  not  be  that much  easier.  
Second,  if our intuition  about the wrongness of torture is born of 
an aversion to how people generally behave while being tortured, we 
should  note  that  this  particular  infelicity  could  be  circumvented  
pharmacologically,  because  paralytic  drugs  make  it  unnecessary  for  
screaming  ever to be  heard or writhing  seen. We  could  easily  devise  
methods  of  torture  that  would  render  a  torturer  as  blind  to  the  
plight  of  his  victims  as  a  bomber  pilot  is  at  thirty  thousand  feet.  
Consequently,  our  natural  aversion  to  the  sights  and  sounds  of  
the  dungeon  provide  no  foothold  for  those who would  argue  against  
the  use  of  torture.  To  demonstrate just  how  abstract  the  torments  

A    SCIENCE     OF    GOOD    AND     EVIL           197           
of the tortured  can  be  made  to  seem,  we  need  only  imagine  an  ideal  
"torture  pill"—a   drug  that  would   deliver  both   the  instruments  
of torture  and  the instrument  of their utter  concealment. The  action  
of  the  pill  would  be  to  produce  transitory  paralysis  and  transitory  
misery  of  a  kind  that  no  human  being would  willingly  submit  to  a  
second  time.  Imagine  how  we  torturers  would  feel  if,  after  giving  
this  pill  to  captive  terrorists,  each  lay  down  for  what  appeared  to  
be  an  hour's  nap  only  to  arise  and  immediately  confess  everything  
he  knows  about  the  workings  of  his  organization.  Might  we  not  be  
tempted  to  call  it  a "truth pill"  in  the  end?  
No,  there  is  no  ethical  difference  to  be  found  in  how  the  suffer-
ing  of the  tortured  or  the  collaterally  damaged  appears.  
WHICH  way  should  the  balance  swing?  Assuming  that  we  want  to  
maintain a coherent ethical position on these matters, this appears to 
be  a  circumstance  of  forced  choice:  if we  are  willing  to  drop  bombs,  
or even  risk that pistol rounds might go astray, we should be willing 
to torture  a  certain  class  of criminal  suspects  and military prisoners; 
if we are unwilling to torture, we should be unwilling to wage mod-
ern  war.  
Opponents  of  torture  will  be  quick  to  argue  that  confessions  
elicited  by  torture  are  notoriously  unreliable.  Given  the  foregoing,  
however, this  objection seems to lack its usual  force. Make these con-
fessions  as  unreliable  as you  like—the  chance that our interests  will  
be  advanced in any instance of torture need only equal the chance of 
such  occasioned  by  the  dropping  of  a  single  bomb.  What  was  the  
chance  that  the  dropping  of bomb  number  117  on  Kandahar  would  
effect the demise of Al Qaeda?  It had to be pretty slim.  Enter Khalid 
Sheikh  Mohammed: our most  valuable  capture  in  our war  on  terror.  
Here  is  a  character  who  actually  seems  cut  from  Dershowitzian  
cloth.  U.S.  officials  now  believe  that  his  was  the  hand  that  decapi-
tated  the  Wall  Street Journal  reporter  Daniel  Pearl. Whether  or  not  
this  is  true,  his  membership  in Al  Qaeda  more  or  less  rules  out  his  

198            THE    END    OF    FAITH    
"innocence"  in  any  important  sense,  and  his  rank  in  the  organiza-
tion  suggests  that  his   knowledge  of  planned  atrocities   must  be  
extensive. The bomb is ticking. Given the damage we were willing to 
cause  to  the  bodies  and  minds  of  innocent  children  in  Afghanistan  
and  Iraq,  our  disavowal  of  torture  in  the  case  of  Khalid  Sheikh  
Mohammed  seems perverse.  If there  is  even  one  chance  in  a  million  
that he  will  tell  us  something under torture  that will  lead  to the  fur-
ther  dismantling  of  Al  Qaeda,  it  seems  that  we  should  use  every  
means  at  our  disposal  to  get  him  talking.  
IN  ALL  likelihood you  began  reading  this  chapter, much  as  I  began  
writing  it,  convinced that torture  is  a very  bad thing and that we are 
wise  not  to  practice  it—indeed  that  we  are  civilized,  in  large  mea-
sure,  because  we  do  not  practice  it.  Most  of  us  feel,  intuitively  at  
least,  that  if  we  can't  quite  muster  a  retort  to  Dershowitz  and  his  
ticking  bomb,  we  can  take  refuge  in  the  fact  that  the  paradigmatic  
case  will  almost  never  arise.  From  this  perspective,  adorning  the  
machinery of our justice system with  a torture provision  seems both 
unnecessary  and  dangerous,  as  the  law  of  unintended  consequences  
may one day  find it throwing the whole works into disarray. Because 
I  believe  the  account  offered  above  is  basically  sound,  I  believe  that  
I  have  successfully argued  for the  use  of torture  in any  circumstance  
in which we would be willing to cause collateral damage.
36
 Paradox-
ically, this equivalence has not made the practice of torture  seem any 
more  acceptable  to me;  nor has  it,  I trust,  for most  readers.  I  believe  
that  here  we  come  upon  an  ethical  illusion  of  sorts—analogous  to  
the  perceptual======================================================== approaches to  spiritu-
ality, ethics, and the building of strong communities.  Religious mod-
erates  seem  to  believe  that  what  we  need  is  not  radical  insight  and  
innovation  in  these  areas  but  a  mere  dilution  of  Iron  Age  philoso-
phy.  Rather  than  bring  the  full  force  of our  creativity  and  rational-
ity  to  bear  on  the  problems  of  ethics,  social  cohesion,  and  even  
spiritual  experience,  moderates  merely  ask  that  we  relax  our  stan-
dards  of adherence  to  ancient  superstitions  and taboos,  while other-
wise  maintaining  a  belief  system  that  was  passed  down  to  us  from  
men  and  women  whose  lives  were  simply  ravaged  by  their  basic  
ignorance  about  the  world.  In what other  sphere  of life  is  such  sub-
servience  to  tradition  acceptable?  Medicine?  Engineering?  Not  even  
politics  suffers  the  anachronism  that  still  dominates  our  thinking  
about  ethical  values  and  spiritual  experience.  
Imagine  that  we  could  revive  a  well-educated  Christian  of  the  
fourteenth century.  The  man  would  prove  to  be  a  total  ignoramus,  

22          THE     END     OF     FAITH     
except  on  matters  of  faith.  His  beliefs  about  geography,  astronomy,  
and medicine would embarrass  even  a child, but he would know more 
or  less  everything  there  is  to  know  about  God.  Though  he  would  be  
considered a  fool to think that the earth is the center of the cosmos, or 
that trepanning*  constitutes  a wise medical intervention, his religious 
ideas  would  still  be  beyond  reproach. There  are  two  explanations  for  
this:  either  we  perfected  our  religious  understanding  of  the  world  a  
millennium  ago—while  our  knowledge  on  all  other  fronts  was  still  
hopelessly  inchoate—or  religion,  being  the  mere  maintenance  of  
dogma,  is  one  area  of  discourse  that  does  not  admit  of  progress.  We  
will  see that there  is  much  to  recommend the latter view. 
With  each  passing  year,  do  our  religious  beliefs  conserve  more  
and  more  of  the  data  of  human  experience?  If  religion  addresses  a  
genuine   sphere   of  understanding   and  human   necessity,   then   it   
should  be  susceptible  to  progress;  its  doctrines  should  become  more  
useful, rather than less. Progress in religion, as in other  fields, would 
have  to  be  a  matter  of  present  inquiry,  not  the  mere  reiteration  of  
past doctrine. Whatever is true now should be  discoverable  now, and 
describable  in  terms  that  are  not  an  outright  affront  to  the  rest  of  
what  we  know  about  the  world.  By  this  measure,  the  entire  project  
of  religion  seems  perfectly  backward.  It  cannot  survive  the  changes  
that  have  come  over  us—culturally,  technologically,  and  even  ethi-
cally.  Otherwise,  there  are  few  reasons  to  believe  that  we  will  sur-
vive  it.  
Moderates  do  not  want  to  kill  anyone  in  the  name  of  God,  but  
they want us to keep using the word "God" as though we knew what 
we  were  talking  about.  And  they  do  not  want  anything  too  critical  
said  about  people  who  really  believe  in  the  God  of  their  fathers,  
because  tolerance, perhaps  above  all  else,  is  sacred. To  speak plainly 
* Trepanning  (or  trephining)  is  the  practice  of  boring  holes  in  the  human  skull.  
Archaeological  evidence  suggests  that  it  is  one  of  the  oldest  surgical  procedures.  It  
was  presumably  performed  on  epileptics  and  the  mentally  ill  as  an  attempt  at  exor-
cism. While there are  still many  reasons  to  open  a person's  skull  nowadays, the  hope  
that  an  evil  spirit will  use  the  hole  as  a point  of egress  is  not among them. 

REASON       IN       EXILE  23  
and truthfully about the state of our world—to  say,  for instance, that 
the  Bible  and  the  Koran  both  contain  mountains  of  life-destroying  
gibberish—is  antithetical  to  tolerance  as  moderates  currently  con-
ceive  it.  But  we  can  no  longer  afford  the  luxury  of  such  political  
correctness.  We  must  finally  recognize  the  price  we  are  paying  to  
maintain  the  iconography  of our  ignorance.  
The    Shadow   of   the   Past   
Finding  ourselves  in  a universe that seems bent upon destroying us, 
we  quickly  discover,  both  as  individuals  and  as  societies,  that  it  is  a  
good  thing  to  understand the  forces  arrayed  against  us. And  so  it  is  
that  every  human  being  comes  to  desire  genuine  knowledge  about  
the  world.  This  has  always  posed  a  special  problem  for  religion,  
because  every  religion  preaches  the  truth  of  propositions  for  which  
it  has  no  evidence.  In  fact,  every  religion  preaches  the  truth  of  
propositions  for which  no  evidence  is  even  conceivable. This put the 
"leap"  in  Kierkegaard's  leap  of faith. 
What  if all our  knowledge  about the  world were  suddenly  to  dis-
appear?  Imagine that  six billion of us wake up tomorrow morning in 
a  state  of utter  ignorance  and  confusion.  Our  books  and  computers  
are  still  here, but  we  can't  make  heads  or  tails  of their  contents. We 
have even  forgotten how to drive our  cars and brush our teeth. What 
knowledge  would  we  want  to  reclaim  first?  Well,  there's  that  busi-
ness  about growing  food and building  shelter that we would want to 
get  reacquainted  with.  We  would  want  to  relearn  how  to  use  and  
repair  many  of  our  machines.  Learning  to  understand  spoken  and  
written  language would  also be  a  top  priority,  given that  these  skills  
are  necessary  for  acquiring  most  others.  When  in  this  process  of  
reclaiming our humanity will it be important to know that Jesus was 
born  of  a  virgin?  Or  that  he  was  resurrected?  And  how  would  we  
relearn  these  truths,  if they  are  indeed  true?  By  reading  the  Bible?  
Our  tour  of the  shelves  will  deliver  similar  pearls  from  antiquity—  

24         THE     END     OF     FAITH     
like  the  "fact"  that  Isis,  the goddess  of fertility,  sports  an  impressive  
pair  of  cow  horns.  Reading  further,  we  will  learn  that  Thor  carries  
a  hammer  and that  Marduk's  sacred  animals  are  horses,  dogs,  and  a  
dragon with  a  forked tongue. Whom  shall we  give  top billing in  our  
resurrected  world?  Yaweh  or  Shiva?  And  when  will  we  want  to  
relearn  that  premarital  sex  is  a  sin?  Or  that  adulteresses  should  be  
stoned  to  death?  Or  that  the  soul  enters  the  zygote  at  the  moment  
of conception? And what  will  we  think  of those  curious  people who 
begin proclaiming that one of our books  is  distinct  from  all others in 
that  it  was  actually written  by  the  Creator  of the  universe?  
There  are  undoubtedly  spiritual  truths  that  we  would  want  to  
relearn—once  we  manage  to  feed  and  clothe  ourselves—and  these  
are  truths  that  we  have  learned  imperfectly  in  our  present  state.  
How  is  it  possible,  for  instance,  to  overcome  one's  fear  and  inward-
ness and simply love other human beings? Assume,  for the moment, 
that  such  a  process  of personal  transformation  exists  and  that  there  
is  something worth knowing about it; there  is,  in other words,  some  
skill,  or  discipline,  or  conceptual  understanding,  or  dietary  supple-
ment  that  allows  for  the  reliable  transformation  of  fearful,  hateful,  
or indifferent persons into loving ones.  If so, we should be positively 
desperate  to  know  about  it.  There  may  even  be  a  few  biblical  pas-
sages  that  would  be  useful  in  this  regard—but  as  for  whole  rafts  of  
untestable  doctrines,  clearly  there  would  be  no  reasonable  basis  to  
take  them  up  again.  The  Bible  and  Koran,  it  seems  certain,  would  
find  themselves  respectfully  shelved  next  to  Ovid's  Metamorphoses  
and  the  Egyptian  Book  of  the  Dead.  
The  point  is  that  most  of  what  we  currently  hold  sacred  is  not  
sacred  for  any  reason  other  than  that  it  was  thought  sacred  yester-
day.  Surely,  if we  could  create  the  world  anew,  the  practice  of orga-
nizing  our  lives  around  untestable  propositions  found  in  ancient  
literature—to  say  nothing  of killing  and  dying  for  them—would  be  
impossible  to justify. What  stops  us  from  finding  it  impossible  now?  
Many  have  observed that  religion,  by  lending  meaning  to human 
life,  permits  communities  (at  least  those  united  under  a  single  faith)  

REASON    IN    EXILE          25          
to  cohere.  Historically this  is true,  and  on  this  score  religion  is  to be 
credited  as much  for wars  of conquest  as  for  feast days  and brotherly 
love.  But  in  its   effect  upon  the   modern  world—a  world  already  
united, at least potentially, by economic, environmental, political, and 
epidemiological  necessity—religious  ideology  is  dangerously  retro-
grade. Our past is  not  sacred  for being past, and there is  much that is 
behind  us  that we  are  struggling  to  keep  behind  us,  and  to  which,  it  
is  to  be  hoped,  we  could  never  return  with  a  clear  conscience:  the  
divine  right  of  kings,  feudalism,  the  caste  system,  slavery,  political  
executions,   forced   castration,   vivisection,   bearbaiting,   honorable   
duels,  chastity  belts,  trial  by  ordeal,  child  labor,  human  and  animal  
sacrifice,  the  stoning  of  heretics,  cannibalism,  sodomy  laws,  taboos  
against   contraception,   human   radiation   experiments—the   list   is   
nearly  endless,  and  if it were extended indefinitely,  the proportion  of  
abuses  for which  religion  could be found directly responsible is likely 
to  remain======================================================== any  sustained  exercise  of reason  must  necessarily  tran-
scend national,  religious, and ethnic boundaries. There is, after all, no 
such  thing  as  an  inherently  American  (or  Christian,  or  Caucasian)  
physics.
21
  Even  spirituality  and  ethics  meet  this  criterion  of univer-
sality  because  human  beings,  whatever  their  background,  seem  to  
converge  on  similar  spiritual  experiences  and  ethical  insights  when  
given  the  same  methods  of  inquiry.  Such  is  not  the  case  with  the  
"truths"  of  religion,  however.  Nothing  that  a  Christian  and  a  Mus-
lim  can  say  to  each  other  will  render  their  beliefs  mutually  vulner-
able   to   discourse,   because   the   very   tenets   of   their   faith   have   
immunized   them   against   the   power   of   conversation.   Believing   
strongly, without  evidence, they have  kicked themselves  loose  of the 
world. It is therefore in the very nature of faith to serve as an imped-

46         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
iment  to  further  inquiry.  And  yet,  the  fact  that  we  are  no  longer  
killing  people  for  heresy  in  the  West  suggests  that  bad  ideas,  how-
ever  sacred,  cannot  survive  the  company  of good  ones  forever.  
Given the  link between  belief and  action,  it  is  clear that we  can  no  
more  tolerate  a  diversity  of  religious  beliefs  than  a  diversity  of  
beliefs  about  epidemiology and  basic hygiene. There  are  still  a num-
ber  of cultures  in which the germ  theory  of disease has  yet  to put  in  
an  appearance, where people  suffer  from  a  debilitating  ignorance  on  
most  matters  relevant  to  their  physical  health.  Do  we  "tolerate"  
these  beliefs?  Not  if they  put  our  own  health  in jeopardy.
22  
Even  apparently  innocuous  beliefs,  when  unjustified,  can  lead  to  
intolerable   consequences.  Many  Muslims,   for  instance,   are  con-
vinced  that  God  takes  an  active  interest  in  women's  clothing.  While  
it  may  seem  harmless  enough,  the  amount  of  suffering  that  this  
incredible idea has  caused is astonishing. The rioting in Nigeria over 
the  2002  Miss World  Pageant claimed over  two hundred  lives; inno-
cent men  and  women were  butchered  with  machetes  or burned  alive  
simply  to  keep  that  troubled  place  free  of women  in  bikinis.  Earlier  
in  the  year,  the  religious  police  in  Mecca  prevented  paramedics  and  
firefighters  from  rescuing  scores  of teenage  girls  trapped  in  a  burn-
ing  building.
23
 Why?  Because  the  girls  were  not  wearing  the  tradi-
tional head covering that Koranic law requires. Fourteen girls died in 
the  fire;  fifty were  injured.  Should  Muslims  really  be  free  to  believe  
that  the  Creator  of the  universe  is  concerned  about  hemlines?  
Gathering   Our   Wits   
Recent  events  have  done  more  than  expose  our  vulnerability  to  the  
militant  discontents  of  the  world:  they  have  uncovered  a  dark  cur-
rent of unreason in our national discourse. To see how much our cul-
ture  currently  partakes  of  the  irrationality  of  our  enemies,  just  
substitute  the  name  of your  favorite  Olympian  for  "God"  wherever  
this   word   appears   in   public   discourse.   Imagine   President   Bush   

REASON       IN        EXILE  47  
addressing the National  Prayer  Breakfast in these terms: "Behind  all  
of  life  and  all history  there  is  a  dedication  and  a  purpose,  set  by  the  
hand  of  a  just  and  faithful  Zeus."  Imagine  his  speech  to  Congress  
(September  20,  2001)  containing  the  sentence  "Freedom  and  fear,  
justice  and  cruelty  have  always  been  at  war,  and  we  know  that  
Apollo  is  not  neutral  between  them."  Clearly,  the  commonplaces  of  
language  conceal  the vacuity  and strangeness  of many of our beliefs. 
Our  president  regularly  speaks  in  phrases  appropriate  to  the  four-
teenth  century,  and  no  one  seems  inclined  to  find  out  what  words  
like  "God"  and  "crusade"  and  "wonder-working  power"  mean  to  
him.  Not  only  do  we  still  eat  the  offal  of the  ancient  world;  we  are  
positively smug about it. Garry Wills  has  noted that the  Bush White 
House  "is  currently  honeycombed  with  prayer  groups  and  Bible  
study  cells,  like  a  whited  monastery."
24
  This  should  trouble  us  as  
much  as  it  troubles  the  fanatics  of the  Muslim  world. We  should be 
humbled,  perhaps  to  the  point  of  spontaneous  genuflection,  by  the  
knowledge  that  the  ancient  Greeks  began  to  lay  their  Olympian  
myths  to  rest  several  hundred  years  before  the  birth  of  Christ,  
whereas  we  have  the  likes  of Bill  Moyers  convening  earnest gather-
ings  of  scholars  for  the  high  purpose  of  determining  just  how  the  
book  of Genesis  can  be  reconciled with  life  in  the  modern  world. As 
we  stride  boldly into  the  Middle Ages,  it  does  not  seem  out  of place 
to  wonder  whether  the  myths  that  now  saturate  our  discourse  will  
wind  up  killing many  of us,  as the myths  of others  already  have.  
Two hundred years  from  now, when  we  are  a thriving  global  civ-
ilization  beginning  to  colonize  space,  something  about  us  will  have  
changed: it must have; otherwise, we would have killed ourselves ten 
times  over  before  this  day  ever  dawned.  We  are  fast  approaching  a  
time  when  the  manufacture  of weapons  of  mass  destruction  will  be  
a  trivial  undertaking;  the  requisite  information  and  technology  are  
now seeping into every corner of our world. As the physicist Martin 
Rees  points  out,  "We  are  entering  an  era where  a  single  person  can,  
by  one  clandestine  act,  cause  millions  of  deaths  or  render  a  city  
uninhabitable  for  years.  .  .  ."
25
  Given  the  power  of  our  technology,  

48         THE    END    OF    FAITH    
we  can  see  at  a  glance  that  aspiring  martyrs  will  not  make  good  
neighbors  in the  future. We have  simply  lost the right to our myths, 
and  to  our mythic  identities.  
It  is  time  we  recognized  that  the  only  thing  that  permits  human  
beings  to  collaborate with  one another in  a truly  open-ended way  is  
their  willingness  to  have  their  beliefs  modified  by  new  facts.  Only  
openness  to  evidence  and argument  will  secure  a  common  world  for  
us.  Nothing  guarantees  that  reasonable  people   will  agree  about  
everything,  of course, but the unreasonable are  certain  to  be  divided  
by their  dogmas. This  spirit of mutual inquiry is the very antithesis 
of  religious  faith.  
While  we  may  never  achieve  closure  in  our  view  of the  world,  it  
seems  extraordinarily  likely  that  our  descendants  will  look  upon  
many  of our  beliefs  as  both  impossibly  quaint  and  suicidally  stupid.  
Our  primary  task  in  our  discourse  with  one  another  should  be  to  
identify  those  beliefs  that  seem  least  likely  to  survive  another thou-
sand  years  of human  inquiry,  or  most  likely  to  prevent  it,  and  sub-
ject  them  to  sustained  criticism.  Which  of our  present  practices  will  
appear  most  ridiculous  from  the  point  of  view  of  those  future  gen-
erations  that might yet  survive the  folly of the present?  It is  hard to 
imagine that our  religious  preoccupations  will  not top  the  list.
26
  It is 
natural  to  hope  that  our  descendants  will  look  upon  us  with  grati-
tude.  But  we  should  also  hope  that they  look  upon  us  with  pity  and  
disgust, just  as  we  view  the  slaveholders  of  our  all-too-recent  past.  
Rather  than  congratulate  ourselves  for  the  state  of  our  civilization,  
we  should  consider  how,  in  the  fullness  of time,  we  will  seem  hope-
lessly  backward,  and  work  to  lay  a  foundation  for  such  refinements  
in  the  present. We  must  find  our  way  to  a  time  when  faith,  without  
evidence,  disgraces  anyone  who  would  claim  it.  Given  the  present  
state   of  our  world,  there   appears   to  be   no   other   future  worth  
wanting. 
It  is  imperative  that  we  begin  speaking  plainly  about  the  absur-
dity of most of our religious  beliefs.  I  fear,  however, that the time has 
not  yet  arrived.  In  this  sense,  what  follows  is  written  very  much  in  

REASON         IN         EXILE  49  
the  spirit  of  a  prayer.  I  pray  that  we  may  one  day  think  clearly  
enough  about  these  matters  to  render  our  children  incapable  of  
killing  themselves  over  their  books.  If not  our  children,  then  I  sus-
pect it  could  well  be  too  late  for  us,  because  while  it  has  never  been  
difficult  to  meet your  maker,  in  fifty  years  it  will  simply be  too  easy  
to  drag  everyone  else  along  to  meet  him  with  you.
27  

2 
The   Nature   of  Belief  
IT  IS  OFTEN  argued that  religious  beliefs  are  somehow distinct  from  
other  claims  to  knowledge  about  the  world.  There  is  no  doubt  that  
we  treat  them  differently—particularly  in  the  degree  to  which  we  
demand,  in  ordinary  discourse,  that  people justify  their  beliefs—but  
this  does  not  indicate that  religious  beliefs  are  special  in  any  impor-
tant  sense. What  do  we  mean  when  we  say  that  a  person  believes  a  
given  proposition  about  the  world?  As  with  all  questions  about  
familiar  mental  events,  we  must  be  careful  that  the  familiarity  of  
our terms  does not lead us astray. The  fact that we have one word  for  
"belief"  does  not  guarantee  that  believing  is  itself  a  unitary  phe-
nomenon.  An  analogy  can  be  drawn  to  the  case  of  memory:  while  
people  commonly  refer  to  their  failures  of  "memory,"  decades  of======================================================== its  keep.  Given  our  beliefs  about  the  human  
mind,  the  success  of our widespread collaboration with  other human 
beings, and the degree to which we all rely on the  news, it is scarcely 
conceivable  that  a  respected  television  network  and  a  highly  paid  
anchorman  are  perpetrating  a  hoax,  or  that  thousands  of  firefight-
ers,  newsmen,  and  terrified  homeowners  have  mistaken  Texas  for  
Colorado.  Implicit in  such  commonsense judgments  lurks  an  under-
standing  of the  causal  connections  between  various  processes  in  the  
world,  the  likelihood  of different  outcomes,  and the  vested  interests,  
or  lack  thereof,  of those  whose  testimony  we  are  considering. What 
would  a  professional  news  anchor  stand  to  gain  from  lying  about  a  
fire  in  Colorado ? We  need  not go  into the details here; if the anchor 
on  the  evening  news  says  that  there  is  a  fire  in  Colorado  and  then  
shows  us  images  of  burning  trees,  we  can  be  reasonably  sure  that  
there  really  is  a  fire  in  Colorado.  
Proposition 2: What about the "truths" of science? Are they true'? 
Much  has  been  written  about  the  inherent  provisionality  of  scien-
tific  theories.  Karl  Popper  has  told  us  that  we  never  prove  a  theory  
right;  we  merely  fail  to  prove  it wrong.
32
 Thomas  Kuhn  has  told  us  
that  scientific  theories  undergo  wholesale  revision with  each  gener-
ation and therefore do not converge on the truth.
33
 There's no telling 
which  of  our  current  theories  will  be  proved  wrong  tomorrow,  so  
how  much  confidence  can  we  have  in  them?  Many  unwary  con-
sumers  of  these  ideas  have  concluded  that  science  is  just  another  
area  of  human  discourse  and,  as  such,  is  no  more  anchored  to  the  
facts  of  this  world  than  literature  or  religion  are.  All  truths  are  up  
for  grabs.  
But  all  spheres  of  discourse  are  not  on  the  same  footing,  for  the  
simple  reason  that  not  all  spheres  of discourse  seek  the  same  footing  
(or  any  footing  whatsoever).  Science  is  science  because  it  represents  

76         THE    END    OF   FAITH   
our  most  committed  effort  to  verify  that  our  statements  about  the  
world  are  true  (or  at  least  not  false).
34
  We  do  this  by  observation  
and  experiment  within  the  context  of  a  theory.  To  say  that  a  given  
scientific  theory  may  be  wrong  is  not  to  say  that  it  may  be  wrong  
in  its  every  particular,  or  that  any  other  theory  stands  an  equal  
chance  of  being  right.  What  are  the  chances  that  DNA  is  not  the  
basis  for  genetic  inheritance?  Well,  if  it  isn't,  Mother  Nature  sure  
has  a  lot  of  explaining  to  do.  She  must  explain  the  results  of  fifty  
years  of  experimentation,  which  have  demonstrated  reliable  corre-
lations   between  genotype   and  phenotype   (including  the   repro-
ducible   effects   of   specific   genetic   mutations).   Any   account   of   
inheritance  that  is  going  to  supersede  the  present  assumptions  of  
molecular  biology  will  have  to  account  for  the  ocean  of  data  that  
now  conforms  to  these  assumptions. What  are  the  chances  that  we  
will  one  day  discover  that  DNA  has  absolutely  nothing  to  do  with  
inheritance ?  They  are  effectively  zero.  
Proposition 3: Can we  rely on the authority of the pope?  Millions  
of Catholics  do,  of course.  He  is,  in  fact,  infallible  in matters  of faith 
and  morality.  Can  we  really  say  that  Catholics  are  wrong  to  believe  
that  the  pope  knows  whereof he  speaks?  We  surely  can.  
We  know  that  no  evidence  would  be  sufficient  to  authenticate  
many  of  the  pope's  core  beliefs.  How  could  anyone  born  in  the  
twentieth  century  come  to  know  that  Jesus  was  actually  born  of  a  
virgin?  What  process  of  ratiocination,  mystical  or  otherwise,  will  
deliver the  necessary  facts  about  a  Galilean woman's  sexual  history  
(facts  that  run  entirely  counter  to  well-known  facts  of human  biol-
ogy) ? There is  no such process.  Even  a time machine could not help 
us,  unless  we  were  willing  to  keep  watch  over  Mary  twenty-four  
hours  a day  for the months  surrounding the  probable time of Jesus' 
conception. 
Visionary  experiences,  in  and  of  themselves,  can  never  be  suffi-
cient  to  answer  questions  of historical  fact.  Let's  say  the  pope  had  a  
dream  about  Jesus,  and  Jesus  came  to  him  looking  fresh  from  Da  
Vinci's  brush. The  pope  would  not  even  be  in  a  position  to  say  that  

THE      NATURE      OF      BELIEF  77  
the  Jesus  of his  dream  looked  like  the  real  Jesus.  The  pope's  infalli-
bility,  no  matter  how  many  dreams  and  visions  he  may  have  had,  
does  not  even  extend to  making  a judgment  about whether  the  his-
torical  Jesus  wore  a  beard,  let  alone  whether  he  was  really  the  Son  
of God, born  of a virgin,  or able  to  raise the  dead. These  are just not 
the  kinds  of propositions  that  spiritual  experience  can  authenticate.  
Of  course,  we  could  imagine  a  scenario  in  which  we  would  give  
credence  to  the  pope's  visions,  or  to  our  own.  If Jesus  came  saying  
things  like  "The Vatican  Library  has  exactly thirty-seven thousand, 
two  hundred  and  twenty-six  books"  and  he  turned  out  to  be  right,  
we  would  then  begin  to  feel  that  we  were,  at the very  least,  in  dia-
logue  with  someone  who  had  something  to  say  about  the  way  the  
world   is.   Given   a   sufficient   number   of   verifiable   statements,   
plucked  from  the  ethers  of  papal  vision,  we  could  begin  speaking  
seriously  about  any  further  claims  Jesus  might  make.  The  point  is  
that  his  authority  would  be  derived  in  the  only  way  that  such  
authority  ever  is—by  making  claims  about  the  world  that  can  be  
corroborated  by  further  observation. As  far  as  proposition  3  is  con-
cerned,  it  is  quite  obvious  that  the  pope  has  nothing  to  go  on  but  
the  Bible  itself. This  document is  not  a  sufficient justification  for his 
beliefs,  given  the  standards  of evidence that prevailed at the time  of  
its  composition.  
WHAT  about  our much  championed  freedom  of religious  belief?  It  is  
no   different   from   our   freedoms   of   journalistic   and   biological   
belief—and  anyone  who  believes  that  the  media  are  perpetrating  a  
great  fire  conspiracy,  or  that  molecular  biology  is just  a  theory  that  
may  prove  totally  wrong,  has  merely  exercised  his  freedom  to  be  
thought  a  fool.  Religious  unreason  should  acquire  an  even  greater  
stigma  in  our  discourse,  given  that  it  remains  among  the  principal  
causes  of armed  conflict  in  our  world.  Before you  can  get  to  the  end  
of this  paragraph,  another  person  will  probably  die  because  of what 
someone  else  believes  about  God.  Perhaps  it  is  time  we  demanded  

78  THE      END      OF      FAITH      
that  our  fellow  human  beings  had  better  reasons  for  maintaining  
their  religious  differences,  if such  reasons  even  exist.  
We must  begin  speaking  freely about what  is  really  in  these holy 
books of ours, beyond the timid heterodoxies  of modernity—the gay 
and  lesbian  ministers,  the  Muslim  clerics  who  have  lost  their  taste  
for  public  amputations,  or  the  Sunday  churchgoers  who  have  never  
read their  Bibles quite through. A  close study of these  books,  and  of  
history, demonstrates that there is  no  act of cruelty so appalling that 
it  cannot  be justified,  or  even  mandated,  by  recourse  to  their  pages.  
It is  only by the  most  acrobatic  avoidance  of passages  whose  canon-
icity  has  never  been  in  doubt  that  we  can  escape  murdering  one  
another  outright  for  the  glory  of  God.  Bertrand  Russell  had  it  right  
when  he  made  the  following  observation:  
The  Spaniards  in  Mexico  and  Peru  used  to  baptize  Indian  infants  
and  then  immediately  dash  their  brains  out:  by  this  means  they  
secured these  infants went  to Heaven.  No orthodox  Christian  can  
find  any  logical  reason  for  condemning  their  action,  although  all  
nowadays   do   so.   In   countless  ways   the  doctrine   of  personal  
immortality  in  its  Christian  form  has  had  disastrous  effects  upon  
morals. . . .
35 
It  is  true  that  there  are  millions  of  people  whose  faith  moves  
them  to  perform extraordinary acts  of self-sacrifice  for the  benefit of 
others.  The  help  rendered  to  the  poor  by  Christian  missionaries  in  
the  developing  world  demonstrates  that  religious  ideas  can  lead  to  
actions  that  are  both  beautiful  and  necessary.  But  there  are  far  bet-
ter  reasons  for  self-sacrifice  than  those  that  religion  provides.  The  
fact that  faith  has motivated many people  to do good things  does  not  
suggest  that  faith  is  itself  a  necessary  (or  even  a  good)  motivation  
for  goodness.  It  can  be  quite  possible,  even  reasonable,  to  risk  one's  
life  to  save  others  without  believing  any  incredible  ideas  about  the  
nature  of the  universe.  
By  contrast,  the  most  monstrous  crimes  against  humanity  have  

THE      NATURE      OF      BELIEF  79  
invariably  been  inspired  by  unjustified  belief.  This  is  nearly  a  tru-
ism.  Genocidal  projects  tend  not  to  reflect  the  rationality  of  their  
perpetrators  simply  because  there  are  no  good reasons  to  kill  peace-
ful  people  indiscriminately.  Even where  such  crimes  have  been  sec-
ular, they  have required the======================================================== and simply read it with the eyes 
of  faith.  You  will  see  how little  compassion  need  be  wasted  on  those  
whom   God   himself  is   in   the   process   of  "mocking,"   "cursing,"   
"shaming,"  "punishing,"  "scourging,"  "judging," "burning," "anni-
hilating,"   "not   forgiving,"   and   "not   reprieving."   God,   who   is   
infinitely  wise,  has  cursed  the  infidels  with  their  doubts.  He  pro-
longs  their  life and prosperity  so that they may continue heaping sin 
upon  sin  and  all  the  more  richly  deserve  the  torments  that  await  
them  beyond  the   grave.   In  this  light,  the   people  who   died  on  
September  11  were  nothing  more  than  fuel  for  the  eternal  fires  of  
God's  justice.  To  convey  the  relentlessness  with  which  unbelievers  
are  vilified  in  the  text  of the  Koran,  I  provide  a  long  compilation  of  
quotations  below,  in  order  of  their  appearance  in  the  text.  This  is  
what the  Creator  of the  universe  apparently  has  on  his  mind  (when  
he  is  not  fussing with  gravitational  constants  and  atomic weights): 
"It  is  the  same  whether  or  not  you  forwarn  them  [the  unbeliev-

118            THE    END     OF    FAITH    
ers],  they  will  have  no  faith"  (2:6).  "God  will  mock  them  and  keep  
them  long  in  sin,  blundering  blindly  along"  (2:15).  A  fire  "whose  
fuel  is  men  and  stones"  awaits  them  (2:24). They  will  be  "rewarded  
with  disgrace  in  this  world  and  with  grievous  punishment  on  the  
Day  of  Resurrection"  (2:85).  "God's  curse  be  upon  the  infidels!"  
(2:89).  "They  have  incurred  God's  most  inexorable wrath. An  igno-
minious  punishment  awaits  [them]"  (2:90).  "God  is  the  enemy  of  
the  unbelievers"  (2:98).  "The  unbelievers  among  the  People  of  the  
Book  [Christians  and  Jews],  and the  pagans,  resent  that any blessing 
should  have been  sent  down  to you  from  your  Lord"  (2:105). "They 
shall  be  held  up  to  shame  in  this  world  and  sternly  punished  in  the  
hereafter"  (2:114). "Those  to whom We  [God]  have  given  the  Book,  
and who  read  it  as  it  ought  to  be  read,  truly  believe  in  it;  those  that  
deny  it  shall  assuredly  be  lost"  (2:122).  "[We]  shall  let  them  live  
awhile, and then shall drag them to the scourge of the  Fire.  Evil shall 
be  their  fate"  (2:126).  "The  East  and  the West  are  God's.  He  guides  
whom  He  will  to  a  straight  path"  (2:142).  "Do  not  say  that  those  
slain  in  the  cause  of  God  are  dead.  They  are  alive,  but  you  are  not  
aware  of them"  (2:154).  "But  the  infidels  who  die  unbelievers  shall  
incur  the  curse  of  God,  the  angels,  and  all  men.  Under  it  they  shall  
remain   for   ever;   their  punishment   shall   not   be   lightened,   nor   
shall they be  reprieved"  (2:162).  "They  shall  sigh with  remorse, but 
shall  never  come  out  of the  Fire"  (2:168).  "The  unbelievers  are  like  
beasts  which,  call  out  to  them  as  one  may,  can  hear  nothing  but  a  
shout  and  a  cry.  Deaf,  dumb,  and  blind,  they  understand  nothing"  
(2:172). "Theirs  shall be a woeful punishment"  (2:175). "How stead-
fastly they  seek the  Fire!  That is because  God  has  revealed the  Book  
with  truth;  those  that  disagree  about  it  are  in  extreme  schism"  
(2:176).  "Slay  them  wherever you  find  them.  Drive  them  out  of the 
places  from  which  they  drove  you.  Idolatry  is  worse  than  carnage.  
...  [I]f they  attack you  put  them  to  the  sword. Thus  shall  the  unbe-
lievers  be  rewarded:  but  if  they  desist,  God  is  forgiving  and  merci-
ful.  Fight  against  them  until  idolatry  is  no  more  and  God's  religion  
reigns   supreme.   But  if  they  desist,   fight   none   except   the   evil-

THE       PROBLEM      WITH       ISLAM  119  
doers"(21190-93).  "Fighting is  obligatory  for you,  much  as you  dis-
like  it.  But  you  may  hate  a  thing  although  it  is  good  for  you,  and  
love  a  thing  although  it  is  bad  for  you.  God  knows,  but  you  know  
not"  (2:216).  "They  will  not  cease  to  fight  against  you  until  they  
force  you  to  renounce your  faith—if they  are  able.  But  whoever  of  
you  recants  and  dies an  unbeliever, his works  shall  come to nothing 
in  this  world  and  in  the  world  to  come.  Such  men  shall  be  the  ten-
ants  of  Hell,  wherein  they  shall  abide   forever.  Those  that  have  
embraced  the  Faith,  and  those  that  have  fled  their  land  and  fought  
for  the  cause  of  God,  may  hope  for  God's  mercy"  (2:217-18).  "God  
does  not  guide  the  evil-doers"  (2:258).  "God  does  not  guide  the  
unbelievers"  (2:264). "The  evil-doers  shall have none to help them" 
(2:270).  "God  gives  guidance  to whom  He will"  (2:272).  
"Those  that  deny  God's  revelations  shall  be  sternly  punished;  
God  is  mighty  and  capable  of revenge"  (3:5).  "As  for  the  unbeliev-
ers, neither their riches nor their  children will in the  least  save them 
from  God's judgment.  They  shall  become  fuel  for  the  Fire"  (3:10).  
"Say  to  the  unbelievers:  'You  shall  be  overthrown  and  driven  into  
Hell—an  evil  resting  place!'"  (3:12).  "The  only  true  faith  in  God's  
sight is Islam....  He that denies God's  revelations  should know that 
swift is  God's  reckoning"  (3:19).  "Let the believers not make  friends  
with  infidels  in  preference  to  the  faithful—he  that  does  this  has  
nothing   to   hope   for   from   God—except   in   self-defense"   (3:28).   
"Believers, do not make  friends with any but your own people. They 
will  spare  no  pains  to  corrupt  you.  They  desire  nothing  but  your  
ruin.  Their   hatred   is   evident   from   what   they  utter  with   their   
mouths,  but   greater  is  the  hatred  which   their  breasts   conceal"   
(3:118).  "If you  have  suffered  a  defeat,  so  did  the  enemy. We  alter-
nate  these  vicissitudes  among  mankind  so  that  God  may  know  the  
true  believers  and  choose  martyrs  from  among  you  (God  does  not  
love  the  evil-doers);  and  that  God  may  test  the  faithful  and  annihi-
late the  infidels"  (3:140).  "Believers, if you yield to the  infidels they 
will drag you  back to unbelief and you will return headlong to perdi-
tion....We  will put terror into the hearts of the unbelievers.... The 

120            THE     END     OF     FAITH     
Fire  shall  be  their  home"  (3:149-51).  "Believers,  do  not  follow  the  
example  of  the  infidels,  who  say  of  their  brothers  when  they  meet  
death  abroad  or  in  battle:  'Had  they  stayed  with  us  they  would  not  
have  died,  nor would they  have been  killed.'  God  will  cause  them  to  
regret  their  words. ...  If you  should  die  or  be  slain  in  the  cause  of  
God,  God's  forgiveness  and  His  mercy  would  surely  be  better  than  
all the riches they amass"  (3:156). "Never think that those who were 
slain  in  the  cause  of God are  dead. They  are  alive,  and well  provided  
for by their  Lord;  pleased with His  gifts  and  rejoicing that those they 
left  behind,  who  have  not  yet joined  them,  have  nothing  to  fear  or  
to  regret;  rejoicing in  God's  grace  and bounty.  God will not deny the 
faithful  their  reward"  (3:169).  "Let  not  the  unbelievers  think  that  
We  prolong  their  days  for  their  own  good.  We  give  them  respite  
only  so  that  they  may  commit  more  grievous  sins.  Shameful  pun-
ishment  awaits  them"  (3:178).  "Those  that  suffered  persecution  for  
My  sake  and  fought  and  were  slain:  I  shall  forgive  them  their  sins  
and admit them  to gardens watered by running streams, as  a  reward  
from  God;  God  holds  the  richest  recompense.  Do  not  be  deceived by 
the  fortunes  of the  unbelievers  in  the  land. Their prosperity  is  brief.  
Hell  shall  be  their home,  a dismal  resting  place"  (3:195-96).  
"God has cursed them  in their unbelief"  (4:46).  "God will not  for-
give  those  who  serve  other  gods  besides  Him;  but  He  will  forgive  
whom  He  will  for other  sins.  He that  serves  other  gods  besides  God  
is  guilty  of a  heinous  sin.  .  .  .  Consider those  to whom  a  portion  of  
the  Scriptures  was  given.  They  believe  in  idols  and  false  gods  and  
say  of  the  infidels:  'These  are  better  guided  than  the  believers'"  
(4:50-51).  "Those that deny Our  revelation We  will burn  in  fire.  No  
sooner  will  their  skins  be  consumed  than We  shall  give  them  other  
skins,  so  that  they  may  truly  taste  the  scourge.  God  is  mighty  and  
wise"  (4:55-56).  
"Believers,  do  not  seek  the  friendship  of  the  infidels  and  those  
who  were  given  the  Book  before  you,  who  have  made  of your  reli-
gion  a  jest  and  a  pastime"  (5:57).  "That  which  is  revealed  to  you  
from  your  Lord  will  surely  increase  the  wickedness  and  unbelief  of  

THE     PROBLEM     WITH     ISLAM               121               
many   among  them.  We   have   stirred   among  them   enmity   and   
hatred, which  will  endure  till  the  Day  of Resurrection"  (5:65).  "God  
does  not  guide  the  unbelievers"  (5:67).  "That  which  is  revealed  to  
you  from  your  Lord  will  surely  increase  the  wickedness  and  unbe-
lief  of  many  among  them.  But  do  not  grieve  for  the  unbelievers"  
(5:69).  "You  see  many  among  them  making  friends  with  unbeliev-
ers.   Evil  is  that  to  which  their   souls  prompt  them.  They  have  
incurred  the wrath  of God  and  shall endure eternal torment....  You  
will  find  that  the  most  implacable  of  men  in  their  enmity  to  the  
faithful  are the  Jews and the