======================================================== first-year students who were randomized into introductory course
sections in management, economics, or law, and then the courses that
followed them in a prescribed sequence over four years. It showed precisely
the same pattern. Teachers who guided students to overachievement in their
own course were rated highly, and undermined student performance in the
long run.
Psychologist Robert Bjork first used the phrase “desirable difficulties” in
1994. Twenty years later, he and a coauthor concluded a book chapter on
applying the science of learning like this: “Above all, the most basic
message is that teachers and students must avoid interpreting current
performance as learning. Good performance on a test during the learning

process can indicate mastery, but learners and teachers need to be aware
that such performance will often index, instead, fast but fleeting progress.”
Here is the bright side: over the past forty years, Americans have
increasingly said in national surveys that current students are getting a
worse education than they themselves did, and they have been wrong.
Scores from the National Assessment of Educational Progress, “the nation’s
report card,” have risen steadily since the 1970s. Unquestionably, students
today have mastery of basic skills that is superior to students of the past.
School has not gotten worse. The goals of education have just become
loftier.
Education economist Greg Duncan, one of the most influential education
professors in the world, has documented this trend. Focusing on “using
procedures” problems worked well forty years ago when the world was
flush with jobs that paid middle-class salaries for procedural tasks, like
typing, filing, and working on an assembly line. “Increasingly,” according
to Duncan, “jobs that pay well require employees to be able to solve
unexpected problems, often while working in groups. . . . These shifts in
labor force demands have in turn put new and increasingly stringent
demands on schools.”
Here is a math question from the early 1980s basic skills test of all public
school sixth graders in Massachusetts:
Carol can ride her bike 10 miles per hour. If Carol rides her bike to the store, how long will it
take?
To solve this problem, you would need to know:
A) How far it is to the store.
B) What kind of bike Carol has.
C) What time Carol will leave.
D) How much Carol has to spend.
And here is a question Massachusetts sixth graders got in 2011:
Paige, Rosie, and Cheryl each spent exactly $9.00 at the same snack bar.
• Paige bought 3 bags of peanuts.
• Rosie bought 2 bags of peanuts and 2 pretzels.
• Cheryl bought 1 bag of peanuts, 1 pretzel, and 1 milk shake.

A. What is the cost, in dollars, of 1 bag of peanuts? Show or explain how you got your
answer.
B. What is the cost, in dollars, of 1 pretzel? Show or explain how you got your answer .
C. What is the total number of pretzels that can be bought for the cost of 1 milk shake?
Show or explain how you got your answer.
For every problem like the first one, the simple formula “distance = rate
× time” could be memorized and applied. The second problem requires the
connection of multiple concepts that are then applied to a new situation.
The teaching strategies that current teachers experienced when they were
students are no longer good enough. Knowledge increasingly needs not
merely to be durable, but also flexible—both sticky and capable of broad
application.
Toward the end of the eighth-grade math class that I watched with
Lindsey Richland, the students settled into a worksheet for what
psychologists call “blocked” practice. That is, practicing the same thing
repeatedly, each problem employing the same procedure. It leads to
excellent immediate performance, but for knowledge to be flexible, it
should be learned under varied conditions, an approach called varied or
mixed practice, or, to researchers, “interleaving.”
Interleaving has been shown to improve inductive reasoning. When
presented with different examples mixed together, students learn to create
abstract generalizations that allow them to apply what they learned to
material they have never encountered before. For example, say you plan to
visit a museum and want to be able to identify the artist (Cézanne, Picasso,
or Renoir) of paintings there that you have never seen. Before you go,
instead of studying a stack of Cézanne flash cards, and then a stack of
Picasso flash cards, and then a stack of Renoir, you should put the cards
together and shuffle, so they will be interleaved. You will struggle more
(and probably feel less confident) during practice, but be better equipped on
museum day to discern each painter’s style, even for paintings that weren’t
in the flash cards.
In a study using college math problems, students who learned in blocks
—all examples of a particular type of problem at once—performed a lot
worse come test time than students who studied the exact same problems
but all mixed up. The blocked-practice students learned procedures for each
type of problem through repetition. The mixed-practice students learned
how to differentiate types of problems.

The same effect has appeared among learners studying everything from
butterfly species identification to psychological-disorder diagnosis. In
research on naval air defense simulations, individuals who engaged in
highly mixed practice performed worse than blocked practicers during
training, when they had to respond to potential threat scenarios that became
familiar over the course of the training. At test time, everyone faced
completely new scenarios, and the mixed-practice group destroyed the
blocked-practice group.
And yet interleaving tends to fool learners about their own progress. In
one of Kornell and Bjork’s interleaving studies, 80 percent of students were
sure they had learned better with blocked than mixed practice, whereas 80
percent performed in a manner that proved the opposite. The feeling of
learning, it turns out, is based on before-your-eyes progress, while deep
learning is not. “When your intuition says block,” Kornell told me, “you
should probably interleave.”
Interleaving is a desirable difficulty that frequently holds for both
physical and mental skills. A simple motor-skill example is an experiment
in which piano students were asked to learn to execute, in one-fifth of a
second, a particular left-hand jump across fifteen keys. They were allowed
190 practice attempts. Some used all of those practicing the fifteen-key
jump, while others switched between eight-, twelve-,fifteen-, and twenty-
two-key jumps. When the piano students were invited back for a test, those
who underwent the mixed practice were faster and more accurate at the
fifteen-key jump than the students who had only practiced that exact jump.
The “desirable difficulty” coiner himself, Robert Bjork, once commented
on Shaquille O’Neal’s perpetual free-throw woes to say that instead of
continuing to practice from the free-throw line, O’Neal should practice
from a foot in front of and behind it to learn the motor modulation he
needed.
Whether the task is mental or physical, interleaving improves the ability
to match the right strategy to a problem. That happens to be a hallmark of
expert problem solving. Whether chemists, physicists, or political scientists,
the most successful problem solvers spend mental energy figuring out what
type of problem they are facing before matching a strategy to it, rather than
jumping in with memorized procedures. In that way, they are just about the
precise opposite of experts who develop in kind learning environments, like
chess masters, who rely heavily on intuition. Kind learning environment

experts choose a strategy and then evaluate; experts in less repetitive
environments evaluate and then choose.
Desirable difficulties like testing and spacing make knowledge stick. It
becomes durable. Desirable difficulties like making connections and
interleaving make knowledge flexible, useful for problems that never
appeared in training. All slow down learning and make performance suffer,
in the short term. That can be a problem, because like the Air Force cadets,
we all reflexively assess our progress by how we are doing right now . And
like the Air Force cadets, we are often wrong.
In 2017, Greg Duncan, the education economist, along with psychologist
Drew Bailey and colleagues, reviewed sixty-seven early childhood
education programs meant to boost academic achievement. Programs like
Head Start did give a head start, but academically that was about it. The
researchers found a pervasive “fadeout” effect, where a temporary academic
advantage quickly diminished and often completely vanished. On a graph, it
looks eerily like the kind that show future elite athletes catching up to their
peers who got a head start in deliberate practice.
A reason for this, the researchers concluded, is that early childhood
education programs teach “closed” skills that can be acquired quickly with
repetition of procedures, but that everyone will pick up at some point
anyway. The fadeout was not a disappearance of skill so much as the rest of
the world catching up. The motor-skill equivalent would be teaching a kid
to walk a little early. Everyone is going to learn it anyway, and while it
might be temporarily impressive, there is no evidence that rushing it
matters.
The research team recommended that if programs want to impart lasting
academic benefits they should focus instead on “open” skills that scaffold
later knowledge. Teaching kids to read a little early is not a lasting
advantage. Teaching them how to hunt for and connect contextual clues to
understand what they read can be. As with all desirable difficulties, the
trouble is that a head start comes fast, but deep learning is slow. “The
slowest growth,” the researchers wrote, occurs “for the most complex
skills.”
Duncan landed on the Today show discussing his team’s findings. The
counteropinion was supplied by parents and an early childhood teacher======================================================== History of Nintendo, vol. 2,
1980–1991 ( Triel-sur-Seine: Pix’N Love, 2012); E. Voskuil, Before Mario: The Fantastic Toys from
the Video Game Giant’s Early Days (Châtillon: Omaké Books, 2014); J. Parish, Game Boy World
1989 (Norfolk, VA: CreateSpace, 2016); D. Sheff, Game Over: How Nintendo Conquered the World
(New York: Vintage, 2011).
“I didn’t want to leave Kyoto”: For source note on Yokoi’s quotes, see footnote on p. 192 .
“snow melts in sunlight”: Gorges with Yamazaki, The History of Nintendo, vol. 2 , 1980–1991.
“lateral thinking”: E. de Bono, Lateral Thinking: Creativity Step by Step (New York: HarperCollins,
2010).
delicately embossed the screen: Yokoi’s often simple patents are a treasure trove of invention
history. This patent (U.S. no. 4398804) and others can be found using Google Patents.
118.7 million units: B. Edwards, “Happy 20th b-day, Game Boy,” Ars Technica, April 21, 2009.
“It was difficult”; “ ‘snowman ’ ”; “grim expression”: shmuplations.com (translation), “Console
Gaming Then and Now: A Fascinating 1997 Interview with Nintendo’s Legendary Gunpei Yokoi,”
techspot.com , July 10, 2015.
the “candle problem”: For an excellent description, see D. Pink, Drive (New York: Riverhead,
2011).
“Electronics was not Yokoi’s strong point”: Satoru Okada’s foreword in Before Mario .
“design and interface”: IGN staff, “Okada on the Game Boy Advance,” IGN.com , Sep. 13, 2000.
“If I can speak”: M. Kodama, Knowledge Integration Dynamics (Singapore: World Scientific): 211.
“simply innovated in a different way”: C. Christensen and S. C. Anthony, “What Should Sony Do
Next?,” Forbes, August 1, 2007, online ed.
focused frogs and visionary birds: F. Dyson, “Bird and Frogs,” Notices of the American
Mathematical Society 56, no. 2 (2009): 212–23. (Dyson may be a math frog, but he is also an
excellent writer.)
multilayer optical film: M. F. Weber et al., “Giant Birefringent Optics in Multilayer Polymer
Mirrors,” Science 287 (2000): 2451–56; and R. F. Service, “Mirror Film Is the Fairest of Them All,”
Science 287 (2000): 2387–89.
blue morpho: R. Ahmed et al., “Morpho Butterfly-Inspired Optical Diffraction, Diffusion, and Bio-
chemical Sensing,” RSC Advances 8 (2018): 27111–18.
“It’s in front of you literally every day”: Ouderkirk’s talk at TEDxHHL, October 14, 2016.

set out to study inventors at 3M: W. F. Boh, R. Evaristo, and A. Ouderkirk, “Balancing Breadth and
Depth of Expertise for Innovation: A 3M Story,” Research Policy 43 (2013): 349–66.
“nobody ever told me”: Ouderkirk’s talk at TEDxHHL, October 14, 2016.
the state of Iowa alone: G. D. Glenn and R. L. Poole, The Opera Houses of Iowa (Ames: Iowa State
University Press, 1993). For a broader discussion of this phenomenon, see R. H. Frank, Luxury Fever
(New York: The Free Press, 1999), ch. 3.
relationship between R& D spending and performance: B. Jaruzelski et al., “Proven Paths to
Innovation Success,” Strategy+ Business, winter 2014, issue 77 preprint.
They analyzed fifteen years of tech patents: E. Melero and N. Palomeras, “The Renaissance Man
Is Not Dead! The Role of Generalists in Teams of Inventors,” Research Policy 44 (2015): 154–67.
comic books: A. Taylor and H. R. Greve, “Superman or the Fantastic Four? Knowledge Combination
and Experience in Innovative Teams,” Academy of Management Journal 49, no. 4 (2006): 723–40.
Wertham manipulated: C. L. Tilley, “Seducing the Innocent: Fredric Wertham and the
Falsifications That Helped Condemn Comics,” Information and Culture 47, no. 4 (2012): 383-413.
specialized surgeons get better outcomes: M. Maruthappu et al., “The Influence of Volume and
Experience on Individual Surgical Performance: A Systematic Review,” Annals of Surgery 261, no. 4
(2015): 642–47; N. R. Sahni et al., “Surgeon Specialization and Operative Mortality in the United
States: Retrospective Analysis,” BMJ 354 (2016): i3571; A. Kurmann et al., “Impact of Team
Familiarity in the Operating Room on Surgical Complications,” World Journal of Surgery 38, no. 12
(2014): 3047–52; M. Maruthappu, “The Impact of Team Familiarity and Surgical Experience on
Operative Efficiency,” Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 109, no. 4 (2016): 147–53.
analyzed its database of major flight accidents: “A Review of Flightcrew-Involved Major
Accidents of U.S. Air Carriers, 1978 Through 1990,” National Transportation Safety Board, Safety
Study NTSB/ SS-94/ 01, 1994.
University of Utah professor Abbie Griffin: A. Griffin, R. L. Price, and B. Vojak, Serial
Innovators: How Individuals Create and Deliver Breakthrough Innovations in Mature Firms
(Stanford, CA: Stanford Business Books, 2012 [Kindle ebook]).
“could be considered a professional outsider”: D. K. Simonton, Origins of Genius (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1999).
“unwilling to spend more time on the subject”; Howard Gruber: H. E. Gruber, Darwin on Man:
A Psychological Study of Scientific Creativity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981).
at least 231 scientific pen pals; experiments with seeds: T. Veak, “Exploring Darwin’s
Correspondence,” Archives of Natural History 30, no. 1 (2003): 118–38.
“bewildering miscellany”: H. E. Gruber, “The Evolving Systems Approach to Creative Work,”
Creativity Research Journal 1, no.1 (1988): 27–51.
“a lot of apps open in my brain”: R. Mead, “All About the Hamiltons,” The New Yorker , February.
9, 2015.
CHAPTER 10:FOOLED BY EXPERTISE
The bet was on: Yale history professor Paul Sabin’s book The Bet (New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 2013) gives fascinating background and analysis. A shorter sample of that analysis is C. R.
Sunstein, “The Battle of Two Hedgehogs,” New York Review of Books, December 5, 2013.
“population growth curve”: P. Ehrlich, Eco-Catastrophe! (San Francisco: City Lights Books,
1969).

“green revolution”: G. S. Morson and M. Schapiro, Cents and Sensibility (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2017 [Kindle ebook]).
the food supply per person increased: This and other statistics in the paragraph (share of
undernourished citizens; death rate from famine; birth rates; population growth trajectory) come from
the incredible online publication Our World in Data, founded by University of Oxford economist
Max Roser. The supply of calories per person per day, for example, can be found here:
https://slides.our world-indata.org/hunger-and-food-provision/#/kcalcapitaday-by-world-regions-
mg.png .
United Nations projects: United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population
Division, “World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision, Key Findings and Advance Tables,”
Working Paper No. ESA/ P/ WP/ 248.
“now the population bomb has detonated”: P. R. Ehrlich and A. H. Ehrlich, The Population
Explosion (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1990).
When economists later examined: K. Kiel et al., “Luck or Skill? An Examination of the Ehrlich-
Simon Bet,” Ecological Economics 69, no. 7 (2010): 1365–67.
Tetlock decided to put: Tetlock gives the results of his work in great (and witty) detail in Expert
Political Judgment: How Good Is It? How Can We Know? (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2005).
“curiously inverse relationship”: Tetlock, Expert Political Judgment .
Superforecasters’ online interactions: P. E. Tetlock et al., “Bringing Probability Judgments into
Policy Debates via Forecasting Tournaments,” Science 355 (2017): 481–83.
“ Forecasts of dollar-euro exchange rates”: G. Gigerenzer, Risk Savvy (New York: Penguin, 2014).
“active open-mindedness”; “myside” ideas: J. Baron et al., “Reflective Thought and Actively
Open-Minded Thinking,” in Individual Differences in Judgment and Decision Making, ed. M. E.
Toplak and J. A. Weller (New York: Routledge, 2017 [Kindle ebook]).
never mind seriously entertain them: J. A. Frimer et al., “Liberals and Conservatives Are Similarly
Motivated to Avoid Exposure to One Another’s Opinions,” Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 72 (2017): 1–12.
study during the run-up to the Brexit vote: Online Privacy Foundation, “Irrational Thinking and
the EU Referendum Result” (2016).
skin cream and gun control: D. Kahan et al., “Motivated Numeracy and Enlightened Self-
Government,” Behavioural Public Policy 1, no. 1 (2017): 54–86.
Not science knowledge, science curiosity : D. M. Kahan et al., “Science Curiosity and Political
Information Processing,” Advances in Political Psychology 38, no. 51 (2017): 179–99.
“Depth can be inadequate”: Baron et al., “Reflective Thought and Actively Open-Minded
Thinking.”
first four models: H. E. Gruber, Darwin on Man: A Psychological Study of Scientific Creativity ,
127.
“views therein advocated”: The Autobiography of Charles Darwin .
“In one of the most remarkable interchanges”: J. Browne, Charles Darwin: A Biography, vol. 1,
Voyaging (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1995), 186.
Einstein was a hedgehog: For one of many references to Einstein’s hedgehoginess, see Morson and
Schapiro, Cents and Sensibility .
“A consensus seems to exist”: G. Mackie, “Einstein’s Folly,” The Conversation, November 29,
2015.

Niels Bohr . . . replied: C. P. Snow, The Physicists , (London: Little, Brown and Co., 1981). Einstein
also expresses this idea in: H. Dukas and B. Hoffmann eds., Albert Einstein, The Human Side:
Glimpses from His Archive s (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1979), 68.
In four straight years: W. Chang et al., “Developing Expert Political Judgment: The Impact of
Training and Practice on Judgmental Accuracy in Geopolitical Forecasting Tournaments,” Judgment
and Decision Making 11, no. 5 (2016): 509–26.
CHAPTER 11: LEARNING TO DROP YOUR FAMILIAR TOOLS
It was early afternoon in fall: Professor Max Bazerman kindly allowed me to observe the Carter
Racing case study at the Harvard Business School over the course of two days in October 2016. (The
case study was created in 1986 by Jack W. Brittain and Sim B. Sitkin.)
“professional weakness shared by all”: F. Lighthall, “Launching the Space Shuttle Challenger:
Disciplinary Deficiencies in the Analysis of Engineering Data,” IEEE Transactions on======================================================== Engineering
Management 38, no. 1 (1991): 63–74. Boisjoly’s “away from goodness” quote is from transcripts of
the Feb 25, 1986 hearing of the presidential commission.
Boisjoly had personally inspected: R. P. Boisjoly et al. “Roger Boisjoly and the Challenger
Disaster,” Journal of Business Ethics 8, no. 4 (1989): 217–230. Boisjoly’s “away from goodness”
quote is from transcripts of the Feb 25, 1986 hearing of the presidential commision.
most complex machine ever built: J. M. Logsdon, “Was the Space Shuttle a Mistake?,” MIT
Technology Review, July 6, 2011.
McDonald and two Thiokol VPs: Transcripts of presidential commission hearings, which provided
information and quotes in this chapter are available at
https://history.nasa.gov/rogersrep/genindex.htm . Allan McDonald also gives a fascinating account of
the investigation and the return of the shuttle to flight in Truth, Lies, and O-Rings (Gainesville:
University Press of Florida, 2009).
“They said because they had flown”: From Diane Vaughan’s book, which includes a fascinating
exploration of “the normalization of deviance” in decision making: The Challenger Launch Decision:
Risky Technology, Culture, and Deviance at NASA (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996).
“In God We Trust, All Others Bring Data”: A number of background interviews with current and
former NASA managers and engineers—especially during a visit to NASA’s Johnson Space Center in
2017—provided helpful context. NASA’s own APPEL Knowledge Services portal was extremely
helpful. It is an incredible repository of information that links to NASA’s voluminous “Lessons
Learned System.” 245 Karl Weick noticed something unusual: K. E. Weick, “The Collapse of
Sensemaking in Organizations: The Mann Gulch Disaster,” Administrative Science Quarterly 38, no.
4 (1993): 628–52.; K. E. Weick, “Drop Your Tools: An Allegory for Organizational Studies,”
Administrative Science Quarterly 41, no. 2 (1996): 301–13; K. E. Weick, “Drop Your Tools: On
Reconfiguring Management Education,” Journal of Management Education 31, no. 1 (2007): 5–16.
eleven feet per second : R. C. Rothermel, “Mann Gulch Fire: A Race That Couldn’t Be Won,”
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, General Technical
Report INT-299, May 1993.
wildland firefighters continued to lose races with fires: K. E. Weick, “Tool Retention and
Fatalities in Wildland Fire Settings,” in Linking Expertise and Naturalistic Decision Making, ed. E.
Salas and G. A. Klein (New York: Psychology Press, 2001 [Kindle ebook]).
“like a jet during take off”: USDA, USDI, and USDC, South Canyon Fire Investigation (Report of
the South Canyon Fire Accident Investigation Team), U.S. Government Printing Office, Region 8,
Report 573-183, 1994.

“still wearing his backpack”; “then I realized I still had my saw”; twenty-three . . . perished
beside them: Weick, “Tool Retention and Fatalities in Wildland Fire Settings.”
grabbed it again in the air; “proxy for unlearning”; “regress to what they know best”;
“existential crisis”: Weick, “Drop Your Tools: An Allegory for Organizational Studies.”
“a common pattern”: J. Orasanu and L. Martin, “Errors in Aviation Decision Making,” Proceedings
of the HESSD ’98 (Workshop on Human Error, Safety and System Development) (1998): 100–107; J.
Orasanu et al., “Errors in Aviation Decision Making,” Fourth Conference on Naturalistic Decision
Making, 1998.
“If I make a decision”: Weick, “Tool Retention and Fatalities in Wildland Fire Settings.”
“Between the lines, it suggested”: M. Kohut, “Interview with Bryan O’Connor,” NASA’s ASK
(Academy Sharing Knowledge ) magazine, issue 45 (January 2012).
“you have to use reason”: transcript, Hearings of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle
Challenger Accident Vol. 4, February 25, 1986.
“must have been really hard”: Several members of the 48th Rescue Squadron provided invaluable
background and corroboration.
“live in the real world”: C. Grupen, Introduction to Radiation Protection (Berlin: Springer, 2010),
90. Shafer’s entire original message is preserved at https:// yarchive.net/ air/ perfect_ safety.html .
But in the first study: K. S. Cameron and S. J. Freeman, “Cultural Congruence, Strength, and Type:
Relationships to Effectiveness,” Research in Organizational Change and Development 5 (1991): 23–
58.
effective leaders and organizations had range: K. S. Cameron and R. E. Quinn, Diagnosing and
Changing Organizational Culture , 3rd Edition (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2011).
In one experiment: S. V. Patil et al., “Accountability Systems and Group Norms: Balancing the
Risks of Mindless Conformity and Reckless Deviation,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 30
(2017): 282–303.
Gene Kranz: G. Kranz, Failure Is Not an Option (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2000). See also: M.
Dunn, “Remaking NASA one step at a time,” Associated Press, October 12, 2003.
“Monday Notes”; William Lucas . . . “often grew angry”: S. J. Dick, ed., NASA’s First 50 Years
(Washington, DC: NASA, 2011 [ebook]). Also, von Braun’s weekly notes are archived at
https://history.msfc.nasa.gov/vonbraun/ vb_ weekly_ notes.html .
“the quality of the notes fell”: R. Launius, “Comments on a Very Effective Communications
System: Marshall Space Flight Center’s Monday Notes,” Roger Launius’s Blog, February 28, 2011.
“proper channels”; “stringent and inhibiting”: Columbia Accident Investigation Board, “History
as Cause: Columbia and Challenger ,” in Columbia Accident Investigation Board Report, vol. 1,
August 2003.
Gravity Probe B: Stanford University maintains an archive with copious information (both technical
and written for the public) on GP-B, at einstein.stanford.edu . For a scientific deep dive, a special
issue of the journal Classical and Quantum Gravity was devoted to GP-B (vol. 32, no. 22 [November
2015]).
technology took twenty years: T. Reichhardt, “Unstoppable Force,” Nature 426 (2003): 380–81.
“was confident that we could succeed”: NASA Case Study, “The Gravity Probe B Launch
Decisions,” NASA, Academy of Program/ Project and Engineering Leadership.
“a healthy tension in the system”: Geveden also discusses healthy tension in R. Wright et al., eds.,
NASA at 50: Interviews with NASA’s Senior Leadership (Washington, DC: NASA, 2012).

first direct test: J. Overduin, “The Experimental Verdict on Spacetime from Gravity Probe B,” in
Vesselin Petkov, ed., Space, Time, and Spacetime (Berlin: Springer, 2010).
Himalayan mountain climbers: E.M. Anicich et al., “Hierarchical Cultural Values Predict Success
and Mortality in High-Stakes Teams,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 112, no. 5 (2015): 1338–43.
“oculostenotic reflex”: Eric Topol is the cardiologist who coined that term. (For a patient who is
actually having a heart attack, a stent can be lifesaving.)
one in fifty patients: K. Stergiopoulos and D. L. Brown, “Initial Coronary Stent Implantation With
Medical Therapy vs Medical Therapy Alone for Stable Coronary Artery Disease: Meta-analysis of
Randomized Controlled Trials,” Archives of Internal Medicine 172, no. 4 (2012): 312–19.
cannot believe that stenting: G. A. Lin et al., “Cardiologists’ Use of Percutaneous Coronary
Interventions for Stable Coronary Artery Disease,” Archives of Internal Medicine 167, no. 15 (2007):
1604–09.
were less likely to die: A. B. Jena et al., “Mortality and Treatment Patterns among Patients
Hospitalized with Acute Cardiovascular Conditions during Dates of National Cardiology Meetings,”
JAMA Internal Medicine 175, no. 2 (2015): 44. See also: A. B. Jena et al., “Acute Myocardial
Infarction during Dates of National Interventional Cardiology Meetings,” Journal of the American
Heart Association 7, no. 6 (2018): e008230.
“At large cardiology conventions”: R. F. Redberg, “Cardiac Patient Outcomes during National
Cardiology Meetings,” JAMA Internal Medicine 175, no. 2 (2015): 245.
compared the surgery with “sham surgery”: R. Sihvonen et al., “Arthroscopic Partial
Meniscectomy Versus Sham Surgery for a Degenerative Meniscal Tear,” New England Journal of
Medicine 369 (2013): 2515–24. Hyperlinks to several other studies with supporting findings can be
found in: D. Epstein, “When Evidence Says No, But Doctors Say Yes,” ProPublica, February 22,
2017.
CHAPTER 12: DELIBERATE AMATEURS
“Very promising!”: Smithies discussed some of his work and notebook pages in his publicly
available Nobel Lecture, “Turning Pages” (December 7, 2007). The University of North Carolina
maintains an extraordinary online archive of digitized versions of more than sixty years of Smithies’s
notebooks, along with audio recordings of Smithies himself going through them and providing
commentary. (Smithies told me that one should always have a notebook, even on Saturday.) The
archive was a wonderful resource for interview preparation, and can be found at
smithies.lib.unc.edu/notebooks .
A 2016 analysis of ten thousand researchers’ careers: A. Clauset et al., “ Data-Driven Predictions
in the Science of Science,” Science 355 (2017): 477–80.
had reportedly tested 240,000 compounds: P. McKenna, “Nobel Prize Goes to Modest Woman
Who Beat Malaria for China,” New Scientist, November 9, 2011, online ed.
a fourth-century Chinese alchemist: Alchemist and herbalist Ge Hong wrote A Handbook of
Prescriptions for Emergencies in the fourth century, during the Jin dynasty. Tu gives background in
her Nobel Lecture: “ Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World”
(December 7, 2015). She shares a photo of a sixteenth-century copy of the handbook in: Y. Tu, “The
Discovery of Artemisinin (Qinghaosu) and Gifts from Chinese Medicine,” Nature Medicine 17, no.
10 (2011): 1217–20.
A study on the decline of malaria: Bhatt et al., “The Effect of Malaria Control on Plasmodium
falciparum in Africa Between 2000 and 2015,” Nature 526 (2015): 207–11.

the label NBGBOKFO: G. Watts, “Obituary: Oliver Smithies,” Lancet 389 (2017): 1004.
Scotch tape to rip thin layers of graphite: Geim details the======================================================== engine fails on national TV, the team will

lose the oil sponsorship, kiss Goodstone goodbye, and go back to square
one, or perhaps out of business. So: race, or don’t race?
The group begins with a vote. Three students vote to race, four to sit it
out. Now the debate begins.
Even with the engine failures, Jake says, the team has a 50 percent
chance of its biggest triumph. The upside of the Goodstone sponsorship is
much more money than the team stands to lose if the engine fails and the
existing sponsors walk. If Carter Racing withdraws, an excellent season
ends with debt, “which, as we all know, is not a sustainable business
model.”
“I just don’t think they can afford not to race,” Justin says.
Alexander agrees, and addresses the dissenters: “What’s going to change
going forward to convince you that now you’re ready?” he asks.
Mei, wearing a Harvard hoodie and sitting across the circle, has a
calculation to share. “To me, the risk of not racing is about one-third of the
downside of [another engine failure],” she says. She adds that she’s
focusing on loss mitigation, and does not want to race.
The case study says that at the last minute, the team owner, BJ Carter,
called his mechanics. Pat, the engine mechanic, dropped out of high school
and has no sophisticated engineering training, but he has a decade of race
experience. Temperature could be the issue, he suggested. When the
turbocharger warms up on a cool day, engine components might expand at
different rates and set up failure of the head gasket, a metal seal in the
engine. Pat admitted that each engine failure looked different, but all seven
had breaks in the head gasket. (Two of the engine failures had multiple
breaks in the gasket.) He didn’t know what was going on, but couldn’t think
of anything else on short notice. He was still hyped to race, and jubilant
about the new Goodstone uniforms. At 40 degrees, it is the coldest race day
of the season. Robin, the chief mechanic, endorsed Pat’s idea to look at the
temperature data. He plotted it on a graph, but saw no correlation:

Dmitry, his black hair flopped to one side, is firmly against racing. He
agrees that there is no apparent linear relationship between gasket failure
and temperature; three gasket breaks occurred on the coolest race day (53
degrees), and two on one of the hottest days (75 degrees). But what if there
is an optimal range for the engine, not too cold and not too hot? “If the
failures are random, the probability that you both finish and get in the top
five is 50 percent,” Dmitry says. “But if it’s not random, the probability is
lower. This day is a very, very low temperature that they haven’t
experienced before. We don’t know if there’s a correlation with
temperature, but if there is, it’s like a sure thing that it fails.”
Julia thinks mechanic Pat’s temperature idea is “nonsense,” but like
Dmitry views the engine problem as a black box that does not give the team
any information to calculate probability for today’s race. She acknowledges
that she’s being risk averse, and would personally never get involved in car
racing at all.
Except for Dmitry, the group agrees that there is “zero correlation at all,”
as Alexander puts it, between temperature and engine failure. “Am I the
only one?” Dmitry asks, to a few giggles.
Jake is particularly unimpressed with engine mechanic Pat’s reasoning. “I
think Pat’s a really good mechanic,” he says. “I don’t think he’s a really
good root cause analysis engineer, and those are two very different things.”
Jake thinks Pat is falling prey to a well-known cognitive bias,
overemphasizing the importance of a single, dramatic memory—the three
gasket breaks on a cool day. “We don’t even have the information to

understand this graph,” Jake says. “There’s twenty-four races, right? How
many of those were around 53 degrees and didn’t break? I don’t mean to
attack your point,” he says to Dmitry, smiling and giving him a friendly tap
on the hand.
Everyone agrees it would be nice to have temperature data from the races
with no engine problems, but that they’re stuck with what they have. Justin
speaks for the entire pro-race side when he says, “I just think you’ve gotta
race, because that’s what you’re in this business to do.”
It seems that the group will finish where they started, voting not to race,
until Mei takes another look at her calculations. “I’ve actually changed my
mind,” she announces. “I’m voting for yes, race.” Comparing the potential
financial upside and downside, Mei calculated that Carter Racing needs just
a 26 percent chance of finishing in the top five—half their current rate—to
make racing a smart bet. Even if the cool temperature changes the odds, “it
won’t decrease it to 26 percent, so we are still safe.” She thinks Dmitry’s
read of the data is biased; Carter Racing has competed at temperatures from
53 to 82 degrees, with four engine failures below 65 and three above.
Dmitry is giving too much credence, Mei says, to the 53-degree data point
because it involved three gasket breaks. It’s still just one engine failure.
Jake jumps in and says that group members are seeing whatever they
want in the temperature chart, so “maybe we table that debate.” He likes
Mei’s expected value argument. “I think that’s one concrete thing we can go
with, in terms of it’s always good to base things on math. . . . If you told me
to flip a coin, and if I lose the flip I lose $100 but if I win I get $200, I flip
that coin every time.” He reminds the group that Carter Racing used a new
engine-prep procedure for the last two races, with no problems. “That’s a
small data point,” he says, “but at least it’s in the right direction for my
argument.”
Mei turns to Dmitry. “What is the temperature you feel comfortable to
race?” she asks. “We have two engine failures at 70, one at 63, and one at
53. There’s no temperature that’s safe for us.”
Dmitry wants to set limits at exactly the temperatures they have already
experienced. Something is not functioning as expected, so anything outside
that temperature range is unknown territory. He knows his recommendation
comes off as extremely arbitrary.
The group moves to a final tally. With Mei’s conversion, it’s four to
three, they’re racing. The students continue to chat as they stuff the case

study papers into their backpacks and messenger bags.
Martina quickly reads aloud a part of the case study where team owner
BJ Carter asked his chief mechanic, Robin, for his opinion. “The drivers
have their lives on the line, I have a career that hangs on every race, and
you have every dime tied up in the business,” Robin told him. Nobody ever
won a race sitting in the pits, he reminded his boss.
Martina has one last question. “This is just about money, right? We’re not
going to kill anyone if we race, are we? ”
A few of the group members look around and laugh, and then they go
their separate ways.
When the students arrive in class the next day, they learn that most student
groups around the world who have ever been assigned the Carter Racing
case chose to race. The professor goes around the room, interrogating their
logic for racing or withdrawing.
Teams that decided to race discuss their probability estimates and
decision trees. Students are split on whether mid-race engine failure will
endanger the driver. A majority of students think the temperature data is a
red herring. Heads nod when one woman says, “If we want to make
something of ourselves in the business of racing, this is the kind of risk we
need to take.” Her team was unanimous, 7–0, for race.
Dmitry objects, and the professor grills him ruthlessly. Dmitry contends
that every probability decision tree that every group posits is irrelevant if
you drop the assumption that engine failures are randomly distributed. He
adds that the data are particularly ambiguous because for some reason the
chief mechanic didn’t plot the race temperatures when the engine didn’t
fail.
“Okay, so, Dmitry, here comes a quantitative question,” the professor
says. “How many times did I say yesterday if you want additional
information let me know?” Muffled gasps spread across the room. “Four
times,” the professor answers himself. “Four times I said if you want
additional information let me know.” Not one student asked for the missing
data. The professor puts up a new graph, with every race plotted. It looks
something like this:

Every single race below 65 degrees had an engine failure. The professor
then labels every race either a fail or not fail, and with that binary division
runs a simple statistical analysis, familiar to the students, known as a
logistic regression. He informs the students that there is a 99.4 percent
probability of engine failure at 40 degrees. “Do we have any remaining fans
of racing?” he asks. And now he has another surprise.
The temperature and engine failure data are taken exactly from NASA’s
tragic decision to launch the space shuttle Challenger, with the details
placed in the context of racing rather than space exploration. Jake’s face
goes blank. Rather than a broken gasket, Challenger had failed O-rings—
the rubber strips that sealed joints along the outer wall of the missile-like
rocket boosters that propelled the shuttle. Cool temperatures caused O-ring
rubber to harden, making them less effective seals.
The characters in the case study are loosely based on managers and
engineers at NASA and its rocket-booster contractor, Morton Thiokol, on an
emergency conference call the night before the Challenger launch. Weather
reports on January 27, 1986, predicted unusually cool Florida weather for
launch. After the conference call, NASA and Thiokol gave the okay to
proceed. On January 28, O-rings failed to properly seal a joint in the wall of
a rocket booster. Burning gas shot right through the joint to the outside, and
Challenger exploded seventy-three seconds into its mission. All seven crew
members were killed.
The Carter Racing case study worked exquisitely. It was eerie how
precisely======================================================== specialize, ref1
science curiosity, ref1
and scientific literature, ref1 , ref2
scientific reasoning, ref1
value of range/inefficiency in, ref1
working abroad, ref1
Serial Innovators (Griffin, Price, and Vojak), ref1
Seth, Jayshree, ref1
Shafer, Mary, ref1
Shakespeare, William, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Shannon, Claude, ref1
Shoda, Yuichi, ref1
short term planning, ref1
Simmons, Michael, ref1
Simon, Herbert A., ref1
Simon, Julian, ref1
Simonton, Dean Keith, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4n , ref5
Sloboda, John, ref1
Smith, Gregory White, ref1 , ref2
Smith, Johnny, ref1
Smithies, Oliver, ref1 , ref2
soccer, ref1
Socrates, ref1
Southern, Edwin, ref1
Soviet Union
predictions/forecasts regarding, ref1
premodern villagers of, ref1 , ref2
spelling bee competitors, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
The Sports Gene (Epstein), ref1
standardization covenant, ref1

StarCraft video games, ref1
stents (coronary), ref1
Storm King Mountain fire, ref1
strategic thinking, ref1 , ref2
struggling, benefits of, ref1 , ref2
sunk cost fallacy, ref1
Super Bowl, 2018, ref1
superforecasters, ref1
Superforecasting (Tetlock and Gardner), ref1
surgeons and surgical teams, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Suzuki Method, ref1
Swanson, Don, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Swanson, Judy, ref1
Syed, Matthew, ref1
Talent Is Overrated (Colvin), ref1
Taylor, Alva, ref1
teachers, ref1 , ref2
teams
innovation in, ref1
of specialists in “kind” learning environments, ref1
tech companies, founders of, ref1
technological inventors, ref1
tennis, ref1
ten-thousand-hours rule of expertise, ref1 , ref2
test-and-learn model for exploring options, ref1
testing/self-testing, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Tetlock, Philip, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
Thrale, Hester, ref1
Tiger parents, ref1 , ref2
Tillman Foundation, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Togelius, Julian, ref1
tools
and Air Force pararescue jumpers, ref1 , ref2
and cultural congruence/ incongruence, ref1 , ref2
in medical world, ref1
and NASA’s quantitative culture, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
and overlearned behavior, ref1 , ref2
and reliance on trusted methods/ beliefs, ref1 , ref2
in wilderness firefighting, ref1 , ref2
Toynbee, Arnold, ref1 , ref2
Treffert, Darold, ref1
Tucker, Ross, ref1
Tu Youyou, ref1
Tversky, Amos, ref1
University of Chicago, ref1
University of Washington, ref1
Unusual (or Alternative) Uses Task, ref1
U.S. Air Force Academy, ref1
U.S. Army, ref1 , ref2 , ref3n , ref1

“using procedures” question type, ref1 , ref2
U.S. Military Academy, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
U.S. National Library of Medicine, ref1
Uzzi, Brian, ref1
Van Gogh, Vincent, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Vaughan, Diane, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Venice, seventeenth-century, ref1
video games, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Viles, Jill, ref1
Vivaldi, Antonio, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
vocabulary learning, ref1 , ref2
Von Braun, Wernher, ref1 , ref2
Wallace, William, ref1
Wallenda, Karl, ref1
Warshaw, Howard Scott, ref1
Watson (IBM), ref1
Weick, Karl, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Wellington, Chrissie, ref1
Wertham, Fredric, ref1
West Point, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Whiteread, Rachel, ref1
Whole Candidate Score of U.S. Military Academy, ref1 , ref2
“wicked” learning environments, ref1 , ref2
Wii by Nintendo, ref1
Williams, Anson, ref1
Wing, Jeannette, ref1
Williams, Serena ref1
Winner, Ellen, ref1 , ref2
Winter Olympics, 2018, ref1
Woods, Earl, ref1 , ref2
Woods, Tiger, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
writers, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Yates, Ian, ref1
Yokoi, Gunpei, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
youth, perceived intelligence of, ref1
youth sports programs, ref1n
Zuckerberg, Mark, ref1 , ref2
OceanofPDF.com

Praise for Range
‘David Epstein manages to make me thoroughly enjoy the experience of
being told that everything I thought about something was wrong. I loved
Range ’
Malcolm Gladwell, author of Outliers
‘An urgent and important book, an essential read for bosses, parents,
coaches and anyone who cares about improving performance’
Daniel H. Pink, author of Drive and To Sell is Human
‘It’s a joy to spend hours in the company of a writer as gifted as David
Epstein. And the joy is all the greater when that writer shares so much
crucial and revelatory information about performance, success and
education’
Susan Cain, author of Quiet
‘A captivating read that will leave you questioning the next steps in your
career – and the way you raise your children’
Adam Grant, author of Originals and co-author of Option B
‘Extraordinary’
Guardian
‘A goldmine of surprising insights. Makes you smarter with every page’
James Clear, author of Atomic Habits
‘Brilliant, timely and utterly impossible to put down. If you care about
improving skill, innovation and performance, you need to read this book’
Daniel Coyle, author of The Talent Code
‘I want to give Range to . . . everyone who wants humans to thrive in an age
of robots. Range is full of surprises and hope, a twenty-first-century
survival guide’
Amanda Ripley, author of The Smartest Kids in the World

‘Masterful. Perfect holiday reading’
Dr Adam Rutherford, author of A Brief History of Everyone Who Ever
Lived
‘Anyone contemplating a change of career late in life will find Range
immensely reassuring. If you calculate that you don’t have 10,000 hours left
in which you can reasonably practise, you can use your range to connect
ideas and use your varied experience’
Daniel Finkelstein, The Times
‘The storytelling is so dramatic, the wielding of data so deft and the lessons
so strikingly framed [it’s] a pleasure to read . . . Range offers such a wealth
of thought-provoking material’
New York Times Books Review
‘Fabulous . . . If you are interested in champions’ journeys, this is for you’
Judy Murray on Twitter
‘As David Epstein shows us, cultivating range prepares us for the wickedly
unanticipated . . . a well-supported and smoothly written case on behalf of
breadth and late starts’
Wall Street Journal
‘Range elevates Epstein to one of the very best science writers at work
today. The scope of the book – and the implications – are breathtaking’
Sebastian Junger, filmmaker and author of The Perfect Storm
‘One of the most thought-provoking and enlightening books I’ve read’
Maria Konnikova, poker player and author of The Confidence Game
‘A fresh, brisk look at creativity, learning and the meaning of achievement’
Kirkus Reviews
‘An assiduously researched and accessible argument for being a jack of all
trades’
O Magazine , Best Nonfiction Books of 2019

‘Range is a convincing, engaging survey of research and anecdotes that
confirm a thoughtful, collaborative world is also a better and more
innovative one’
NPR
‘A clear and unfussy writer . . . this book is likely to resonate strongly with
most teachers’
Tes
OceanofPDF.com

About the Author
David Epstein is the author of the New York Times bestseller The Sports
Gene . He has master’s degrees in environmental science and journalism
and has worked as an investigative reporter for ProPublica and a senior
writer for Sports Illustrated . He lives in Washington, D.C.
OceanofPDF.com

ALSO BY DAVID EPSTEIN
The Sports Gene
OceanofPDF.com

First published 2019 by Riverhead Books
an imprint of Penguin Random House
First published in the UK 2019 by Macmillan
This electronic edition published 2020 by Pan Books
an imprint of Pan Macmillan
The Smithson, 6 Briset Street, London EC1M 5NR
Associated companies throughout the world
www.panmacmillan.com
ISBN  978-1-5098-4351-0
Copyright © David Epstein 2019
New afterword copyright © David Epstein 2020
Front Cover Image © Image Source/Getty Images
The right of David Epstein to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted by him in
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
Pan Macmillan does not have any control over, or any responsibility for, any author or third-party
websites referred to in or on this book.
You may not copy, store, distribute, transmit, reproduce or otherwise make available this publication
(or any part of it) in any form, or by any means (electronic, digital, optical, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of the publisher. Any
person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication may be liable to criminal
prosecution and civil claims for damages.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Visit www.panmacmillan.com to read more about all our books and to buy them. You will also find
features, author interviews and news of any author events, and you can sign up for e-newsletters so
that you’re always first to hear about our new releases.
OceanofPDF.com======================================================== pails or do whatever,
grunt work,” he told me. “I’m not a super-strong guy, so I wasn’t really
awesome at that, I’ll be honest.”
Concrete was unloaded at the top of the hill and sent sluicing down a
chute when it was needed at the bottom. Davis was standing at the top,
concerned about a massive mound of concrete that was already hardening
while it baked in the sun. He alerted his friend’s brother. “Watch this,” the
brother told him. He grabbed a rod attached to a motor and touched it to the
mound of concrete. “It fluidized instantly, just like whoooosh ,” Davis
recalled. The rod was a concrete vibrator, which is just what it sounds like,
a shaking piece of metal that keeps the components of concrete from

sticking together. “When it came to my mind it was a eureka moment,”
Davis told me.
He called a company that sold concrete vibrators to learn a few details,
and then made a diagram of how the vibrators could easily attach to a barge
and do to “chocolate mousse” what they already do with concrete. Counting
diagrams, the solution was a total of three pages.
“Sometimes you just slap your head and go, ‘Well why didn’t I think of
that?’ If it was easily solved by people within the industry, it would have
been solved by people within the industry,” Pegau said. “I think it happens
more often than we’d love to admit, because we tend to view things with all
the information we’ve gathered in our industry, and sometimes that puts us
down a path that goes into a wall. It’s hard to back up and find another
path.” Pegau was basically describing the Einstellung effect, a psychology
term for the tendency of problem solvers to employ only familiar methods
even if better ones are available. Davis subsequently earned another cash
award in a challenge that sought help with a hair removal product; a
memory of rolling chewing gum on his leg as a kid led him to a solution.
When I asked Davis if he was prone to framing problems with distant
analogies from random experiences outside his field, he had to ponder it for
a moment. Does he do that in his daily chemistry problems, I asked? “You
know, I don’t, not really,” he said. “It’s these other puzzles or problems
where you have to think outside the box.”
InnoCentive works in part because, as specialists become more narrowly
focused, “the box” is more like Russian nesting dolls. Specialists divide into
subspecialties, which soon divide into sub-subspecialties. Even if they get
outside the small doll, they may get stuck inside the next, slightly larger
one. Cragin and Davis were outside the box to begin with, and saw
straightforward solutions that eluded insiders with seemingly every training
and resource advantage. Solvers themselves were often bewildered when
they overcame a challenge that stumped entire companies or industries.
“It took me three evenings to write it up,” an outside solver told the
journal Science after he answered Johnson & Johnson’s request for help
with a production problem in the manufacture of tuberculosis medication. “I
think it’s strange that a major pharma company cannot solve this kind of
problem.” Karim Lakhani, codirector of the Laboratory for Innovation

Science at Harvard, had InnoCentive solvers rate problems on how relevant
they were to their own field of specialization, and found that “the further
the problem was from the solver’s expertise, the more likely they were to
solve it.”
As organizational boxes get smaller and smaller, and as outsiders are
more easily engaged online, “exploration [of new solutions] now
increasingly resides outside the boundaries of the traditional firm,” Lakhani
and colleagues wrote. Our intuition might be that only hyperspecialized
experts can drive modern innovation, but increasing specialization actually
creates new opportunities for outsiders.
As Alph Bingham noticed, for difficult challenges organizations tend
toward local search. They rely on specialists in a single knowledge domain,
and methods that have worked before. (Think about the lab with only E.
coli specialists from chapter 5 .) If those fail, they’re stuck. For the most
intractable problems, “our research shows that a domain-based solution is
often inferior,” according to Lakhani. “Big innovation most often happens
when an outsider who may be far away from the surface of the problem
reframes the problem in a way that unlocks the solution.”
Since InnoCentive demonstrated the concept, other organizations have
arisen to capitalize on outside-in solvers in normally highly specialized
fields. Kaggle is like InnoCentive but specifically for posting challenges in
the area of machine learning—artificial intelligence designed to teach itself
without human intervention.
Shubin Dai, who lives in Changsha, China, was the top-ranked Kaggle
solver in the world as of this writing, out of more than forty thousand
contributors. His day job is leading a team that processes data for banks, but
Kaggle competitions gave him an opportunity to dabble in machine
learning. His favorite problems involve human health or nature
conservation, like a competition in which he won $30,000 by wielding
satellite imagery to distinguish human-caused from natural forest loss in the
Amazon. Dai was asked, for a Kaggle blog post, how important domain
expertise is for winning competitions. “To be frank, I don’t think we can
benefit from domain expertise too much. . . . It’s very hard to win a
competition just by using [ well-known] methods,” he replied. “We need
more creative solutions.”
“The people who win a Kaggle health competition have no medical
training, no biology training, and they’re also often not real machine

learning experts,” Pedro Domingos, a computer science professor and
machine learning researcher, told me. “Knowledge is a double-edged
sword. It allows you to do some things, but it also makes you blind to other
things that you could do.”
Don Swanson saw it coming—the opportunities for people like Bruce
Cragin and John Davis, outsiders who merge strands of disparate
knowledge. Swanson earned a physics PhD in 1952, and then worked as an
industry computer systems analyst, where he became fascinated with
organizing information. In 1963, the University of Chicago took a chance
on him as dean of the Graduate Library School. As a thirty-eight-year-old
from private industry, he was an oddball. The hiring announcement
declared, “Swanson is the first physical scientist to head a professional
library school in this country.”
Swanson became concerned about increasing specialization, that it would
lead to publications that catered only to a very small group of specialists
and inhibit creativity. “The disparity between the total quantity of recorded
knowledge . . . and the limited human capacity to assimilate it, is not only
enormous now but grows unremittingly,” he once said. How can frontiers
be pushed, Swanson wondered, if one day it will take a lifetime just to
reach them in each specialized domain? In 1960, the U.S. National Library
of Medicine used about one hundred unique pairs of terms to index articles.
By 2010, it was nearing one hundred thousand. Swanson felt that if this big
bang of public knowledge continued apace, subspecialties would be like
galaxies, flying away from one another until each is invisible to every other.
Given that he knew interdisciplinary problem solving was important, that
was a conundrum.
In crisis, Swanson saw opportunity. He realized he could make
discoveries by connecting information from scientific articles in
subspecialty domains that never cited one another and that had no scientists
who worked together. For example, by systematically cross-referencing
databases of literature from different disciplines, he uncovered “eleven
neglected connections” between magnesium deficiency and migraine
research, and proposed that they be tested. All of the information he found
was in the public domain; it had just never been connected. “Undiscovered
public knowledge,” Swanson called it. In 2012, the American Headache

Society and the American Academy of Neurology reviewed all the research
on migraine prevention and concluded that magnesium should be
considered as a common treatment. The evidence for magnesium was as
strong as the evidence for the most common remedies, like ibuprofen.
Swanson wanted to show that areas of specialist literature that never
normally overlapped were rife with hidden interdisciplinary treasures
waiting to be connected. He created a computer system, Arrowsmith, that
helped other users do what he did—devise searches that might turn up
distant but relevant sets of scientific articles, and ignited a field of
information science that grapples with connecting diverse areas of
knowledge, as specialties that can inform one another drift apart.
Swanson passed away in 2012, so I contacted his daughter, political
philosophy professor Judy Swanson, to see if she had ever discussed with
him his concerns about specialization. When I reached her, she was at a
conference, “as it happens, one related to overspecialization in the social
sciences,” she told me. From the outside, Judy Swanson looks pretty
specialized. Her faculty web page listed forty-four of her articles and books,
every single one of which had “Aristotle” in the title. So I asked how she
felt about her own specialization, and she seemed surprised. She did not
consider herself specialized compared to her peers, she told me, partly
because she spends time teaching undergraduates, which requires more than
Aristotle. “There is this feeling of frustration,” she told me, “that I should
be doing something more specialized.” Academic departments no longer
merely fracture naturally into subspecialties, they elevate narrowness as an
ideal.
That is counterproductive. As Karim Lakhani put it after his Inno-Centive
research, a key to creative problem solving is tapping outsiders who use
different approaches “so that the ‘home field’ for the problem does not end
up constraining the solution.” Sometimes, the======================================================== have won the Nobel Prize are more likely still.
Compared to other scientists, Nobel laureates are at least twenty-two times
more likely to partake as an amateur actor, dancer, magician, or other type
of performer. Nationally recognized scientists are much more likely than
other scientists to be musicians, sculptors, painters, printmakers,
woodworkers, mechanics, electronics tinkerers, glassblowers, poets, or
writers, of both fiction and nonfiction. And, again, Nobel laureates are far
more likely still. The most successful experts also belong to the wider
world. “To him who observes them from afar,” said Spanish Nobel laureate
Santiago Ramón y Cajal, the father of modern neuroscience, “it appears as
though they are scattering and dissipating their energies, while in reality
they are channeling and strengthening them.” The main conclusion of work
that took years of studying scientists and engineers, all of whom were
regarded by peers as true technical experts, was that those who did not
make a creative contribution to their field lacked aesthetic interests outside
their narrow area. As psychologist and prominent creativity researcher Dean
Keith Simonton observed, “rather than obsessively focus[ing] on a narrow
topic,” creative achievers tend to have broad interests. “This breadth often
supports insights that cannot be attributed to domain-specific expertise
alone.”
Those findings are reminiscent of a speech Steve Jobs gave, in which he
famously recounted the importance of a calligraphy class to his design
aesthetics. “When we were designing the first Macintosh computer, it all
came back to me,” he said. “If I had never dropped in on that single course
in college, the Mac would have never had multiple typefaces or
proportionally spaced fonts.” Or electrical engineer Claude Shannon, who

launched the Information Age thanks to a philosophy course he took to
fulfill a requirement at the University of Michigan. In it, he was exposed to
the work of self-taught nineteenth-century English logician George Boole,
who assigned a value of 1 to true statements and 0 to false statements and
showed that logic problems could be solved like math equations. It resulted
in absolutely nothing of practical importance until seventy years after Boole
passed away, when Shannon did a summer internship at AT& T’s Bell Labs
research facility. There he recognized that he could combine telephone call-
routing technology with Boole’s logic system to encode and transmit any
type of information electronically. It was the fundamental insight on which
computers rely. “It just happened that no one else was familiar with both
those fields at the same time,” Shannon said.
In 1979, Christopher Connolly cofounded a psychology consultancy in
the United Kingdom to help high achievers (initially athletes, but then
others) perform at their best. Over the years, Connolly became curious
about why some professionals floundered outside a narrow expertise, while
others were remarkably adept at expanding their careers—moving from
playing in a world-class orchestra, for example, to running one. Thirty years
after he started, Connolly returned to school to do a PhD investigating that
very question, under Fernand Gobet, the psychologist and chess
international master. Connolly’s primary finding was that early in their
careers, those who later made successful transitions had broader training
and kept multiple “career streams” open even as they pursued a primary
specialty. They “traveled on an eight-lane highway,” he wrote, rather than
down a single-lane one-way street. They had range. The successful adapters
were excellent at taking knowledge from one pursuit and applying it
creatively to another, and at avoiding cognitive entrenchment. They
employed what Hogarth called a “circuit breaker.” They drew on outside
experiences and analogies to interrupt their inclination toward a previous
solution that may no longer work. Their skill was in avoiding the same old
patterns. In the wicked world, with ill-defined challenges and few rigid
rules, range can be a life hack .
Pretending the world is like golf and chess is comforting. It makes for a
tidy kind-world message, and some very compelling books. The rest of this
one will begin where those end—in a place where the popular sport is
Martian tennis, with a view into how the modern world became so wicked
in the first place.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 2
How the Wicked World Was Made
THE TOWN OF DUNEDIN sits at the base of a hilly peninsula that juts off of
New Zealand’s South Island into the South Pacific. The peninsula is famous
for yellow-eyed penguins, and Dunedin boasts, demurely, the world’s
steepest residential street. It also features the University of Otago, the oldest
university in New Zealand, and home to James Flynn, a professor of political
studies who changed how psychologists think about thinking.
He started in 1981, intrigued by a thirty-year-old paper that reported IQ
test scores of American soldiers in World Wars I and II. The World War II
soldiers had performed better, by a lot. A World War I soldier who scored
smack in the middle of his peers—the 50th percentile—would have made
only the 22nd percentile compared to soldiers in World War II. Flynn
wondered if perhaps civilians had experienced a similar improvement. “I
thought, if IQ gains had occurred anywhere,” he told me, “maybe they had
occurred everywhere.” If he was right, psychologists had been missing
something big right before their eyes.
Flynn wrote to researchers in other countries asking for data, and on a dull
November Saturday in 1984, he found a letter in his university mailbox. It
was from a Dutch researcher, and it contained years of raw data from IQ
tests given to young men in the Netherlands. The data were from a test
known as Raven’s Progressive Matrices, designed to gauge the test taker’s
ability to make sense of complexity. Each question of the test shows a set of
abstract designs with one design missing. The test taker must try to fill in the
missing design to complete a pattern. Raven’s was conceived to be the
epitome of a “culturally reduced” test; performance should be unaffected by
material learned in life, inside or outside of school. Should Martians alight

on Earth, Raven’s should be the test capable of determining how bright they
are. And yet Flynn could immediately see that young Dutchmen had made
enormous gains from one generation to the next.
Flynn found more clues in test reference manuals. IQ tests are all
standardized so that the average score is always 100 points. (They are graded
based on a curve, with 100 in the middle.) Flynn noticed that the tests had to
be restandardized from time to time to keep the average at 100, because test
takers were giving more correct answers than they had in the past. In the
twelve months after he received the Dutch letter, Flynn collected data from
fourteen countries. Every single one showed huge gains for both children
and adults. “Our advantage over our ancestors,” as he put it, is “from the
cradle to the grave.”
Flynn had asked the right question. Score gains had occurred everywhere.
Other academics had stumbled upon pieces of the same data earlier, but none
had investigated whether it was part of a global pattern, even those who were
having to tweak the test scoring system to keep the average at 100. “As an
outsider,” Flynn told me, “things strike me as surprising that I think people
trained in psychometrics just accepted.”
The Flynn effect—the increase in correct IQ test answers with each new
generation in the twentieth century—has now been documented in more than
thirty countries. The gains are startling: three points every ten years. To put
that in perspective, if an adult who scored average today were compared to
adults a century ago, she would be in the 98th percentile.
When Flynn published his revelation in 1987, it hit the community of
researchers who study cognitive ability like a firebomb. The American
Psychological Association convened an entire meeting on the issue, and
psychologists invested in the immutable nature of IQ test scores offered an
array of explanations to usher the effect away, from more education and
better nutrition—which presumably contributed—to test-taking experience,
but none fit the unusual pattern of score improvements. On tests that gauged
material picked up in school or with independent reading or study—general
knowledge, arithmetic, vocabulary—scores hardly budged. Meanwhile,
performance on more abstract tasks that are never formally taught, like the
Raven’s matrices, or “similarities” tests, which require a description of how
two things are alike, skyrocketed.

A young person today asked to give similarities between “dusk” and
“dawn” might immediately realize that both connote times of day. But they
would be far more likely than their grandmothers to produce a higher-level
similarity: both separate day from night. A child today who scores average
on similarities would be in the 94th percentile of her grandparents’
generation. When a group of Estonian researchers used national test scores
to compare word understandings of schoolkids in the 1930s to those in 2006,
they saw that improvement came very specifically on the most abstract
words. The more abstract the word, the bigger the improvement. The kids
barely bested their grandparents on words for directly observable objects or
phenomena (“hen,” “eating,” “illness”), but they improved massively on
imperceptible concepts (“law,” “pledge,” “citizen”).
The gains around the world on Raven’s Progressive Matrices—where
change was least expected—were the biggest of all. “The huge Raven’s
gains show that today’s children are far better at solving problems on the
spot without a previously learned method for doing so,” Flynn concluded.
They are more able to extract rules and patterns where none are given. Even
in countries that have recently had a decrease in verbal and math IQ test
scores, Raven’s scores went======================================================== every area. This must change, he argues, if students are to
capitalize on their unprecedented capacity for abstract thought. They must be

taught to think before being taught what to think about. Students come
prepared with scientific spectacles, but do not leave carrying a scientific-
reasoning Swiss Army knife.
Here and there, professors have begun to pick up the challenge. A class at
the University of Washington titled “Calling Bullshit” (in staid coursebook
language: INFO 198/ BIOL 106B), focused on broad principles fundamental
to understanding the interdisciplinary world and critically evaluating the
daily firehose of information. When the class was first posted in 2017,
registration filled up in the first minute.
Jeannette Wing, a computer science professor at Columbia University and
former corporate vice president of Microsoft Research, has pushed broad
“computational thinking” as the mental Swiss Army knife. She advocated
that it become as fundamental as reading, even for those who will have
nothing to do with computer science or programming. “Computational
thinking is using abstraction and decomposition when attacking a large
complex task,” she wrote. “It is choosing an appropriate representation for a
problem.”
Mostly, though, students get what economist Bryan Caplan called narrow
vocational training for jobs few of them will ever have. Three-quarters of
American college graduates go on to a career unrelated to their major—a
trend that includes math and science majors—after having become
competent only with the tools of a single discipline.
One good tool is rarely enough in a complex, interconnected, rapidly
changing world. As the historian and philosopher Arnold Toynbee said when
he described analyzing the world in an age of technological and social
change, “No tool is omnicompetent.”
Flynn’s passion resonated deeply with me. Before turning to journalism, I
was in grad school, living in a tent in the Arctic, studying how changes in
plant life might impact the subterranean permafrost. Classes consisted of
stuffing my brain with the details of Arctic plant physiology. Only years later
—as an investigative journalist writing about poor scientific research—did I
realize that I had committed statistical malpractice in one section of the
thesis that earned me a master’s degree from Columbia University. Like
many a grad student, I had a big database and hit a computer button to run a
common statistical analysis, never having been taught to think deeply (or at

all) about how that statistical analysis even worked. The stat program spit
out a number summarily deemed “statistically significant.” Unfortunately, it
was almost certainly a false positive, because I did not understand the
limitations of the statistical test in the context in which I applied it. Nor did
the scientists who reviewed the work. As statistician Doug Altman put it,
“Everyone is so busy doing research they don’t have time to stop and think
about the way they’re doing it.” I rushed into extremely specialized scientific
research without having learned scientific reasoning. (And then I was
rewarded for it, with a master’s degree, which made for a very wicked
learning environment.) As backward as it sounds, I only began to think
broadly about how science should work years after I left it.
Fortunately, as an undergrad, I did have a chemistry professor who
embodied Flynn’s ideal. On every exam, amid typical chemistry questions,
was something like this: “How many piano tuners are there in New York
City?” Students had to estimate, just by reasoning, and try to get the right
order of magnitude. The professor later explained that these were “Fermi
problems,” because Enrico Fermi—who created the first nuclear reactor
beneath the University of Chicago football field—constantly made back-of-
the-envelope estimates to help him approach problems. 
*
 The ultimate lesson
of the question was that detailed prior knowledge was less important than a
way of thinking.
On the first exam, I went with gut instinct (“I have no clue, maybe ten
thousand?”)— way too high . By the end of the class, I had a new tool in my
conceptual Swiss Army knife, a way of using what little I did know to make
a guess at what I didn’t. I knew the population of New York City; most
single people in studio apartments probably don’t have pianos that get tuned,
and most of my friends’ parents had one to three children, so how many
households are in New York? What portion might have pianos? How often
are pianos tuned? How long might it take to tune a piano? How many homes
can one tuner reach in a day? How many days a year does a tuner work?
None of the individual estimates has to be particularly accurate in order to
get a reasonable overall answer. Remote Uzbek villagers would not perform
well on Fermi problems, but neither did I before taking that class. It was
easy to learn, though. Having grown up in the twentieth century, I was
already wearing the spectacles, I just needed help capitalizing on them. I
remember nothing about stoichiometry, but I use Fermi thinking regularly,

breaking down a problem so I can leverage what little I know to start
investigating what I don’t, a “similarities” problem of sorts.
Fortunately, several studies have found that a little training in broad
thinking strategies, like Fermi-izing, can go a long way, and can be applied
across domains. Unsurprisingly, Fermi problems were a topic in the “Calling
Bullshit” course. It used a deceptive cable news report as a case study to
demonstrate “how Fermi estimation can cut through bullshit like a hot knife
through butter.” It gives anyone consuming numbers, from news articles to
advertisements, the ability quickly to sniff out deceptive stats. That’s a pretty
handy hot butter knife. I would have been a much better researcher in any
domain, including Arctic plant physiology, had I learned broadly applicable
reasoning tools rather than the finer details of Arctic plant physiology.
Like chess masters and firefighters, premodern villagers relied on things
being the same tomorrow as they were yesterday. They were extremely well
prepared for what they had experienced before, and extremely poorly
equipped for everything else. Their very thinking was highly specialized in a
manner that the modern world has been telling us is increasingly obsolete.
They were perfectly capable of learning from experience, but failed at
learning without experience. And that is what a rapidly changing, wicked
world demands—conceptual reasoning skills that can connect new ideas and
work across contexts. Faced with any problem they had not directly
experienced before, the remote villagers were completely lost. That is not an
option for us. The more constrained and repetitive a challenge, the more
likely it will be automated, while great rewards will accrue to those who can
take conceptual knowledge from one problem or domain and apply it in an
entirely new one.
The ability to apply knowledge broadly comes from broad training. A
particular skilled group of performers in another place and time turned broad
training into an art form. Their story is older, and yet a much better parable
than chess prodigies for the modern age.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 3
When Less of the Same Is More
ANYWHERE A TRAVELER to seventeenth-century Venice turned an ear, they
could hear music exploding from its traditional bounds. Even the name of
the musical era, “Baroque,” is taken from a jewelers’ term to describe a
pearl that was extravagantly large and unusually shaped.
Instrumental music—music that did not depend on words—underwent a
complete revolution. Some of the instruments were brand-new, like the
piano; others were enhanced—violins made by Antonio Stradivari would
sell centuries later for millions of dollars. The modern system of major and
minor keys was created. Virtuosos, the original musical celebrities, were
anointed. Composers seized on their skill and wrote elaborate solos to push
the boundaries of the best players’ abilities. The concerto was born—in
which a virtuoso soloist plays back and forth against an orchestra—and
Venetian composer Antonio Vivaldi (known as il Prete Rosso, the Red
Priest, for his flame-red hair) became the form’s undisputed champion. The
Four Seasons is as close to a pop hit as three-hundred-year-old music gets.
(A mashup with a song from Disney’s Frozen has ninety million YouTube
plays.)
Vivaldi’s creativity was facilitated by a particular group of musicians
who could learn new music quickly on a staggering array of instruments.
They drew emperors, kings, princes, cardinals, and countesses from across
Europe to be regaled by the most innovative music of the time. They were
the all-female cast known as the figlie del coro, literally, “daughters of the
choir.” Leisure activities like horseback riding and field sports were scarce
in the floating city, so music bore the full weight of entertainment for its

citizens. The sounds of violins, flutes, horns, and voices spilled into the
night from every bobbing barge and gondola. And in a time and place
seething with music, the figlie dominated for a century.
“Only in Venice,” a prominent visitor wrote, “can one see these musical
prodigies.” They were both ground zero of a musical revolution and an
oddity. Elsewhere, their instruments were reserved for men. “They sing like
angels, play the violin, the flute, the organ, the oboe, the cello, and the
bassoon,” an astonished French politician remarked. “In short, no
instrument is large enough to frighten them.” Others were less diplomatic.
Aristocratic British writer Hester Thrale complained, “The sight of girls
handling the double bass, and blowing into the bassoon did not much please
me.” After all, “suitable feminine instruments” were more along the lines of
the harpsichord or musical glasses.
The figlie left the king of Sweden in awe. Literary rogue Casanova
marveled at the standing-room-only crowds. A dour French concert
reviewer singled out a======================================================== suddenly seen as
invention,” said sociologist Brian Uzzi, Amaral’s collaborator. Human
creativity, he said, is basically an “import/ export business of ideas.”
Uzzi documented an import/ export trend that began in both the physical
and social sciences in the 1970s, pre-internet: more successful teams tended
to have more far-flung members. Teams that included members from
different institutions were more likely to be successful than those that did
not, and teams that included members based in different countries had an
advantage as well.
Consistent with the import/ export model, scientists who have worked
abroad—whether or not they returned—are more likely to make a greater
scientific impact than those who have not. The economists who documented

that trend suggested one reason could be migrants’ “arbitrage”
opportunities, the chance to take an idea from one market and bring it to
another where it is more rare and valued. 
*
 It echoes Oliver Smithies’s
advice to bring new skills to an old problem, or a new problem to old skills.
The atypical combination of typical forms—say, hip-hop, a Broadway
musical, and American historical biography—is not a strategy fluke of
showbiz.
Uzzi and a team analyzed eighteen million papers from a variety of
scientific domains to see whether atypical knowledge combinations
mattered. If a particular paper cited other areas of research that rarely, if
ever, appeared together, then it was classified as having used an atypical
combination of knowledge. Most papers relied purely on conventional
combinations of previous knowledge. That is, they cited work from other
journals that often appeared together in other studies’ lists of references.
The “hit” papers, those that over the next decade were used by a huge
number of other scientists, featured ample conventional combinations, but
also added an injection of unusual knowledge combinations.
A separate, international team analyzed more than a half million research
articles, and classified a paper as “novel” if it cited two other journals that
had never before appeared together. Just one in ten papers made a new
combination, and only one in twenty made multiple new combinations. The
group tracked the impact of research papers over time. They saw that papers
with new knowledge combinations were more likely to be published in less
prestigious journals, and also much more likely to be ignored upon
publication. They got off to a slow start in the world, but after three years,
the papers with new knowledge combos surpassed the conventional papers,
and began accumulating more citations from other scientists. Fifteen years
after publication, studies that made multiple new knowledge combinations
were way more likely to be in the top 1 percent of most-cited papers.
To recap: work that builds bridges between disparate pieces of
knowledge is less likely to be funded, less likely to appear in famous
journals, more likely to be ignored upon publication, and then more likely
in the long run to be a smash hit in the library of human knowledge.
Casadevall leads by example. A single conversation with him is liable to
include Anna Karenina, the Federalist Papers, the fact that Isaac Newton

and Gottfried Leibniz were philosophers as well as scientists, why the
Roman Empire wasn’t more innovative, and a point about mentoring in the
form of a description of the character Mentor from Homer’s Odyssey. “I
work at it,” he said, smirking. “I always advise my people to read outside
your field, everyday something. And most people say, ‘Well, I don’t have
time to read outside my field.’ I say, ‘No, you do have time, it’s far more
important.’ Your world becomes a bigger world, and maybe there’s a
moment in which you make connections.”
One of Casadevall’s projects was born from a news article he read about
a robot sent into the Chernobyl nuclear accident site, still highly
contaminated thirty years post-disaster. The article happened to mention
that the robot returned with some black mold, a kind that resembled a grotty
shower curtain and that had colonized the abandoned reactor. “So, why
black mold?” Casadevall asked rhetorically. “And then one thing led to
another.” He and colleagues made a remarkable find—that the mold was
nourishing itself with radiation. Not with radioactive substances—with
radiation itself.
Casadevall makes sure to highlight experiences outside the lab and how
they contributed to who he is today. His family fled Cuba and arrived in
Queens when he was eleven. At sixteen, he got his first job, at McDonald’s,
and worked there until he was twenty. It’s still on his résumé, and he made
sure to discuss it in his Johns Hopkins interview. “It was a great, great
experience,” he told me. “I learned a lot working there.” Like handling
pressure. His younger brother worked there, too, and was briefly taken
hostage during a holdup. “He spent two days on the witness stand where the
lawyers made fun of his accent,” Casadevall recalled. “He came out ready
for law school. Now he’s a successful trial lawyer.” After McDonald’s,
Casadevall worked as a bank teller. (“That was held up too!”) His father
wanted him to have something practical to fall back on, so a community
college degree in pest control operations hangs on his office wall, near a
certificate of his election into the prestigious National Academy of
Medicine.
Casadevall is renowned in his area of expertise. He has no trouble getting
research grants, and is frequently one of the scientists who helps determine
who else gets grants. He is a winner if the specialization status quo
continues. And yet he considers his attempt to shatter it the most important
work of his life. The further basic science moves from meandering

exploration toward efficiency, he believes, the less chance it will have of
solving humanity’s greatest challenges.
Laszlo Polgar, in the midst of his chess experiment with his daughters,
proclaimed that “the problems of cancer and AIDS” would more likely be
solved if his system of narrow specialization and efficient education were
used beyond chess, to educate a thousand kids. Casadevall is a student of
innovation history. He grew up as a doctor and scientist when HIV/ AIDS
exploded into an epidemic, and he could hardly disagree more passionately.
“When I went to medical school, I was taught that there were no human
diseases caused by retroviruses, that retroviruses were a curiosity that
occurred in some animal tumors. In 1981, a new disease emerges that
nobody knows anything about. In 1984, it’s found to be a retrovirus, HIV. In
1987, you have the first therapy. In 1996, you have such effective therapy
that people don’t have to die of it anymore. How did that happen? Was it
because companies all of a sudden rushed to make drugs? No. If you really
look back and analyze it, before that time society had spent some of its very
hard-earned money to study a curiosity called retroviruses. Just a curiosity
in animals. So by the time HIV was found to be a retrovirus, you already
knew that if you interfered with the protease [a type of enzyme] that you
could deactivate it. So when HIV arrived, society had right off the shelf a
huge amount of knowledge from investments made in a curiosity that at the
time had no use. It may very well be that if you were to take all the research
funding in the country and you put it in Alzheimer’s disease, you would
never get to the solution. But the answer to Alzheimer’s disease may come
from a misfolding protein in a cucumber. But how are you going to write a
grant on a cucumber? And who are you going to send it to? If somebody
gets interested in a folding protein in a cucumber and it’s a good scientific
question, leave them alone. Let them torture the cucumber.”
Casadevall’s overarching point is that the innovation ecosystem should
intentionally preserve range and inefficiency. He is fighting an uphill battle.
In 2006, when I was starting in journalism, I sat in on funding policy
hearings of a U.S. Senate subcommittee on science and space, chaired by
Texas senator Kay Bailey Hutchison. Hutchison would thumb through a
stack of scientists’ research proposals and read the titles aloud. If a title did
not directly pertain to the creation of a new commercial technology, she

whisked it from the stack and asked the room how exactly that sort of thing
would help the country get ahead of India and China. Among the disciplines
Hutchison classified as distracting from technological innovation were
biology, geology, economics, and archaeology. One can only guess how she
would have assessed the work of Louis Pasteur (who started as an artist) on
chickens with cholera, which led him to lab-created vaccines. Or Einstein’s
fanciful idea to investigate if time passes differently in high versus low
gravity, part of a theory essential to some rather useful technology, like cell
phones, which use global positioning satellites with gravitationally adjusted
clocks that sync with clocks on Earth.
In 1945, former MIT dean Vannevar Bush, who oversaw U.S. military
science during World War II—including the mass production of penicillin
and the Manhattan Project—authored a report at the request of President
Franklin Roosevelt in which he explained successful innovation culture. It
was titled “Science, the Endless Frontier,” and led to the creation of the
National Science Foundation that funded three generations of wildly
successful scientific discovery, from Doppler radar and fiber optics to web
browsers and MRIs. “Scientific progress on a broad front results from the
free play of free intellects, working on subjects of their own choice,” Bush
wrote, “in the manner dictated by their curiosity for exploration of the
unknown.”
A curious phenomenon has appeared in recent years on a near-annual
basis when the Nobel Prizes are awarded. Someone who receives one
explains that their breakthrough could not have occurred today. In 2016,
Japanese biologist Yoshinori Ohsumi closed his Nobel lecture======================================================== in

cancer, but rather in cancer related to a single organ, and the trend advances
each year. Surgeon and writer Atul Gawande pointed out that when doctors
joke about left ear surgeons, “we have to check to be sure they don’t exist.”
In the ten-thousand-hours-themed bestseller Bounce , British journalist
Matthew Syed suggested that the British government was failing for a lack
of following the Tiger Woods path of unwavering specialization. Moving
high-ranking government officials between departments, he wrote, “is no
less absurd than rotating Tiger Woods from golf to baseball to football to
hockey.”
Except that Great Britain’s massive success at recent Summer Olympics,
after decades of middling performances, was bolstered by programs set up
specifically to recruit adults to try new sports and to create a pipeline for late
developers—“slow bakers,” as one of the officials behind the program
described them to me. Apparently the idea of an athlete, even one who wants
to become elite, following a Roger path and trying different sports is not so
absurd. Elite athletes at the peak of their abilities do spend more time on
focused, deliberate practice than their near-elite peers. But when scientists
examine the entire developmental path of athletes, from early childhood, it
looks like this:

Eventual elites typically devote less time early on to deliberate practice in
the activity in which they will eventually become experts. Instead, they
undergo what researchers call a “sampling period.” They play a variety of
sports, usually in an unstructured or lightly structured environment; they
gain a range of physical proficiencies from which they can draw; they learn
about their own abilities and proclivities; and only later do they focus in and
ramp up technical practice in one area. The title of one study of athletes in
individual sports proclaimed “Late Specialization” as “the Key to Success”;
another, “Making It to the Top in Team Sports: Start Later, Intensify, and Be
Determined.”

When I began to write about these studies, I was met with thoughtful
criticism, but also denial. “Maybe in some other sport,” fans often said, “but
that’s not true of our sport.” The community of the world’s most popular
sport, soccer, was the loudest. And then, as if on cue, in late 2014 a team of
German scientists published a study showing that members of their national
team, which had just won the World Cup, were typically late specializers
who didn’t play more organized soccer than amateur-league players until age
twenty-two or later. They spent more of their childhood and adolescence
playing nonorganized soccer and other sports. Another soccer study
published two years later matched players for skill at age eleven and tracked
them for two years. Those who participated in more sports and nonorganized
soccer, “but not more organized soccer practice/ training,” improved more
by age thirteen. Findings like these have now been echoed in a huge array of
sports, from hockey to volleyball.
The professed necessity of hyperspecialization forms the core of a vast,
successful, and sometimes well-meaning marketing machine, in sports and
beyond. In reality, the Roger path to sports stardom is far more prevalent
than the Tiger path, but those athletes’ stories are much more quietly told, if
they are told at all. Some of their names you know, but their backgrounds
you probably don’t.
I started writing this introduction right after the 2018 Super Bowl, in
which a quarterback who had been drafted into professional baseball before
football (Tom Brady), faced off against one who participated in football,
basketball, baseball, and karate and had chosen between college basketball
and football (Nick Foles). Later that very same month, Czech athlete Ester
Ledecká became the first woman ever to win gold in two different sports
(skiing and snowboarding) at the same Winter Olympics. When she was
younger, Ledecká participated in multiple sports (she still plays beach
volleyball and windsurfs), focused on school, and never rushed to be number
one in teenage competition categories. The Washington Post article the day
after her second gold proclaimed, “In an era of sports specialization,
Ledecká has been an evangelist for maintaining variety.” Just after her feat,
Ukrainian boxer Vasyl Lomachenko set a record for the fewest fights needed
to win world titles in three different weight classes. Lomachenko, who took
four years off boxing as a kid to learn traditional Ukrainian dance, reflected,
“I was doing so many different sports as a young boy—gymnastics,

basketball, football, tennis—and I think, ultimately, everything came
together with all those different kinds of sports to enhance my footwork.”
Prominent sports scientist Ross Tucker summed up research in the field
simply: “We know that early sampling is key, as is diversity.”
In 2014, I included some of the findings about late specialization in sports in
the afterword of my first book, The Sports Gene . The following year, I got
an invitation to talk about that research from an unlikely audience—not
athletes or coaches, but military veterans. In preparation, I perused scientific
journals for work on specialization and career-swerving outside of the sports
world. I was struck by what I found. One study showed that early career
specializers jumped out to an earnings lead after college, but that later
specializers made up for the head start by finding work that better fit their
skills and personalities. I found a raft of studies that showed how
technological inventors increased their creative impact by accumulating
experience in different domains, compared to peers who drilled more deeply
into one; they actually benefited by proactively sacrificing a modicum of
depth for breadth as their careers progressed. There was a nearly identical
finding in a study of artistic creators.
I also began to realize that some of the people whose work I deeply
admired from afar—from Duke Ellington (who shunned music lessons to
focus on drawing and baseball as a kid) to Maryam Mirzakhani (who
dreamed of becoming a novelist and instead became the first woman to win
math’s most famous prize, the Fields Medal)—seemed to have more Roger
than Tiger in their development stories. I delved further and encountered
remarkable individuals who succeeded not in spite of their range of
experiences and interests, but because of it: a CEO who took her first job
around the time her peers were getting ready to retire; an artist who cycled
through five careers before he discovered his vocation and changed the
world; an inventor who stuck to a self-made antispecialization philosophy
and turned a small company founded in the nineteenth century into one of
the most widely resonant names in the world today.
I had only dipped my toe into research on specialization in the wider
world of work, so in my talk to the small group of military veterans I mostly
stuck to sports. I touched on the other findings only briefly, but the audience
seized on it. All were late specializers or career changers, and as they filed

up one after another to introduce themselves after the talk, I could tell that
all were at least moderately concerned, and some were borderline ashamed
of it.
They had been brought together by the Pat Tillman Foundation, which, in
the spirit of the late NFL player who left a professional football career to
become an Army Ranger, provides scholarships to veterans, active-duty
military, and military spouses who are undergoing career changes or going
back to school. They were all scholarship recipients, former paratroopers and
translators who were becoming teachers, scientists, engineers, and
entrepreneurs. They brimmed with enthusiasm, but rippled with an
undercurrent of fear. Their LinkedIn profiles didn’t show the linear
progression toward a particular career they had been told employers wanted.
They were anxious starting grad school alongside younger (sometimes much
younger) students, or changing lanes later than their peers, all because they
had been busy accumulating inimitable life and leadership experiences.
Somehow, a unique advantage had morphed in their heads into a liability.
A few days after I spoke to the Tillman Foundation group, a former Navy
SEAL who came up after the talk emailed me: “We are all transitioning from
one career to another. Several of us got together after you had left and
discussed how relieved we were to have heard you speak.” I was slightly
bemused to find that a former Navy SEAL with an undergraduate degree in
history and geophysics pursuing graduate degrees in business and public
administration from Dartmouth and Harvard could feel behind. But like the
others in the room, he had been told, implicitly or explicitly, that changing
directions was dangerous.
The talk was greeted with so much enthusiasm that the foundation invited
me to give a keynote speech at the annual conference in 2016, and then to
small group gatherings in different cities. Before each occasion, I read more
studies and spoke with more researchers and found more evidence that it
takes time—and often forgoing a head start—to develop personal and
professional range, but it is worth it.
I dove into work showing that highly credentialed experts can become so
narrow-minded that they actually get worse with experience, even while
becoming more confident—a dangerous combination. And I was stunned
when cognitive psychologists I spoke with led me to an enormous and too
often ignored body of work demonstrating that learning itself is best done
slowly to accumulate lasting knowledge, even when that means performing

poorly on tests of immediate progress. That is, the most effective learning
looks inefficient; it looks like falling behind.
Starting something new in middle age might look that way too. Mark
Zuckerberg famously noted that “young people are just smarter.” And yet a
tech founder who is fifty years old is nearly twice as likely to start a
blockbuster======================================================== many different
sources”; “they appear to flit among ideas”; “broad range of interests”;
“they read more (and more broadly) than other technologists and have a
wider range of outside interests”; “need to learn significantly across
multiple domains”; “Serial innovators also need to communicate with
various individuals with technical expertise outside of their own domain.”
Get the picture?
Charles Darwin “could be considered a professional outsider,” according
to creativity researcher Dean Keith Simonton. Darwin was not a university
faculty member nor a professional scientist at any institution, but he was
networked into the scientific community. For a time, he focused narrowly
on barnacles, but got so tired of it that he declared, “I am unwilling to spend
more time on the subject,” in the introduction to a barnacle monograph.
Like the 3M generalists and polymaths, he got bored sticking in one area, so
that was that. For his paradigm-shattering work, Darwin’s broad network
was crucial. Howard Gruber, a psychologist who studied Darwin’s journals,
wrote that Darwin only personally carried out experiments “opportune for
experimental attack by a scientific generalist such as he was.” For
everything else, he relied on correspondents, Jayshree Seth style. Darwin
always juggled multiple projects, what Gruber called his “network of
enterprise.” He had at least 231 scientific pen pals who can be grouped
roughly into thirteen broad themes based on his interests, from worms to

human sexual selection. He peppered them with questions. He cut up their
letters to paste pieces of information in his own notebooks, in which “ideas
tumble over each other in a seemingly chaotic fashion.” When his chaotic
notebooks became too unwieldy, he tore pages out and filed them by themes
of inquiry. Just for his own experiments with seeds, he corresponded with
geologists, botanists, ornithologists, and conchologists in France, South
Africa, the United States, the Azores, Jamaica, and Norway, not to mention
a number of amateur naturalists and some gardeners he happened to know.
As Gruber wrote, the activities of a creator “may appear, from the outside,
as a bewildering miscellany,” but he or she can “map” each activity onto
one of the ongoing enterprises. “In some respects,” Gruber concluded,
“Charles Darwin’s greatest works represent interpretative compilations of
facts first gathered by others.” He was a lateral-thinking integrator .
Toward the end of their book Serial Innovators, Abbie Griffin and her
coauthors depart from stoically sharing their data and observations and offer
advice to human resources managers. They are concerned that HR policies
at mature companies have such well-defined, specialized slots for
employees that potential serial innovators will look like “round pegs to the
square holes” and get screened out. Their breadth of interests do not neatly
fit a rubric. They are “π-shaped people” who dive in and out of multiple
specialties. “Look for wide-ranging interests,” they advised. “Look for
multiple hobbies and avocations. . . . When the candidate describes his or
her work, does he or she tend to focus on the boundaries and the interfaces
with other systems?” One serial innovator described his network of
enterprise as “a bunch of bobbers hanging in the water that have little
thoughts attached to them.” Hamilton creator Lin-Manuel Miranda painted
the same idea elegantly: “I have a lot of apps open in my brain right now.”
Griffin’s research team noticed that serial innovators repeatedly claimed
that they themselves would be screened out under their company’s current
hiring practices. “A mechanistic approach to hiring, while yielding highly
reproducible results, in fact reduces the numbers of high-potential [for
innovation] candidates,” they wrote. When I first spoke with him, Andy
Ouderkirk was developing a class at the University of Minnesota partly
about how to identify potential innovators. “We think a lot of them might be
frustrated by school,” he said, “because by nature they’re very broad.”
Facing uncertain environments and wicked problems, breadth of
experience is invaluable. Facing kind problems, narrow specialization can

be remarkably efficient. The problem is that we often expect the
hyperspecialist, because of their expertise in a narrow area, to magically be
able to extend their skill to wicked problems. The results can be disastrous.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 10
Fooled by Expertise
THE BET WAS ON , and it was over the fate of humanity.
On one side was Stanford biologist Paul Ehrlich. In congressional
testimony, on The Tonight Show (twenty times), and in his 1968 bestseller
The Population Bomb, Ehrlich insisted that it was too late to prevent a
doomsday apocalypse from overpopulation. On its lower left corner, the
book cover bore an image of a fuse burning low, and a reminder that the
“bomb keeps ticking.” Resource shortages would cause hundreds of
millions of starvation deaths within a decade, Ehrlich warned. The New
Republic alerted the world that the global population had already
outstripped the food supply. “The famine has started,” it proclaimed. It was
cold, hard math: human population was growing exponentially, the food
supply was not. Ehrlich was a butterfly specialist, and an accomplished one.
He knew full well that nature did not regulate animal populations delicately.
Populations exploded, blew past the available resources, and crashed. “The
shape of the population growth curve is one familiar to the biologist,” he
wrote.
Ehrlich played out hypothetical scenarios in his book, representing “the
kinds of disasters that will occur.” In one scenario, during the 1970s the
United States and China start blaming one another for mass starvation and
end up in a nuclear war. That’s the moderate scenario. In the bad one,
famine rages across the planet. Cities alternate between riots and martial
law. The American president’s environmental advisers recommend a one-
child policy and sterilization of people with low IQ scores. Russia, China,
and the United States are dragged into nuclear war, which renders the

northern two-thirds of Earth uninhabitable. Pockets of society persist in the
Southern Hemisphere, but the environmental degradation soon extinguishes
the human race. In the “cheerful” scenario, population controls begin. The
pope announces that Catholics should reproduce less, and gives his blessing
to abortion. Famine spreads, and countries teeter. By the mid-1980s, the
major death wave ends and agricultural land can begin to be rehabilitated.
The cheerful scenario only forecast half a billion or so deaths by starvation.
“I challenge you to create one more optimistic,” Ehrlich wrote, adding that
he would not count scenarios involving benevolent aliens with care
packages.
Economist Julian Simon took up Ehrlich’s challenge to create a more
optimistic picture. The late 1960s was the prime of the “green revolution.”
Technology from other sectors—water control techniques, hybridized seeds,
management strategies—moved into agriculture, and global crop yields
were increasing. Simon saw that innovation was altering the equation. More
people would actually be the solution, because it meant more good ideas
and more technological breakthroughs. So Simon proposed a bet. Ehrlich
could choose five metals that he expected to become more expensive as
resources were depleted and chaos ensued over the next decade. The
material stakes were $1,000 worth of Ehrlich’s five metals. If, ten years
hence, prices had gone down, Ehrlich would have to pay the price
difference to Simon. If prices went up, Simon would be on the hook for the
difference. Ehrlich’s liability was capped at $1,000, whereas Simon’s risk
had no roof. The bet was made official in 1980.
In October 1990, Simon found a check for $576.07 in his mailbox.
Ehrlich got smoked. The price of every one of the metals declined.
Technological change not only supported a growing population, but the
food supply per person increased year after year, on every continent. The
proportion of people who are undernourished is too high until it is zero, but
it has never been so low as it is now. In the 1960s, 50 of every 100,000
global citizens died annually from famine; now that number is 0.5. Even
without the pope’s assistance, the world’s population growth rate began a
precipitous decline that continues today. When child mortality declined and
education (especially for women) and development increased, birth rates
decreased. Humanity will need more innovation as absolute world
population continues to grow, but the growth rate is declining, rapidly. The
United Nations projects that by the end of the century human population

will be near a peak—the growth rate approaching zero—or it could even be
in decline.
Ehrlich’s starvation predictions were almost magically bad. He made
them just as technological development was dramatically altering the global
predicament, and right before the rate of population growth started a long
deceleration. And yet, the very same year he conceded the bet, Ehrlich
doubled down in another book. Sure, the timeline had been a little off, but
“now the population bomb has detonated.” Despite one erroneous
prediction after another, Ehrlich amassed an enormous following and
continued to receive prestigious awards. Simon became a standard-bearer
for scholars who felt that Ehrlich had ignored economic principles, and for
anyone angry at an incessant flow of dire predictions that did not manifest.
The kind of excessive regulations Ehrlich advocated, the Simon camp
argued, would quell the very innovation that had delivered humanity from
catastrophe. Both men became luminaries in their respective domains. And
both were mistaken.
When economists later examined metal prices for every ten-year window
from 1900 to 2008, during which time world population quadrupled, they
saw that Ehrlich would have won the bet 62 percent of the time. The catch:
commodity prices are a bad======================================================== look flat, he experimented to find out
why. It turned out he could get the effect by painting on a canvas that had a
particular weave, and then scraping the paint back with a palette knife so
that the weave itself broke up the brushstroke. “That right there is how I
learned to paint, by looking a lot.” He spent hours in the studio, forgetting
to eat because he was so engaged with the work. He considered himself an
extreme extrovert, but for the first time was finding fulfilment in an activity
that he did quietly, in a corner, by himself. And he got better, a lot better.
He got so much better that a professor told him he should apply to the
master of fine arts program at Yale. “What’s Yale?” he asked. The professor
chuckled and showed him a pamphlet. Kaphar applied, and got rejected.
The next year, he applied to Yale and a bunch of other grad schools. He got
rejected from all of them. He resolved to apply to Yale every year. By that
point, whether he got in or not was a secondary consideration. He had found
his work identity. “I’m an artist,” he said. “I’m a maker, so I’m going to
make.”
The resulting body of work eventually got him into Yale, where he was
one of the oldest students in his class. Yale was not a place to learn
technique, but by then he was used to self-teaching. At Yale he learned that
some art critics had pronounced painting dead as an important medium. “I
don’t understand how something that’s dead can make me feel so alive,”
Kaphar said. So he kept making, churning out paintings, sculptures, and
painting/sculpture combinations.
In 2011, Kaphar was researching his father’s prison history, and was
surprised to find ninety-seven men with the same name who had been
incarcerated. That spawned his “Jerome Project,” in which he used
mugshots to paint portraits of the men on wood panels with gold leaf
backgrounds, (evocative of Byzantine portraits of St. Jerome), and with tar
covering a portion of each face to represent a life scarred by prison. His

work has now been featured in venues from the Museum of Modern Art and
the National Portrait Gallery to the pages of Time magazine.
Today, Kaphar lives in New Haven, Connecticut, with his two kids and
his wife—a.k.a. the older woman he wanted to impress by taking junior
college classes. In 2015, Kaphar and a colleague founded NXTHVN
(pronounced “Next Haven”), an art space created in a former manufacturing
plant, and where early-career artists can apply for a stipend and studio
space. Those artists in turn mentor local high school students who are paid
to serve as their studio assistants. For most of the high school students, it is
their first job of any kind. Kaphar wants to diversify the entry points into
the art pipeline, because imagine who we miss if we force every Titus
Kaphar to find his vocation by chance alone.
In 2018, Kaphar won a MacArthur Foundation fellowship, colloquially
known as a “genius grant.” He doesn’t love that moniker, however. He
doesn’t really like the word “genius” at all. It makes it seem as if someone
was plopped on Earth magically knowing what to do and how to do it. It
doesn’t seem like it could encompass someone who took a junior college
class hoping for a date, and accidentally found his path.
“In that class,” Kaphar told me, “I realized that I had a visual intelligence
that no one had ever asked me to use.”
Diversifying the entry points into a given path, I think, is a productive
strategy. That includes allowing for early specialization, when it makes
sense, as one of many possibilities.
In late 2019, I had a chance to talk with Serena Williams. I hadn’t
researched her childhood at all, but I had heard that it was a Tiger story. I
was only slightly surprised when she complicated that notion. Her father
was ahead of his time, she told me. She participated in ballet, gymnastics,
taekwondo and track and field. She and Venus threw a football to develop
the motion for a powerful serve, a habit they continued as professionals.
I certainly don’t share that to suggest that pure Tiger stories do not exist.
After all, the literal Tiger story opened this book. But we may be telling
even that one slightly wrong. As Woods said in 2000: “To this day, my dad
has never asked me to go play golf. I ask him. It’s the child’s desire to play
that matters, not the parent’s desire to have the child play.”

Mozart’s childhood might be the second most influential story of
development. In researching Mozart’s childhood, I came across a letter to
Mozart’s sister from a musician and Mozart family friend; it recounted
Mozart’s father, Leopold, shooing little Wolfgang away when he asked to
play violin with the adults. “Papa [Leopold] refused him this foolish
request, because he had not yet had the least instruction in the violin, and
Papa thought that he could not possibly play anything,” the letter read.
Little Wolfgang cried, and then proceeded to play the violin in front of his
awestruck father.
There is no evidence that parents can simply manufacture what
psychologist Ellen Winner calls the “rage to master” evident in prodigies
like Woods and Mozart. For both Tiger and Mozart, it seems that their
famous fathers were initially responding to the son’s very unusual display
of both interest and prowess in a highly structured activity. Even if the goal
were to create as many Tigers and Mozarts as possible, I expect that the best
strategy would be exposing children to an array of activities and seeing if
one happens to light their fire.
On the other hand, you have people like me, who aren’t quite sure what
they’re going to be when they grow up, only—as the twelve-year-old
recommended—a list of things they’d like to learn about this year. I
recently came across a quote from Christopher Nolan—writer and director
of films like Inception , Interstellar , and The Dark Knight —on finding a
next project. “For me, it’s all about trying new things,” he said. “If you’re
going to write, you want to read a lot before you write, without any
purpose.” Of course, the purpose is to find something that stimulates you
but that you couldn’t have known to look for—an interest you didn’t know
you had. I think I’ll take that advice.
OceanofPDF.com

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I VIEW BOOK WRITING as kind of like running the 800—torture in the middle,
but if you PR or give a supreme effort, pretty soon you look back and say,
“Well, that wasn’t so bad.” It was, but still you should do it again.
All sorts of cool things transpired while I worked on this book. For
example: I learned a ton. Also, one day while my brain was overheating, a
cardinal, a blue jay, and an oriole appeared near my windowsill—that’s all
the eponymous birds of Major League Baseball teams. That never happens.
Thank you, first, to the entire team at Riverhead, especially my editor,
Courtney Young. Courtney spooked me a little when we first agreed to go
about this book project together by saying something like, “I’d be worried if
I weren’t familiar with you.” [Gulp]. She then proceeded to respond like a
great coach developing an athlete; she let me engage in broad, self-directed
activity, and when I resurfaced two years later with a manuscript that was
too long, she switched gears and responded to my desire for fast and
frequent feedback as I cut it down to size and shape. When the time came,
she gave feedback that made a wicked learning environment a bit more kind
(“Yes, I like it; now he sounds like less of a magical gnome.” —Courtney’s
feedback on what may have been an overwritten description.).
Appropriately, she has range; she almost became an engineer.
Thank you to my agent, Chris Parris-Lamb, who finished 235th in the
New York City Marathon, which is important, but not so important as his
animating mission, which, as far as I can tell, is to help writers earn their
freedom. To use a sports analogy, my strategy for working with an agent
was to draft the best athlete available and get out of the way.
Thank you to everyone who took part in my tortuous fact-checking
process, but especially Emily Krieger and Drew Bailey, and the
interviewees who gave their time (again . . . and sometimes again) so that I
could pester them about things they had already told me. Thanks to
Masaharu Kawamata and Tyler Walker for help with Japanese translation.

Thanks to Malcolm Gladwell. The first time we met was for a debate at
the MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference, framed as “10, 000-hours vs.
The Sports Gene.” (It’s on YouTube.) It turned into a great discussion, and I
think we both took new thoughts home. He invited me for an interval
workout the next day, and then again, and we got to talking (only during
warmup) about that whole “Roger vs. Tiger” idea. The discussion was filed
away somewhere in my head and surfaced when I interacted with Tillman
Scholars. I’m not sure I would have explored the topic without it. As
psychologist Howard Gruber wrote, “Ideas are not really lost, they are
reactivated when useful.”
This book was the greatest organizational challenge I’ve faced; figuring
out how to gather information, what to include, and then where to put it
overwhelmed me many times. A quote kept coming to mind: “It’s a little
like wrestling a gorilla. You don’t quit when you’re tired, you quit when the
gorilla’s tired.” Whatever the reception, I’m proud I kept coming back for
more. And I thank the friends and family who supported me and accepted
my answer of “hopefully next year” to so many questions. Believe me, it’s
not that I didn’t want tickets to that thing I like. It’s just that, as any
Westerosi knows, my house words are: “When my book is done.” Those
supporters: My brother, Daniel (whose enthusiastic response to my
rambling about ideas in chapter 4 convinced me to write about them); sister,
Charna (she may have purchased all the copies of my last book); my
parents, Mark and Eve, who always waited until after I did something
ridiculous to weigh in, rather than prohibiting it beforehand. It makes for a
vibrant sampling period.======================================================== proxy for population effects, particularly over a
single decade. The variable that both men were certain would vindicate
their worldviews actually had little to do with them. Commodity prices
waxed and waned with macroeconomic cycles, and a recession during the
bet brought the prices down. Ehrlich and Simon might as well have flipped
a coin and both declared victory.
Both men dug in. Each declared his faith in science and the undisputed
primacy of facts. And each continued to miss the value of the other’s ideas.
Ehrlich was wrong about population (and the apocalypse), but right on
aspects of environmental degradation. Simon was right about the influence
of human ingenuity on the food and energy supply, but wrong in claiming
that improvements in air and water quality also vindicated his predictions.
Ironically, those improvements failed to arise naturally from technological
initiative and markets, and rather were bolstered through regulations
pressed by Ehrlich and others.
Ideally, intellectual sparring partners “hone each other’s arguments so
that they are sharper and better,” Yale historian Paul Sabin wrote. “The
opposite happened with Paul Ehrlich and Julian Simon.” As each man

amassed more information for his own view, each became more dogmatic,
and the inadequacies in their models of the world more stark.
There is a particular kind of thinker, one who becomes more entrenched
in their single big idea about how the world works even in the face of
contrary facts, whose predictions become worse, not better, as they amass
information for their mental representation of the world. They are on
television and in the news every day, making worse and worse predictions
while claiming victory, and they have been rigorously studied.
It started at the 1984 meeting of the National Research Council’s committee
on American-Soviet relations. Newly tenured psychologist and political
scientist Philip Tetlock was thirty years old, by far the most junior
committee member. He listened intently as members discussed Soviet
intentions and American policies. Renowned experts confidently delivered
authoritative predictions, and Tetlock was struck by the fact that they were
often perfectly contradictory to one another, and impervious to
counterarguments.
Tetlock decided to put expert predictions to the test. With the Cold War in
full swing, he began a study to collect short-and long-term forecasts from
284 highly educated experts (most had doctorates) who averaged more than
twelve years of experience in their specialties. The questions covered
international politics and economics, and in order to make sure the
predictions were concrete, the experts had to give specific probabilities of
future events. Tetlock had to collect enough predictions over enough time
that he could separate lucky and unlucky streaks from true skill. The project
lasted twenty years, and comprised 82,361 probability estimates about the
future. The results limned a very wicked world.
The average expert was a horrific forecaster. Their areas of specialty,
years of experience, academic degrees, and even (for some) access to
classified information made no difference. They were bad at short-term
forecasting, bad at long-term forecasting, and bad at forecasting in every
domain. When experts declared that some future event was impossible or
nearly impossible, it nonetheless occurred 15 percent of the time. When
they declared a sure thing, it failed to transpire more than one-quarter of the
time. The Danish proverb that warns “It is difficult to make predictions,
especially about the future,” was right. Dilettantes who were pitted against

the experts were no more clairvoyant, but at least they were less likely to
call future events either impossible or sure things, leaving them with fewer
laugh-out-loud errors to atone for—if, that was, the experts had believed in
atonement.
Many experts never admitted systematic flaws in their judgment, even in
the face of their results. When they succeeded, it was completely on their
own merits—their expertise clearly enabled them to figure out the world.
When they missed wildly, it was always a near miss; they had certainly
understood the situation, they insisted, and if just one little thing had gone
differently, they would have nailed it. Or, like Ehrlich, their understanding
was correct; the timeline was just a bit off. Victories were total victories,
and defeats were always just a touch of bad luck away from having been
victories too. Experts remained undefeated while losing constantly. “There
is often a curiously inverse relationship,” Tetlock concluded, “between how
well forecasters thought they were doing and how well they did.”
There was also a “perverse inverse relationship” between fame and
accuracy. The more likely an expert was to have his or her predictions
featured on op-ed pages and television, the more likely they were always
wrong. Or, not always wrong. Rather, as Tetlock and his coauthor succinctly
put it in their book Superforecasting, “roughly as accurate as a dart-
throwing chimpanzee.”
Early predictions in Tetlock’s research pertained to the future of the
Soviet Union. There were experts (usually liberal) who saw Mikhail
Gorbachev as an earnest reformer who would be able to change the Soviet
Union and keep it intact for a while, and experts (usually conservative) who
felt that the Soviet Union was immune to reform, ruinous by its very nature,
and losing legitimacy. Both sides were partly right and partly wrong.
Gorbachev did bring real reform, opening the Soviet Union to the world and
empowering citizens. But those reforms uncorked bottled-up forces in the
republics outside of Russia, where the system had lost legitimacy. Starting
with Estonia declaring its sovereignty, the forces blew the Soviet Union
apart. Both camps of experts were completely taken by surprise at the swift
end of the USSR, and their predictions about the course of events were
terrible. There was, however, one subgroup within the experts that managed
to see more of what was coming.
Unlike Ehrlich and Simon, they were not vested in a single approach.
They were able to take from each argument and integrate apparently

contradictory worldviews. They agreed that Gorbachev was a real reformer,
and that the Soviet Union had lost legitimacy outside of Russia. Some of
those integrators actually foresaw that the end of the Soviet Union was
close at hand, and that real reforms would be the catalyst.
The integrators outperformed their colleagues on pretty much everything,
but they especially trounced them on long-term predictions. Eventually,
Tetlock conferred nicknames (borrowed from philosopher Isaiah Berlin)
that became famous throughout the psychology and intelligence-gathering
communities: the narrow-view hedgehogs, who “know one big thing,” and
the integrator foxes, who “know many little things.”
Hedgehog experts were deep but narrow. Some had spent their careers
studying a single problem. Like Ehrlich and Simon, they fashioned tidy
theories of how the world works through the single lens of their specialty,
and then bent every event to fit them. The hedgehogs, according to Tetlock,
“toil devotedly” within one tradition of their specialty, “and reach for
formulaic solutions to ill-defined problems.” Outcomes did not matter; they
were proven right by both successes and failures, and burrowed further into
their ideas. It made them outstanding at predicting the past, but dart-
throwing chimps at predicting the future. The foxes, meanwhile, “draw
from an eclectic array of traditions, and accept ambiguity and
contradiction,” Tetlock wrote. Where hedgehogs represented narrowness,
foxes ranged outside a single discipline or theory and embodied breadth.
Incredibly, the hedgehogs performed especially poorly on long-term
predictions within their domain of expertise. They actually got worse as
they accumulated credentials and experience in their field. The more
information they had to work with, the more they could fit any story to their
worldview. This did give hedgehogs one conspicuous advantage. Viewing
every world event through their preferred keyhole made it easy to fashion
compelling stories about anything that occurred, and to tell the stories with
adamant authority. In other words, they make great TV .
Tetlock is clearly a fox. He is a professor at Penn, and when I visited his
home in Philadelphia I was enveloped in a casual conversation about
politics he was having with colleagues, including his wife and collaborator,
Barbara Mellers, also a psychologist and eminent scholar of decision
making. Tetlock would start in one direction, then interrogate himself and

make an about-face. He drew on economics, political science, and history to
make one quick point about a current debate in psychology, and then
stopped on a dime and noted, “But if your assumptions about human nature
and how a good society needs to be structured are different, you would see
this completely differently.” When a new idea entered the conversation, he
was quick with “Let’s say for the sake of argument,” which led to him
playing out viewpoints from different disciplines or political or emotional
perspectives. He tried on ideas like Instagram filters until it was hard to tell
which he actually believed.
In 2005, he published the results of his long study of expert judgment,
and they caught the attention of the Intelligence Advanced Research
Projects Activity (IARPA), a government organization that supports
research on the U.S. intelligence community’s most difficult challenges. In
2011, IARPA launched a four-year prediction tournament in which five
researcher-led teams competed. Each team could recruit, train, and
experiment however it saw fit. Every day for four years, predictions were
due at 9 a.m. Eastern time. The questions were hard. What is the chance that
a member will withdraw from the European Union by a target date? Will
the Nikkei close above 9,500? What is the likelihood======================================================== many different
sources”; “they appear to flit among ideas”; “broad range of interests”;
“they read more (and more broadly) than other technologists and have a
wider range of outside interests”; “need to learn significantly across
multiple domains”; “Serial innovators also need to communicate with
various individuals with technical expertise outside of their own domain.”
Get the picture?
Charles Darwin “could be considered a professional outsider,” according
to creativity researcher Dean Keith Simonton. Darwin was not a university
faculty member nor a professional scientist at any institution, but he was
networked into the scientific community. For a time, he focused narrowly
on barnacles, but got so tired of it that he declared, “I am unwilling to spend
more time on the subject,” in the introduction to a barnacle monograph.
Like the 3M generalists and polymaths, he got bored sticking in one area, so
that was that. For his paradigm-shattering work, Darwin’s broad network
was crucial. Howard Gruber, a psychologist who studied Darwin’s journals,
wrote that Darwin only personally carried out experiments “opportune for
experimental attack by a scientific generalist such as he was.” For
everything else, he relied on correspondents, Jayshree Seth style. Darwin
always juggled multiple projects, what Gruber called his “network of
enterprise.” He had at least 231 scientific pen pals who can be grouped
roughly into thirteen broad themes based on his interests, from worms to

human sexual selection. He peppered them with questions. He cut up their
letters to paste pieces of information in his own notebooks, in which “ideas
tumble over each other in a seemingly chaotic fashion.” When his chaotic
notebooks became too unwieldy, he tore pages out and filed them by themes
of inquiry. Just for his own experiments with seeds, he corresponded with
geologists, botanists, ornithologists, and conchologists in France, South
Africa, the United States, the Azores, Jamaica, and Norway, not to mention
a number of amateur naturalists and some gardeners he happened to know.
As Gruber wrote, the activities of a creator “may appear, from the outside,
as a bewildering miscellany,” but he or she can “map” each activity onto
one of the ongoing enterprises. “In some respects,” Gruber concluded,
“Charles Darwin’s greatest works represent interpretative compilations of
facts first gathered by others.” He was a lateral-thinking integrator .
Toward the end of their book Serial Innovators, Abbie Griffin and her
coauthors depart from stoically sharing their data and observations and offer
advice to human resources managers. They are concerned that HR policies
at mature companies have such well-defined, specialized slots for
employees that potential serial innovators will look like “round pegs to the
square holes” and get screened out. Their breadth of interests do not neatly
fit a rubric. They are “π-shaped people” who dive in and out of multiple
specialties. “Look for wide-ranging interests,” they advised. “Look for
multiple hobbies and avocations. . . . When the candidate describes his or
her work, does he or she tend to focus on the boundaries and the interfaces
with other systems?” One serial innovator described his network of
enterprise as “a bunch of bobbers hanging in the water that have little
thoughts attached to them.” Hamilton creator Lin-Manuel Miranda painted
the same idea elegantly: “I have a lot of apps open in my brain right now.”
Griffin’s research team noticed that serial innovators repeatedly claimed
that they themselves would be screened out under their company’s current
hiring practices. “A mechanistic approach to hiring, while yielding highly
reproducible results, in fact reduces the numbers of high-potential [for
innovation] candidates,” they wrote. When I first spoke with him, Andy
Ouderkirk was developing a class at the University of Minnesota partly
about how to identify potential innovators. “We think a lot of them might be
frustrated by school,” he said, “because by nature they’re very broad.”
Facing uncertain environments and wicked problems, breadth of
experience is invaluable. Facing kind problems, narrow specialization can

be remarkably efficient. The problem is that we often expect the
hyperspecialist, because of their expertise in a narrow area, to magically be
able to extend their skill to wicked problems. The results can be disastrous.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 10
Fooled by Expertise
THE BET WAS ON , and it was over the fate of humanity.
On one side was Stanford biologist Paul Ehrlich. In congressional
testimony, on The Tonight Show (twenty times), and in his 1968 bestseller
The Population Bomb, Ehrlich insisted that it was too late to prevent a
doomsday apocalypse from overpopulation. On its lower left corner, the
book cover bore an image of a fuse burning low, and a reminder that the
“bomb keeps ticking.” Resource shortages would cause hundreds of
millions of starvation deaths within a decade, Ehrlich warned. The New
Republic alerted the world that the global population had already
outstripped the food supply. “The famine has started,” it proclaimed. It was
cold, hard math: human population was growing exponentially, the food
supply was not. Ehrlich was a butterfly specialist, and an accomplished one.
He knew full well that nature did not regulate animal populations delicately.
Populations exploded, blew past the available resources, and crashed. “The
shape of the population growth curve is one familiar to the biologist,” he
wrote.
Ehrlich played out hypothetical scenarios in his book, representing “the
kinds of disasters that will occur.” In one scenario, during the 1970s the
United States and China start blaming one another for mass starvation and
end up in a nuclear war. That’s the moderate scenario. In the bad one,
famine rages across the planet. Cities alternate between riots and martial
law. The American president’s environmental advisers recommend a one-
child policy and sterilization of people with low IQ scores. Russia, China,
and the United States are dragged into nuclear war, which renders the

northern two-thirds of Earth uninhabitable. Pockets of society persist in the
Southern Hemisphere, but the environmental degradation soon extinguishes
the human race. In the “cheerful” scenario, population controls begin. The
pope announces that Catholics should reproduce less, and gives his blessing
to abortion. Famine spreads, and countries teeter. By the mid-1980s, the
major death wave ends and agricultural land can begin to be rehabilitated.
The cheerful scenario only forecast half a billion or so deaths by starvation.
“I challenge you to create one more optimistic,” Ehrlich wrote, adding that
he would not count scenarios involving benevolent aliens with care
packages.
Economist Julian Simon took up Ehrlich’s challenge to create a more
optimistic picture. The late 1960s was the prime of the “green revolution.”
Technology from other sectors—water control techniques, hybridized seeds,
management strategies—moved into agriculture, and global crop yields
were increasing. Simon saw that innovation was altering the equation. More
people would actually be the solution, because it meant more good ideas
and more technological breakthroughs. So Simon proposed a bet. Ehrlich
could choose five metals that he expected to become more expensive as
resources were depleted and chaos ensued over the next decade. The
material stakes were $1,000 worth of Ehrlich’s five metals. If, ten years
hence, prices had gone down, Ehrlich would have to pay the price
difference to Simon. If prices went up, Simon would be on the hook for the
difference. Ehrlich’s liability was capped at $1,000, whereas Simon’s risk
had no roof. The bet was made official in 1980.
In October 1990, Simon found a check for $576.07 in his mailbox.
Ehrlich got smoked. The price of every one of the metals declined.
Technological change not only supported a growing population, but the
food supply per person increased year after year, on every continent. The
proportion of people who are undernourished is too high until it is zero, but
it has never been so low as it is now. In the 1960s, 50 of every 100,000
global citizens died annually from famine; now that number is 0.5. Even
without the pope’s assistance, the world’s population growth rate began a
precipitous decline that continues today. When child mortality declined and
education (especially for women) and development increased, birth rates
decreased. Humanity will need more innovation as absolute world
population continues to grow, but the growth rate is declining, rapidly. The
United Nations projects that by the end of the century human population

will be near a peak—the growth rate approaching zero—or it could even be
in decline.
Ehrlich’s starvation predictions were almost magically bad. He made
them just as technological development was dramatically altering the global
predicament, and right before the rate of population growth started a long
deceleration. And yet, the very same year he conceded the bet, Ehrlich
doubled down in another book. Sure, the timeline had been a little off, but
“now the population bomb has detonated.” Despite one erroneous
prediction after another, Ehrlich amassed an enormous following and
continued to receive prestigious awards. Simon became a standard-bearer
for scholars who felt that Ehrlich had ignored economic principles, and for
anyone angry at an incessant flow of dire predictions that did not manifest.
The kind of excessive regulations Ehrlich advocated, the Simon camp
argued, would quell the very innovation that had delivered humanity from
catastrophe. Both men became luminaries in their respective domains. And
both were mistaken.
When economists later examined metal prices for every ten-year window
from 1900 to 2008, during which time world population quadrupled, they
saw that Ehrlich would have won the bet 62 percent of the time. The catch:
commodity prices are a bad======================================================== were then given a chance to get paid if they read contrary
arguments, two-thirds decided they would rather not even look at the
counterarguments, never mind seriously entertain them. The aversion to
contrary ideas is not a simple artifact of stupidity or ignorance. Yale law and
psychology professor Dan Kahan has shown that more scientifically literate
adults are actually more likely to become dogmatic about politically
polarizing topics in science. Kahan thinks it could be because they are
better at finding evidence to confirm their feelings: the more time they
spend on the topic, the more hedgehog-like they become.
In a study during the run-up to the Brexit vote, a small majority of both
Remainers and Brexiters were able to correctly interpret made-up statistics
about the efficacy of a rash-curing skin cream, but when voters were given
the same exact data presented as if it indicated that immigration either
increased or decreased crime, hordes of Brits suddenly became innumerate
and misinterpreted statistics that disagreed with their political beliefs.
Kahan found the same phenomenon in the United States using skin cream
and gun control. Kahan also documented a personality feature that fought

back against that propensity: science curiosity. Not science knowledge,
science curiosity .
Kahan and colleagues measured science curiosity cleverly, smuggling
relevant questions into what looked like consumer marketing surveys, and
tracking how people pursued follow-up information after viewing videos
with particular content, some of them science-related. The most science-
curious folk always chose to look at new evidence, whether or not it agreed
with their current beliefs. Less science-curious adults were like hedgehogs:
they became more resistant to contrary evidence and more politically
polarized as they gained subject matter knowledge. Those who were high in
science curiosity bucked that trend. Their foxy hunt for information was
like a literal fox’s hunt for prey: roam freely, listen carefully, and consume
omnivorously. Just as Tetlock says of the best forecasters, it is not what they
think, but how they think. The best forecasters are high in active open-
mindedness. They are also extremely curious, and don’t merely consider
contrary ideas, they proactively cross disciplines looking for them. “Depth
can be inadequate without breadth,” wrote Jonathan Baron, the psychologist
who developed measurements of active open-mindedness.
Charles Darwin must have been one of the most curious and actively
open-minded human beings in history. His first four models of evolution
were forms of creationism or intelligent design. (The fifth model treated
creation as a separate question.) He made a point of copying into his notes
any fact or observation he encountered that ran contrary to a theory he was
working on. He relentlessly attacked his own ideas, dispensing with one
model after another, until he arrived at a theory that fit the totality of the
evidence. But before he even started on that life’s work, he needed a push
from an actively open-minded teammate—or mentor, really. John Stevens
Henslow was the priest, geologist, and botany professor who arranged
Darwin’s place aboard the HMS Beagle . Before the ship set sail, he told
Darwin to read a controversial new book, Principles of Geology, by Charles
Lyell. Lyell argued that Earth had changed very gradually over time by
processes that continued in the present. Henslow could not accept Lyell’s
description of geology as entirely separate from theology, warning Darwin
“on no account to accept the views therein advocated.” But, in foxlike
fashion, he set aside his own revulsion and urged his mentee to read the
book. It was a revelation. According to science historian Janet Browne, “In

one of the most remarkable interchanges in the history of science, Lyell’s
book taught Darwin how to think about nature.”
None of this is to say that hedgehog experts are unnecessary. They
produce vital knowledge. Einstein was a hedgehog. He saw simplicity
beneath complexity, and found elegant theories to prove it. But he also
spent the last thirty years of his life in a rigid quest for a single theory of
everything that would explain away the messy apparent randomness
inherent to quantum mechanics, a field spawned in part by his own work.
As astrophysicist Glen Mackie wrote, “A consensus seems to exist: in later
years, Einstein worked with mathematical blinkers, immune to relevant
discoveries, and unable to change his method of investigation.” God does
not play dice with the universe, Einstein asserted, figuratively. Niels Bohr,
his contemporary who illuminated the structure of atoms (using analogies to
Saturn’s rings and the solar system), replied that Einstein should keep an
open mind and not tell God how to run the universe.
Beneath complexity, hedgehogs tend to see simple, deterministic rules of
cause and effect framed by their area of expertise, like repeating patterns on
a chessboard. Foxes see complexity in what others mistake for simple cause
and effect. They understand that most cause-and-effect relationships are
probabilistic, not deterministic. There are unknowns, and luck, and even
when history apparently repeats, it does not do so precisely. They recognize
that they are operating in the very definition of a wicked learning
environment, where it can be very hard to learn, from either wins or losses.
In wicked domains that lack automatic feedback, experience alone does not
improve performance. Effective habits of mind are more important, and
they can be developed. In four straight years of forecasting tournaments,
Tetlock and Mellers’s research group showed that an hour of basic training
in foxy habits improved accuracy. One habit was a lot like the analogical
thinking that helped the venture capitalists and movie enthusiasts in chapter
5 make better projections of investment returns and film revenues.
Basically, forecasters can improve by generating a list of separate events
with deep structural similarities, rather than focusing only on internal
details of the specific event in question. Few events are 100 percent novel—
uniqueness is a matter of degree, as Tetlock puts it—and creating the list
forces a forecaster implicitly to think like a statistician.

For example, in 2015, forecasters were asked if Greece would exit the
eurozone that year. No country had ever left, so the question seemed totally
unique. But there were plenty of examples of international negotiation
failures, exits from international agreements, and forced currency
conversions that allowed the best forecasters to ground themselves in what
usually happens without focusing narrowly on all the unique details of the
present situation. Starting with the details—the inside view—is dangerous.
Hedgehog experts have more than enough knowledge about the minutiae of
an issue in their specialty to do just what Dan Kahan suggested: cherry-pick
details that fit their all-encompassing theories. Their deep knowledge works
against them. Skillful forecasters depart from the problem at hand to
consider completely unrelated events with structural commonalities rather
than relying on intuition based on personal experience or a single area of
expertise.
Another aspect of the forecaster training involved ferociously dissecting
prediction results in search of lessons, especially for predictions that turned
out bad. They made a wicked learning environment, one with no automatic
feedback, a little more kind by creating rigorous feedback at every
opportunity. In Tetlock’s twenty-year study, both foxes and hedgehogs were
quick to update their beliefs after successful predictions, by reinforcing
them even more strongly. When an outcome took them by surprise,
however, foxes were much more likely to adjust their ideas. Hedgehogs
barely budged. Some hedgehogs made authoritative predictions that turned
out wildly wrong, and then updated their theories in the wrong direction .
They became even more convinced of the original beliefs that led them
astray. “Good judges are good belief updaters,” according to Tetlock. If they
make a bet and lose, they embrace the logic of a loss just as they would the
reinforcement of a win.
That is called, in a word: learning. Sometimes, it involves putting
experience aside entirely.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 11
Learning to Drop Your Familiar Tools
JAKE, THE ATHLETIC-LOOKING sandy blond, speaks first. He wants to race the
car. “What if everybody just agrees?” he asks. “I say, race this thang.”
It was early afternoon in fall, and Jake and six of his second-year
Harvard Business School classmates found a shady spot where they could
eat their lunches and talk. 
*
 Their professor had given them three pages
containing one of the most famous business school case studies ever
created, known as Carter Racing. The crux is whether the fictional Carter
Racing team’s car should compete in the biggest race of the season, which
begins in one hour.
The argument in favor of racing: thanks to a custom turbocharger, Carter
Racing has placed in the money (top five) in twelve of twenty-four races.
That success secured an oil company sponsorship, and a trial sponsorship
from prestigious (and also fictional) Goodstone Tire. Carter Racing won the
last race, its fourth win of the season. Today’s race will be on national TV,
and if Carter Racing finishes in the top five, it will likely draw a $2 million
sponsorship from Goodstone. If Carter Racing chooses not to race and
withdraws, it would lose part of its entry fee and have to pay back some
sponsor money. The team would end a stellar season $80,000 in the hole,
and may never get another shot this big. Racing seems like a no-brainer.
The argument against racing: in seven of twenty-four races, the engine
failed, each time damaging the car. In the last two races, the mechanics used
a new engine-prep procedure and had no trouble, but they aren’t sure what
caused the problem before. If the======================================================== dates to 1592. In the New Latin form “Johannes factotum ”, it was
contained in a pamphlet by a playwright criticizing his own industry. The
jab refers to a poet with no university education who was apparently
involved in various other roles, like copying scripts and bit-part acting, even
trying to write plays. The poet on the receiving end of the insult: a young
William Shakespeare. The phrase evolved over time, and today it’s usually
“jack of all trades, master of none.” I think it is culturally telling that we
habitually hack off the end of the long version: “A jack of all trades is a
master of none, but oftentimes better than a master of one.”
Lately I’ve been thinking in a more personal way about the implications
of these cultural cues, and of the research in Range . Between the time I
turned in the final manuscript and the time the hardcover was published, I
became a parent. I’ve been asking myself how, in this new adventure, I
might (eventually) wield some of what I learned. That, in turn, led me to a
bit of analogical thinking: at the moment, I’m conceiving of my role as akin
to the role of a coach-like mentor in the Army’s “talent-based branching”
program. I realize it might seem odd for me to liken my parenting strategy
to a military program—one that I mentioned only in a footnote here . But
this is not a surface analogy: it’s a deeper, structural analogy.
The talent-based branching program grew out of the Army’s realization
(discussed in chapter 6) that it had developed a match quality problem,
particularly with West Point and ROTC cadets who received scholarships.
The Army persisted in a traditional model of talent development: assigning
future officers to a career path before they knew much about their own
abilities and interests, or much of anything about the career. Cadets could
express preferences, but it amounted to requesting a profession they did not
know well enough for the person they had not yet become. And once they
chose, they were stuck. In a knowledge economy, bursting with sampling

and lateral mobility, cadets simply left the service (in droves) if they turned
out to have a subpar career match. The talent-based branching program was
designed to help young officers get a better understanding of potential
careers earlier in the selection process, and discover their own interests and
talents at the same time. Essentially, it provides them with a sampling
period.
As officers-in-training cycle through classes, internship-like work
experiences, and field training that exposes them to different jobs, they are
encouraged to take part in constant self-reflection, both on their own (which
they can track in an online portal) and with mentors. (Learning about and
reflecting on their own strengths and weaknesses, according to an Army
Strategic Studies Institute monograph, “can sometimes be a bit of a shock.”)
The idea is to foster better match quality, and in turn to improve
performance, satisfaction, and retention. When talent-based branching was
piloted with West Point cadets, nearly 90 percent of participating cadets
changed at least one of their top three career preferences. Once again: we
learn who we are in practice, not in theory.
I think that’s a useful model for parenting. First, I’d like to facilitate a
sampling period for my kid—to expose him to a variety of experiences and
possibilities. (A 2019 OECD report found that children already significantly
narrow their ideas of possible careers by age seven. “We must fight to keep
their horizons open,” said Andreas Schleicher, OECD’s director for
education and skills.) And then my role is that of the mentor, supporting my
son by helping him get the maximum amount of signal about his own
talents, interests, and options from each experience. I hope that will help
guide him to good match quality, broaden his toolbox en route, and form a
habit of regular reflection reminiscent of the dark horses from chapter 7,
who repeatedly say to themselves: “Here’s who I am at the moment, here
are my motivations, here’s what I’ve found I like to do, here’s what I’d like
to learn, and here are the opportunities. Which of these is the best match
right now? And maybe a year from now I’ll switch because I’ll find
something better.”
Shortly after Range came out, Ruth Brennan Morrey—a former college
soccer captain, pro triathlete, Olympic Trials marathon qualifier, and
psychology PhD—tagged me in an apt tweet: “Listening to @DavidEpstein
Range in the car with twelve-year-old daughter. ‘Mom, why do we make
“What I want to be when I grow up” signs on the first day of school? We

should make “Top 5 things I want to learn about this year” signs.’ Smart
cookie. :-)” I think I’ll borrow the twelve-year-old’s idea.
Ultimately, I think the idea of helping individuals get the maximum
match quality signal from each zig and zag is a good model, whether one is
“managing” kids, mentees, teammates, employees, or, as management
scholar Peter Drucker put it twenty years ago in a prophetic Harvard
Business Review article, “managing oneself.” The summary atop the article
—which predicts that workers would increasingly have longer and
multifaceted careers—reads: “Success in the knowledge economy comes to
those who know themselves—their strengths, their values, and how they
best perform.”
That is often easier said than done. One of the most common questions I
received after the hardcover publication of Range came from people who
viewed themselves as latecomers or generalists; the refrain was that they
believe employers will view their varied background as a liability, so they
downplay it. They would ask me how to make it a selling point, or at least
not a liability.
I get it. Weeks before publication, I had the honor of participating for the
second time on the final selection committee for the Pat Tillman
Foundation, which awards scholarships to veterans to aid professional
development and career changes. I was hyperconscious of the fact that
when I began reviewing an application by perusing the candidate’s résumé,
my first, reflexive impression was sometimes that they appeared a bit
scattered. But then I would delve more deeply into their journey, and what
appeared scattered at first blush became something completely different.
Let’s say a hypothetical candidate started work after high school or college.
They didn’t feel fulfilled, so they joined the military. Once enlisted, they
ended up doing something other than what they expected—say, organizing
medical care for citizens of a remote village in another country—and during
that time they learned something about international relations, or about
bureaucratic dysfunction, or about the administration of public health
initiatives. Meanwhile, they also learned they were good (or not so good) at
and interested in things they had not expected, and they returned to civilian
life with new ideas about a field to enter or a business to start. Viewed
holistically, what initially looked scattered on a résumé morphed into a

journey in which the traveler was responding to lived experience with
changes of direction, rather than continuing down an initial path just
because they started there. In my experience with the foundation, applicants
who win a scholarship are often those who explain a varied path—including
stops along the way that sometimes seem far afield—as a series of lessons
and subsequent pivots. I think that is a good strategy to keep in mind: rather
than hiding diverse experience, explain it.
People who told me that they downplayed their broad backgrounds
worried that their online résumés would not serve them well. I think that’s a
valid concern, and a shame if it holds them back. LinkedIn is the most
popular résumé database, and the site’s own research has found that one of
the strongest predictors of who will eventually become an executive is the
number of different job functions an individual has worked across. Based
on that analysis, LinkedIn’s principal economist, Guy Berger, gave
straightforward advice: “My recommendation for those of you who want to
become executives is to work across as many job functions as possible.”
Executives with more varied careers have also been found to be “more
likely to have novel strategies . . . which is key to a sustainable competitive
advantage,” according to Gina Dokko, a professor at the University of
California-Davis Graduate School of Management. “Research has
established pretty firmly that diverse groups of people are better at
innovation and problem solving, but more recent research is finding that
diverse career histories within a single person can also benefit
performance.”
Plus, career-path swerves are now common. Separate LinkedIn research
found that nearly half of professionals who switch jobs move to a different
industry—up about 10 percent from a decade ago—and 60 percent move to
a completely new job function. So perhaps it would be a good idea for sites
that host résumés, and organizations that review them, to include some
function that allows users the chance to share their résumé as a narrative
journey in which they can explain the lessons of their zigs and zags, rather
than just list them as bullet points. In my mind, a system that leads people
to downplay previous experiences, as if they were entirely wasted, is a
counterproductive one. We shouldn’t be ashamed of broad experience, or of
needing time to find match quality. Take it from Angela Duckworth, the
researcher whose work popularized the psychological construct of “grit.”

Two days before Range was published, an edition of Duckworth’s weekly
email was titled, “Summer is for Sampling.” “Many parents ask me for
advice on how to get their kids to stick to one thing for years and years like
the paragons of grit I study,” Duckworth wrote. “I can empathize. In the
decade of adult life it took me to commit to becoming a psychologist, I was
desperate for direction to match my determination.”
Duckworth added that it is neither======================================================== McDonald told me that
engineers who pushed to abort might have been cast as “Chicken Littles.”
Chicken Little doesn’t fare well in the space business. As NASA engineer
Mary Shafer once articulated, “Insisting on perfect safety is for people who
don’t have the balls to live in the real world.” It is no wonder that
organizations struggle to cultivate experts who are both proficient with their
tools and prepared to drop them. But there is an organizational strategy that
can help. The strategy, strange as it sounds, is to send a mixed message.
“Congruence” is a social science term for cultural “fit” among an
institution’s components—values, goals, vision, self-concepts, and
leadership styles. Since the 1980s, congruence has been a pillar of
organizational theory. An effective culture is both consistent and strong.
When all signals point clearly in the same direction, it promotes self-
reinforcing consistency, and people like consistency.
Plenty of profiles of individual businesses were written in support of
congruence. But in the first study that systematically examined a broad
swath of organizations across an industry, researchers who studied cultural
congruence at 334 institutions of higher education found that it had no
influence on any measure of organizational success whatsoever.
Administrators, department heads, and trustees in strongly congruent
institutions did have an easier time classifying the culture when asked, but
there was no impact at all on performance, from the academic and career
development of students to the satisfaction of faculty and the financial
health of the college. The researcher who led that work went on to study

thousands of businesses. She found that the most effective leaders and
organizations had range; they were, in effect, paradoxical. They could be
demanding and nurturing, orderly and entrepreneurial, even hierarchical
and individualistic all at once. A level of ambiguity, it seemed, was not
harmful. In decision making, it can broaden an organization’s toolbox in a
way that is uniquely valuable .
Philip Tetlock and Barbara Mellers showed that thinkers who tolerate
ambiguity make the best forecasts; one of Tetlock’s former graduate
students, University of Texas professor Shefali Patil, spearheaded a project
with them to show that cultures can build in a form of ambiguity that forces
decision makers to use more than one tool, and to become more flexible and
learn more readily.
In one experiment, subjects played the role of corporate human resources
managers who had to predict the performance of job applicants. The
managers were presented with a standard evaluation process that showed
them how a candidate’s skills were typically weighted, and then told that
they would be evaluated (and paid) based on how they made decisions. In a
sped-up simulation of real life, after each prediction they could see how the
candidate actually performed according to company records. In some
batches of applications, the candidates performed as the standard evaluation
process predicted; in others, they weren’t even close. Yet, over and over, the
individual managers conformed to standard procedure no matter what the
results told them, even when it clearly was not working, and even when a
better system was easily discoverable. They failed to learn with experience.
Until a wrinkle was added. Conformist managers were given fake Harvard
Business Review research proclaiming that successful groups prioritize
independence and dissent. Miraculously, their minds were opened and they
started learning. They began to see when the standard evaluation process
clearly needed to be modified or discarded. They were learning with
experience, and their predictions became more accurate. The managers
were benefitting from incongruence . The formal, conformist company
process rules were balanced out by an informal culture of individual
autonomy in decision making and dissent from the typical way of doing
things.
Incongruence worked in the other direction as well. HR managers who
were given a standard evaluation process but told that only the accuracy of
their predictions mattered began by ditching the process and making up

their own rules. They never learned when the standard process did indeed
work. In that case, the cure was fake Harvard Business Review research
indicating that successful groups prioritize cohesion, loyalty, and finding
common ground. Again, the HR managers became learning machines; they
suddenly hewed closer to the traditional process when it had value, but
continued to deviate readily when it didn’t, as NASA should have.
Business school students are widely taught to believe the congruence
model, that a good manager can always align every element of work into a
culture where all influences are mutually reinforcing—whether toward
cohesion or individualism. But cultures can actually be too internally
consistent. With incongruence, “you’re building in cross-checks,” Tetlock
told me.
The experiments showed that an effective problem-solving culture was
one that balanced standard practice—whatever it happened to be—with
forces that pushed in the opposite direction. If managers were used to
process conformity, encouraging individualism helped them to employ
“ambidextrous thought,” and learn what worked in each situation. If they
were used to improvising, encouraging a sense of loyalty and cohesion did
the job. The trick was expanding the organization’s range by identifying the
dominant culture and then diversifying it by pushing in the opposite
direction.
By the time of the Challenger launch, NASA’s “can do” culture
manifested as extreme process accountability combined with collectivist
social norms. Everything was congruent for conformity to the standard
procedures. The process was so rigid it spurned evidence that didn’t
conform to the usual rules, and so sacred that Larry Mulloy felt protected
by a signed piece of paper testifying that he had followed the usual process.
Dissent was valued at flight readiness reviews, but at the most important
moment, the most important engineering group asked for an offline caucus
where they found a way, in private, to conform. Like the one engineer said,
without data, “the boss’s opinion is better than mine. ”
The more I spoke with Captain Lesmes, the more it seemed to me that he
had felt strongly outcome accountable—searching for a solution even if it
deviated from standard procedure—within an extraordinarily potent
collective culture that ensured he would not make the decision to deviate
easily. He had, as Patil, Tetlock, and Mellers wrote, harnessed “the power of
cross-pressures in promoting flexible, ambidextrous thought.” The subtitle

of that paper: “Balancing the Risks of Mindless Conformity and Reckless
Deviation.”
Superforecasting teams harnessed the same cultural cross-pressure. A
team was judged purely by the accuracy of its members’ forecasts. But
internally the Good Judgment Project incentivized collective culture.
Commenting was an expectation; teammates were encouraged to vote for
useful comments and recognized for process milestones, like a certain
number of lifetime comments.
Prior to Challenger, there was a long span when NASA culture harnessed
incongruence. Gene Kranz, the flight director when Apollo 11 first landed
on the moon, lived by that same mantra, the valorized process—“In God
We Trust, All Others Bring Data”—but he also made a habit of seeking out
opinions of technicians and engineers at every level of the hierarchy. If he
heard the same hunch twice, it didn’t take data for him to interrupt the usual
process and investigate.
Wernher von Braun, who led the Marshall Space Flight Center’s
development of the rocket that propelled the moon mission, balanced
NASA’s rigid process with an informal, individualistic culture that
encouraged constant dissent and cross-boundary communication. Von
Braun started “Monday Notes”: every week engineers submitted a single
page of notes on their salient issues. Von Braun handwrote comments in the
margins, and then circulated the entire compilation. Everyone saw what
other divisions were up to, and how easily problems could be raised.
Monday Notes were rigorous, but informal.
On a typed page of notes from two days after the moon landing in 1969,
von Braun homed in on a short section in which an engineer guessed why a
liquid oxygen tank unexpectedly lost pressure. The issue was already
irrelevant for the moon mission, but could come up again in future flights.
“Let’s pin this down as precisely as possible,” von Braun wrote. “We must
know whether there’s more behind this, that calls for checks or remedies.”
Like Kranz, von Braun went looking for problems, hunches, and bad news.
He even rewarded those who exposed problems. After Kranz and von
Braun’s time, the “All Others Bring Data” process culture remained, but the
informal culture and power of individual hunches shriveled.
In 1974, William Lucas took over the Marshall Space Flight Center. A
NASA chief historian wrote that Lucas was a brilliant engineer but “often
grew angry when he learned of problems.” Allan McDonald described him

to me as a “ shoot-the-messenger type guy.” Lucas transformed von Braun’s
Monday Notes into a system purely for upward communication. He did not
write feedback and the notes did not circulate. At one point they morphed
into standardized forms that had to be filled out. Monday Notes became one
more rigid formality in a process culture. “Immediately, the quality of the
notes fell,” wrote another official NASA historian.
Lucas retired shortly after the Challenger disaster, but the entrenched
process culture persisted. NASA’s only other fatal shuttle accident, the
space shuttle Columbia disintegration in 2003, was a cultural carbon copy
of the Challenger . NASA clung to its usual process tools in an unusual
circumstance. The Columbia disaster engendered an even stronger ill-fated
congruence between process accountability and group-focused======================================================== (1974): 475–94. For more on work that extended Luria’s findings,
see: M. Cole and S. Scribner, Culture and Thought (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1974).
The word “percent”: Google Books Ngram Viewer search for “percent.” See also: J. B. Michel et
al., “Quantitative Analysis of Culture Using Millions of Digitized Books,” Science 331 (2011): 176–
82.
They do very well on Raven’s: Flynn, Does Your Family Make You Smarter?
provides peace of mind: S. Arbesman, Overcomplicated (New York: Portfolio, 2017), 158–60.

“cognitively flexible”: C. Schooler, “Environmental Complexity and the Flynn Effect,” in The
Rising Curve, ed. U. Neisser (Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 1998). And see:
A. Inkeles and D. H. Smith, Becoming Modern: Individual Change in Six Developing Countries
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1974).
“No historian who takes in the sweep of human history”: S. Pinker, The Better Angels of our
Nature (New York: Penguin, 2011).
more slowly for women: Flynn, Are We Getting Smarter? .
“the traits that earn good grades”: Flynn, How to Improve Your Mind (Malden, MA: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2012). Flynn kindly provided me with the test and answer key.
econ professors have been shown: R. P. Larrick et al., “Teaching the Use of Cost-Benefit Reasoning
in Everyday Life,” Psychological Science 1, no. 6 (1990): 362–70; R. P. Larrick et al., “Who Uses the
Cost-Benefit Rules of Choice?,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 56 (1993):
331–47. (Hogarth’s “what strikes me” quote in the footnote is from his Educating Intuition, p. 222).
Chemists, on the other hand: J. F. Voss et al., “Individual Differences in the Solving of Social
Science Problems,” in Individual Differences in Cognition, vol. 1, ed. 44–R. F. Dillon and R. R.
Schmeck (New York: Academic Press, 1983); D. R. Lehman et al., “The Effects of Graduate Training
on Reasoning,” American Psychologist 43, no. 6 (1988): 431–43.
“is intended as an introduction”: “The College Core Curriculum,” University of Chicago,
https://college.uchicago.edu/ academics/ college-core-curriculum .
registration filled up in the first minute: M. Nijhuis, “How to Call B.S. on Big Data: A Practical
Guide,” The New Yorker, June 3, 2017, online ed.
“Computational thinking is using abstraction”: J. M. Wing, “Computational Thinking,”
Communications of the ACM 49, no. 3 (2006): 33–35.
narrow vocational training: B. Caplan, The Case Against Education (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2018), 233–35.
a career unrelated to their major: J. R. Abel and R. Deitz, “Agglomeration and Job Matching
among College Graduates.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 51 (2015): 14–24.
“No tool is omnicompetent”: A. J. Toynbee, A Study of History, vol. 12, Reconsiderations (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1964), 42.
“Everyone is so busy doing research”: Center for Evidence-Based Medicine video, “Doug Altman
—Scandal of Poor Medical Research,” https://www.youtube.com / watch? v= ZwDNPldQO1Q .
like Fermi-izing, can go a long way: In addition to the Larrick and Lehman studies above, see: D. F.
Halpern, “Teaching Critical Thinking for Transfer Across Domains,” American Psychologist 53, no.
4 (1998): 449–55; W. Chang et al., “Developing Expert Political Judgment,” Judgment and Decision
Making 11, no. 5 (2016): 509–26.
“how Fermi estimation can cut”: “Case Studies: Bullshit in the Wild,” Calling Bullshit,
https://callingbullshit.org/case_studies.html .
CHAPTER 3: WHEN LESS OF THE SAME IS MORE
The citations for this chapter will be extensive but necessarily abbreviated. Explanation: The most
extensive research on life and music at the ospedali was conducted by Jane L. Baldauf-Berdes. Some
of her work can be found in books, like Women Musicians of Venice (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1996), which she barely completed before she died of cancer. She was still very much in the
thick of her work. In the course of reporting, I learned that she left her research files to the David M.
Rubenstein Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Duke University. Thanks to the library and its staff,
I had access to forty-eight boxes full of Baldauf-Berdes’s research material, from translations of

original documents and photographs of antique instruments, to rosters of musicians and
correspondence with other historians. Her passion for the topic bursts from those boxes. A few details
in this chapter that come from her research are, I believe, published here for the first time. I only
hope she would be glad that some curious writer came along and made a little use of it. I would like
to dedicate this chapter to Jane L. Baldauf-Berdes. 50–
exploding from its traditional bounds: J. Kerman and G. Tomlinson, Listen (Brief Fourth Edition) .
(Boston: Bedford/ St. Martin’s, 2000), chaps. 7 and 9. (Vivaldi as “undisputed champion” is from p.
117.)
full weight of entertainment: This is from pp. 118–38 of the modern publication of a
contemporaneous account that provided an important source throughout the chapter on eighteenth-
century music in Europe: P. A. Scholes, ed., Dr. Burney’s Musical Tours in Europe, vol. 1, An
Eighteenth-Century Musical Tour in France and Italy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1959).
dominated for a century: E. Selfridge-Field, “Music at the Pietà Before Vivaldi,” Early Music 14,
no. 3 (1986): 373–86; R. Thackray, “Music Education in Eighteenth Century Italy,” reprint from
Studies in Music 9 (1975): 1–7.
“Only in Venice”: E. Arnold and J. Baldauf-Berdes, Maddalena Lombardini Sirmen (Lanham, MD:
Scarecrow Press, 2002).
reserved for men: J. Spitzer and N. Zaslaw, The Birth of the Orchestra (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2004), 175. Also: Scholes, ed., Burney’s Musical Tours in Europe, vol. 1, 137.
“They sing like angels”: A. Pugh, Women in Music (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991).
“The sight of girls”: Hester L. Piozzi, Autobiography, Letters and Literary Remains of Mrs. Piozzi
(Thrale) (Tredition Classics, 2012 [Kindle ebook]).
“feminine instruments”; “first of her sex”: Arnold and Baldauf-Berdes, Maddalena Lombardini
Sirmen .
“angelic Sirens”: Coli’s writing appeared in 1687 in Pallade Veneta, a (largely forgotten) periodical
that carried commentary in letter form. The best source on the periodical is: E. Selfridge-Field,
Pallade Veneta: Writings on Music in Venetian Society, 1650–1750 (Venice: Fondazione Levi, 1985).
“the premier violinist in Europe”; “unsurpassed”: J. L. Baldauf-Berdes, “Anna Maria della Pietà:
The Woman Musician of Venice Personified,” in Cecilia Reclaimed, ed. S. C. Cook and J. S. Tsou
(Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1994).
An expense report: This is from another remarkable source, a book of scanned original documents
compiled by Micky White, a British former sports photographer and Vivaldi enthusiast who moved to
Venice and made it her mission to pore over the Pietà’s immense archives: M. White, Antonio
Vivaldi: A Life in Documents (with CD-ROM) (Florence: Olschki, 2013), 87.
ordered by the Senate: Baldauf-Berdes, “Anna Maria della Pietà.”
“I had brought with me”: Rousseau was a musical autodidact. His quotes come from his famous
autobiographical work, The Confessions .
“Missing are the fingers”: The anonymous poem (c. 1740) was translated by Baldauf-Berdes and
M. Civera from R. Giazotto, Vivaldi (Turin: ERI, 1973).
“My request was granted”: Lady Anna Riggs Miller, Letters from Italy Describing the Manners,
Customs, Antiquities, Paintings, etc. of that Country in the Years MDCCLXX and MDCCLXXI, vol. 2
(Printed for E. and C. Dilly, 1777), 360–61.
some trinket left: D. E. Kaley, “The Church of the Pietà” (Venice: International Fund for
Monuments, 1980).
An eighteenth-century roster: From one of the many lists of musicians and instruments that
Baldauf-Berdes compiled from archival research. This particular one is in Box 1 of 48 in the

Baldauf-Berdes collection at Duke’s Rubinstein Library.
“penitential mood”: Baldauf-Berdes, Women Musicians of Venice (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1996).
“It was really curious”: Scholes, ed., Burney’s Musical Tours in Europe, vol. 1.
“acquiring skills not expected of my sex”: Arnold and Baldauf-Berdes, Maddalena Lombardini
Sirmen .
Pelegrina della Pietà: One of the many orphans listed on a Pietà roster, she is also expertly
discussed by Micky White in a BBC Four film called Vivaldi’s Women .
“all styles”: R. Rolland, A Musical Tour Through the Land of the Past (New York: Henry Holt,
1922).
“Vivaldi had at his disposal”: M. Pincherle, “Vivaldi and the ‘Ospitali’ of Venice,” Musical
Quarterly 24, no. 3 (1938): 300–312.
“might never have been composed at all”: D. Arnold. “Venetian Motets and Their Singers,”
Musical Times 119 (1978): 319–21. (The specific piece discussed is Exsultate, jubilate, but the author
uses it as representative of Mozart’s sacred music.)
Napoleon’s troops: Arnold and Baldauf-Berdes, Maddalena Lombardini Sirmen .
went entirely unidentified: In a research proposal written for the Gladys Krieble Delmas
Foundation in 1989, Baldauf-Berdes chronicled this and other instances of the figlie being forgotten.
The series she intended to publish, unfortunately, was one of those she was never able to complete.
left the world having been: Baldauf-Berdes, “Anna Maria della Pietà.”
“able indigents”: G. J. Buelow, ed., The Late Baroque Era (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1993).
“how to choose”: R. Lane, “How to Choose a Musical Instrument for My Child,”
Upperbeachesmusic.com , January 5, 2017.
he didn’t really like the first two instruments: M. Steinberg, “Yo-Yo Ma on Intonation, Practice,
and the Role of Music in Our Lives,” Strings, September 17, 2015, online ed.
A study of music students: J. A. Sloboda et al., “The Role of Practice in the Development of
Performing Musicians,” British Journal of Psychology 87 (1996): 287–309. See also: G. E.
McPherson et al., “Playing an Instrument,” in The Child as Musician, ed. G. E. McPherson (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2006) (“[I]t was discovered some of the======================================================== thought of making optical films out of
this.”
He formed and led the small team that accomplished just that. In less
than the width of a human hair, the film comprises hundreds of polymer
layers exquisitely tailored to reflect, refract, or let pass specific wavelengths
of light. Unlike typical optical films, or even mirrors, multilayer optical
film can reflect light nearly perfectly, and no matter the angle at which it
arrives. It can even enhance the light as it bounces around the layers before
returning to the viewer. Hence the glitter. Normal glitter doesn’t reflect light
well in every direction, but the breakthrough glitter dazzled in all directions
at once.
The applications of the invention that was supposed to be impossible
reached a tad beyond glitter. Inside cell phones and laptops, multilayer
optical film reflects and “recycles” light that would normally be absorbed as
it travels from a backlight to the screen, thus transmitting more light to the
viewer, and drastically reducing the power needed to keep screens bright. It
improves efficiency in LED light bulbs, solar panels, and fiber optics. It
enhanced the energy efficiency of a projector so dramatically that it only
needed a tiny battery for bright video. When a 2010 cave-in trapped thirty-
three Chilean gold-and-copper miners a half mile underground for sixty-
nine days, pocket-sized projectors with multilayer optical film were
lowered through a 4.5-inch hole so that the men could receive messages

from their families, safety instructions, and, naturally, a Chile-Ukraine
soccer match.
Multilayer optical film is relatively cheap and can be made in large
volume. Sitting on spools it could be mistaken for shimmering wrapping
paper. It is a multibillion-dollar invention that is good for the environment.
So how is it that nobody had looked at a plastic water bottle that way
before? A recently published technical book for optics experts “said this
technology is not capable of precision,” Ouderkirk recalled. “It was written
by a real subject matter expert. He’s writing a whole book on this topic, so
he knew his stuff. The problem is, he didn’t know the adjacent stuff.”
In 2013, R& D Magazine named Ouderkirk Innovator of the Year. Over
three decades at 3M, he was named on 170 patents. Along the way, he
became fascinated with the ingredients of invention, inventive teams, and
individual inventors themselves. He eventually decided to investigate those
ingredients systematically. He teamed up with an analytics expert and a
professor at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. They found
that it has quite a bit to do with “the adjacent stuff.”
Ouderkirk and the other two researchers who set out to study inventors at
3M wanted to know what profile of inventor made the greatest
contributions. They found very specialized inventors who focused on a
single technology, and generalist inventors who were not leading experts in
anything, but had worked across numerous domains.
They examined patents, and with Ouderkirk’s internal access to 3M, the
actual commercial impact inventors made. The specialists and the
generalists, they found, both made contributions. One was not uniformly
superior to the other. (They also found inventors who had neither significant
depth nor breadth—they rarely made an impact.) The specialists were adept
at working for a long time on difficult technical problems, and for
anticipating development obstacles. The generalists tended to get bored
working in one area for too long. They added value by integrating domains,
taking technology from one area and applying it in others. Neither an
inventor’s breadth nor their depth alone predicted the likelihood that one of
their inventions would win the Carlton Award—the “Nobel Prize of 3M.”
Ouderkirk’s group unearthed one more type of inventor. They called
them “polymaths,” broad with at least one area of depth. An inventor’s

depth and breadth were measured by their work history. The U.S. Patent
and Trademark Office categorizes technology into four hundred fifty
different classes—exercise devices, electrical connectors, marine
propulsion, and myriad more. Specialists tended to have their patents in a
narrow range of classes. A specialist might work for years only on
understanding a type of plastic composed of a particular small group of
chemical elements. Generalists, meanwhile, might start in masking tape,
which would lead to a surgical adhesives project, which spawned an idea
for veterinary medicine. Their patents were spread across many classes. The
polymaths had depth in a core area—so they had numerous patents in that
area—but they were not as deep as the specialists. They also had breadth,
even more than the generalists, having worked across dozens of technology
classes. Repeatedly, they took expertise accrued in one domain and applied
it in a completely new one, which meant they were constantly learning new
technologies. Over the course of their careers, the polymaths’ breadth
increased markedly as they learned about “the adjacent stuff,” while they
actually lost a modicum of depth. They were the most likely to succeed in
the company and to win the Carlton Award. At a company whose mission is
to constantly push technological frontiers, world-leading technical
specialization by itself was not the key ingredient to success.
Ouderkirk is a polymath. He had been interested in chemistry since his
second-grade teacher showed off a model volcano eruption. He took a
winding path from a community college in northern Illinois to a chemistry
PhD, to working completely outside of his chemistry background in a laser
lab when he arrived at 3M. “What I was taught is to become a world expert
in the rate of vibrational energy transfer between [ gas-phase] molecules,”
he said. “What nobody ever told me in my whole career is that, not only is
that good, but it’s also good to know a little bit about everything else.”
Ouderkirk’s patents range from optics to metal working to dentistry. The
patent office frequently registered individual inventions he worked on under
several classes at once, because they merged technological domains.
He became so interested in classifying innovators that he wrote a
computer algorithm to analyze ten million patents from the last century and
learn to identify and classify different types of inventors. Specialist
contributions skyrocketed around and after World War II, but more recently
have declined. “Specialists specifically peaked about 1985,” Ouderkirk told
me. “And then declined pretty dramatically, leveled off about 2007, and the

most recent data show it’s declining again, which I’m trying to understand.”
He is careful to say that he can’t pinpoint a cause of the current trend. His
hypothesis is that organizations simply don’t need as many specialists. “As
information becomes more broadly available, the need for somebody to just
advance a field isn’t as critical because in effect they are available to
everybody,” he said. He is suggesting that communication technology has
limited the number of hyperspecialists required to work on a particular
narrow problem, because their breakthroughs can be communicated quickly
and widely to others—the Yokois of the world—who work on clever
applications.
Communication technologies have certainly done that in other areas. In
the early twentieth century, for example, the state of Iowa alone had more
than a thousand opera houses, one for every fifteen hundred residents. They
were theaters, not just music venues, and they provided full-time
employment for hundreds of local acting troupes and thousands of actors.
Fast forward to Netflix and Hulu. Every customer can have Meryl Streep on
demand, and the Iowa opera houses are extinct. So much for thousands of
fully employed stage actors in Iowa. Ouderkirk’s data suggest that
something analogous happened for narrowly focused specialists in technical
fields. They are still absolutely critical, it’s just that their work is widely
accessible, so fewer suffice.
It is an extension of the trend that Don Swanson foretold, and it
massively increased opportunities for Yokoi-like connectors and polymathic
innovators. “When information became more widely disseminated,”
Ouderkirk told me, “it became a lot easier to be broader than a specialist, to
start combining things in new ways.”
Specialization is obvious: keep going straight. Breadth is trickier to grow. A
subsidiary of PricewaterhouseCoopers that studied technological innovation
over a decade found that there was no statistically significant relationship
between R& D spending and performance. 
*
 (Save for the bottom 10
percent of spenders, which did perform worse than their peer companies.)
Seeding the soil for generalists and polymaths who integrate knowledge
takes more than money. It takes opportunity.
Jayshree Seth rose to corporate scientist precisely because she was
allowed to pinball around different technological domains. Staying in one

technical lane isn’t her thing. Seth was unenthusiastic enough about the
research she did for her master’s degree that she ignored warnings and
switched labs at Clarkson University for her PhD in chemical engineering.
“People said, ‘This is going to take too long because you have no
fundamental knowledge in this area and you’re going to be behind people
who have already done their master’s there,’” she told me. To clarify: the
advice she received was to stick in an area she knew she didn’t like because
she had already started, even though she wasn’t even that far in. It is the
sunk cost fallacy embodied.
When she entered the professional world with 3M, she dared to switch
focus again, this time away from her PhD research, and for a personal
reason: her husband was coming to 3M from the same Clarkson lab, and
she didn’t want to occupy the spot he might apply for. So she branched out.
It worked: Seth has more than fifty patents. She helped create new pressure-
sensitive adhesives for stretchable and reusable tapes,======================================================== going on started flying. Every hour of lab meeting Dunbar recorded
required eight hours of transcribing and labeling problem-solving behaviors
so that he could analyze the process of scientific creativity, and he found an
analogy fest.
Dunbar witnessed important breakthroughs live, and saw that the labs
most likely to turn unexpected findings into new knowledge for humanity
made a lot of analogies, and made them from a variety of base domains.
The labs in which scientists had more diverse professional backgrounds
were the ones where more and more varied analogies were offered, and
where breakthroughs were more reliably produced when the unexpected
arose. Those labs were Keplers by committee. They included members with
a wide variety of experiences and interests. When the moment came to
either dismiss or embrace and grapple with information that puzzled them,
they drew on their range to make analogies. Lots of them.
For relatively straightforward challenges, labs started with analogies to
other, very similar experiments. The more unusual the challenge, the more

distant the analogies, moving away from surface similarities and toward
deep structural similarities. In some lab meetings a new analogy entered the
conversation every four minutes on average, some of them from outside of
biology entirely.
In one instance, Dunbar actually saw two labs encounter the same
experimental problem at around the same time. Proteins they wanted to
measure would get stuck to a filter, which made them hard to analyze. One
of the labs was entirely E. coli experts, and the other had scientists with
chemistry, physics, biology, and genetics backgrounds, plus medical
students. “One lab made an analogy drawing on knowledge from the person
with a medical degree, and they figured it out right there at the meeting,”
Dunbar told me. “The other lab used E. coli knowledge to deal with every
problem. That didn’t work here so they had to just start experimenting for
weeks to get rid of the problem. It put me in an awkward position because I
had seen the answer in another lab’s meeting.” (As part of the conditions of
the study, he was not allowed to share information between labs.)
In the face of the unexpected, the range of available analogies helped
determine who learned something new. In the lone lab that did not make
any new findings during Dunbar’s project, everyone had similar and highly
specialized backgrounds, and analogies were almost never used. “When all
the members of the laboratory have the same knowledge at their disposal,
then when a problem arises, a group of similar minded individuals will not
provide more information to make analogies than a single individual,”
Dunbar concluded.
“It’s sort of like the stock market,” he told me. “You need a mixture of
strategies.”
The trouble with courses of study like Northwestern’s Integrated Science
Program, which impart a broad mixture of strategies, is that they may
require abandoning a head start toward a major or career. That is a tough
sell, even if it better serves learners in the long run.
Whether it is the making-connections knowledge Lindsey Richland
studied, or the broad concepts that Flynn tested, or the distant, deep
structural analogical reasoning that Gentner assessed, there is often no
entrenched interest fighting on the side of range, or of knowledge that must
be slowly acquired. All forces align to incentivize a head start and early,

narrow specialization, even if that is a poor long-term strategy. That is a
problem, because another kind of knowledge, perhaps the most important of
all, is necessarily slowly acquired—the kind that helps you match yourself
to the right challenge in the first place.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 6
The Trouble with Too Much Grit
THE BOY’S MOTHER APPRECIATED music and art, but when the boy tried to
freehand sketch the family cat, he proved such a deficient draftsman that he
destroyed the picture and refused to try again. Instead, he spent his
childhood in the Netherlands playing marbles or sledding with his little
brother, but mostly just looking at things. A prominent parenting handbook
advised against unsupervised wanderings that might “intoxicate” a child’s
imagination, but he wandered alone for hours. He walked in storms, and at
night. He walked for miles just to sit for hours watching a bird’s nest, or
following water bugs on their commutes across a brook. He was especially
obsessed with collecting beetles, labeling each one with its proper Latin
species name.
When he was thirteen, the boy was admitted to a brand-new school
housed in a hulking former royal palace. It was so far from his home that he
had to board with a local family. His mind was elsewhere during class, but
he was a good student, and spent his free time memorizing poetry.
The art teacher was the faculty celebrity, an education pioneer who
argued for design to become a central part of the national economic engine.
That crusade was so successful it led the federal government to mandate
freehand drawing classes in every public school. Rather than holding forth
from the front of the class, the teacher arranged students in the center and
meandered through them like a sewing needle, giving personal attention.
Most students adored him. But he made no impression on the boy. As an
adult, the boy would complain that nobody had ever told him what
perspective was in drawing, even though it was so central to the teacher’s

tenets that knowledge of perspective was written into the new law
expanding art education.
The boy didn’t like living with strangers, so he left the school just before
he turned fifteen. For the next sixteen months, he did little other than take
long nature walks. That could not go on forever, but he had no idea what
else to do. Fortunately, his uncle owned a fantastically successful art
dealership, and had just been knighted. He offered his nephew a job in the
big city. Making art had not inspired the boy, but selling it did. He turned
the observational intensity he had practiced in nature to lithographs and
photographs, categorizing what he saw just as he had his beetles. By twenty,
he was dealing with important clients and traveling abroad for sales trips.
The young man confidently told his parents that he would never have to
look for a job again. He was wrong.
He was a country boy in the city, without enough social grace to smooth
over disagreements with his boss, and he disliked bargaining, which felt
like trying to take advantage of customers. He was soon transferred to a
London office that did not deal directly with customers, and then at twenty-
two he was transferred again, this time to Paris. He arrived in France amid
an artistic revolution. On walks to work, the young man passed the studios
of artists who were in the process of becoming famous. And yet, as with the
art teacher, as a pair of his future biographers would write, “None of it
registered.” He was too busy with a new obsession: religion. Years later,
when he and his little brother discussed those revolutionary artists, he
would say he had “seen absolutely nothing of them.”
When he was finally dismissed from the dealership, he went to work as
an assistant teacher at a boarding school in a seaside town in England.
Working fourteen-hour days, he taught classes from French to math,
oversaw the dorm, took the kids to church, and acted as the handyman. The
school was simply a business venture for the owner, and the young man was
cheap labor. He found another job as a tutor, this time at a fancier boarding
school, but after a few months he decided he would become a missionary in
South America. His parents talked him out of that, insisting that he needed
to “stop following [his] own desires” and return to a stable life course. His
mother wished he would do something in nature that would make him
“happier and calmer.” He decided to follow in his father’s footsteps; he
would train to become a full-fledged pastor.

In the meantime, his father arranged a job as a bookstore clerk. The
young man loved books and worked from 8 a.m. until midnight. When the
store flooded, he astounded his colleagues with his sheer physical
endurance as he carried pile after pile of books to safety. His new goal was
to get accepted to a university so that he could later train as a pastor. Again,
he unleashed his tireless passion. He worked with a tutor, and copied by
hand the text of entire books. “I must sit up as long as I can keep my eyes
open,” he told his brother. He reminded himself that “practice makes
perfect,” but Latin and Greek did not come easily to him. He moved in with
an uncle, a stern war hero who urged him simply, “push on.” The young
man resolved to begin work before his peers rose and finish after they slept.
His uncle would find him reading in the wee morning hours.
And still, he floundered in his studies. Nearing his twenty-fifth birthday,
the young man heard a sermon about how the economic revolution had
made certain citizens, like his art-dealer uncle, fabulously wealthy, while
others had been thrust into abject poverty. He decided to forsake university
to spread the Word more quickly. He opted for a shorter educational course,
but was not adept at giving the succinct, punchy sermons that the school
mandated. He failed in that program as well. But nobody could stop him
from preaching, so he headed for coal country, where inspiration was
needed most .
When the young man arrived and saw the blackened sky, he likened it to
the shading of a Rembrandt. There he would preach to workers so
downtrodden that they referred to the world above the mineshaft as “up in
Hell.” He dove in to spiritual service with his usual verve, giving away his
clothes and money, and doting night and day on the ill and injured. They
were legion.
Shortly after he arrived, a series of explosions killed 121 miners and sent
gas streaming out of the ground, fueling a pillar of fire like some monstrous
Bunsen burner nestled below the earth. The======================================================== up. The cause, it seemed, was some ineffable
thing in modern air. Not only that, but the mystery air additive somehow
supercharged modern brains specifically for the most abstract tests. What
manner of change, Flynn wondered, could be at once so large and yet so
particular?
Through the late 1920s and early 1930s, remote reaches of the Soviet Union
were forced through social and economic changes that would normally take
generations. Individual farmers in isolated areas of what is now Uzbekistan
had long survived by cultivating small gardens for food, and cotton for
everything else. Nearby in the mountain pasturelands of present-day
Kyrgyzstan, herders kept animals. The population was entirely illiterate, and
a hierarchical social structure was enforced by strict religious rules. The
socialist revolution dismantled that way of life almost overnight.
The Soviet government forced all that agricultural land to become large
collective farms and began industrial development. The economy quickly
became interconnected and complex. Farmers had to form collective work
strategies, plan ahead for production, divvy up functions, and assess work

along the way. Remote villages began communicating with distant cities. A
network of schools opened in regions with 100 percent illiteracy, and adults
began learning a system of matching symbols to sounds. Villagers had used
numbers before, but only in practical transactions. Now they were taught the
concept of a number as an abstraction that existed even without reference to
counting animals or apportioning food. Some village women remained fully
illiterate but took short courses on how to teach kindergartners. Other
women were admitted for longer study at a teachers’ school. Classes in
preschool education and the science and technology of agriculture were
offered to students who had no formal education of any kind. Secondary
schools and technical institutes soon followed. In 1931, amid that incredible
transformation, a brilliant young Russian psychologist named Alexander
Luria recognized a fleeting “natural experiment,” unique in the history of the
world. He wondered if changing citizens’ work might also change their
minds.
When Luria arrived, the most remote villages had not yet been touched by
the warp-speed restructuring of traditional society. Those villages gave him a
control group. He learned the local language and brought fellow
psychologists to engage villagers in relaxed social situations—teahouses or
pastures—and discuss questions or tasks designed to discern their habits of
mind.
Some were very simple: present skeins of wool or silk in an array of hues
and ask participants to describe them. The collective farmers and farm
leaders, as well as the female students, easily picked out blue, red, and
yellow, sometimes with variations, like dark blue or light yellow. The most
remote villagers, who were still “premodern,” gave more diversified
descriptions: cotton in bloom, decayed teeth, a lot of water, sky, pistachio.
Then they were asked to sort the skeins into groups. The collective farmers,
and young people with even a little formal education, did so easily, naturally
forming color groups. Even when they did not know the name of a particular
color, they had little trouble putting together darker and lighter shades of the
same one. The remote villagers, on the other hand, refused, even those
whose work was embroidery. “It can’t be done,” they said, or, “None of
them are the same, you can’t put them together.” When prodded vigorously,
and only if they were allowed to make many small groups, some relented
and created sets that were apparently random. A few others appeared to sort
the skeins according to color saturation, without regard to the color.

Geometric shapes followed suit. The greater the dose of modernity, the
more likely an individual grasped the abstract concept of “shapes” and made
groups of triangles, rectangles, and circles, even if they had no formal
education and did not know the shapes’ names. The remote villagers,
meanwhile, saw nothing alike in a square drawn with solid lines and the
same exact square drawn with dotted lines. To Alieva, a twenty-six-year-old
remote villager, the solid-line square was obviously a map, and the dotted-
line square was a watch. “How can a map and a watch be put together?” she
asked, incredulous. Khamid, a twenty-four-year-old remote villager, insisted
that filled and unfilled circles could not go together because one was a coin
and the other a moon.
The pattern continued for every genre of question. Pressed to make
conceptual groupings—akin to the similarities questions on IQ tests—remote
villagers reverted to practical narratives based on their direct experience.
When psychologists attempted to explain a “which one does not belong”
grouping exercise to thirty-nine-year-old Rakmat, they gave him the
example of three adults and one child, with the child obviously different
from the others. Except Rakmat could not see it that way. “The boy must
stay with the others!” he argued. The adults are working, “and if they have to
keep running out to fetch things, they’ll never get the job done, but the boy
can do the running for them.” Okay, then, how about a hammer, a saw, a
hatchet, and a log—three of them are tools. They are not a group, Rakmat
replied, because they are useless without the log, so why would they be
together?
Other villagers removed either the hammer or the hatchet, which they saw
as less versatile for use with the log, unless they considered pounding the
hatchet into the log with the hammer, in which case it could stay. Perhaps,
then, bird/ rifle/ dagger/ bullet? You can’t possibly remove one and have a
group, a remote villager insisted. The bullet must be loaded in the rifle to kill
the bird, and “then you have to cut the bird up with the dagger, since there’s
no other way to do it.” These were just the introductions explaining the
grouping task, not the actual questions. No amount of cajoling, explanation,
or examples could get remote villagers to use reasoning based on any
concept that was not a concrete part of their daily lives .
The farmers and students who had begun to join the modern world were
able to practice a kind of thinking called “eduction,” to work out guiding
principles when given facts or materials, even in the absence of instructions,

and even when they had never seen the material before. This, it turns out, is
precisely what Raven’s Progressive Matrices tests. Imagine presenting the
villagers living in premodern circumstances with abstract designs from the
Raven’s test.
Some of the changes wrought by modernity and collective culture seem
almost magical. Luria found that most remote villagers were not subject to
the same optical illusions as citizens of the industrialized world, like the
Ebbinghaus illusion. Which middle circle below looks bigger?
If you said the one on the right, you’re probably a citizen of the
industrialized world. The remote villagers saw, correctly, that they are the
same, while the collective farmers and women in teachers’ school picked the
one on the right. Those findings have been repeated in other traditional
societies, and scientists have suggested it may reflect the fact that premodern
people are not as drawn to the holistic context—the relationship of the
various circles to one another—so their perception is not changed by the
presence of extra circles. To use a common metaphor, premodern people
miss the forest for the trees; modern people miss the trees for the forest.
Since Luria’s voyage to the interior, scientists have replicated his work in
other cultures. The Kpelle people in Liberia were subsistence rice farmers,

but in the 1970s roads began snaking toward them, connecting the Kpelle to
cities. Given similarities tests, teenagers who were engaged with modern
institutions grouped items by abstract categories (“All of these things can
keep us warm”), while the traditional teens generated groups that were
comparatively arbitrary, and changed frequently even when they were asked
to repeat the exact same task. Because the touched-by-modernity teens had
constructed meaningful thematic groups, they also had far superior recall
when asked later to recount the items. The more they had moved toward
modernity, the more powerful their abstract thinking, and the less they had to
rely on their concrete experience of the world as a reference point.
In Flynn’s terms, we now see the world through “scientific spectacles.” He
means that rather than relying on our own direct experiences, we make sense
of reality through classification schemes, using layers of abstract concepts to
understand how pieces of information relate to one another. We have grown
up in a world of classification schemes totally foreign to the remote
villagers; we classify some animals as mammals, and inside of that class
make more detailed connections based on the similarity of their physiology
and DNA.
Words that represent concepts that were previously the domain of scholars
became widely understood in a few generations. The word “percent” was
almost absent from books in 1900. By 2000 it appeared about once every
five thousand words. (This chapter is 5,500 words long.) Computer
programmers pile layers of abstraction. (They do very well on Raven’s.) In
the progress bar on your computer screen that fills up to indicate a
download, abstractions are legion, from the fundamental—the programming
language that created it is a representation of binary code, the raw 1s and 0s
the computer uses—to the psychological: the bar is a visual projection of
time that provides peace of mind by estimating the progress of an immense
number of underlying activities.
Lawyers might consider how results of one court case brought by an
individual in Oklahoma could be relevant to a different one brought by a
company in California. In order to prep, they might try out different
hypothetical arguments while putting themselves in the======================================================== most successful young learners
were those who had been through a range of musical instruments”); and J. A. Sloboda and M. J. A.
Howe, “Biographical Precursors of Musical Excellence,” Psychology of Music 19 (1991): 3–21 (“The
exceptional children practiced much less than the average children on their first chosen instrument
but much more than the average children on their third instrument”).
“a mismatch between the instruments”: S. A. O’Neill, “Developing a Young Musician’s Growth
Mindset,” in Music and the Mind, ed. I. Deliège and J. W. Davidson (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2011).
“It seems very clear”: Sloboda and Howe, “Biographical Precursors of Musical Excellence.”
A study that followed up: A. Ivaldi, “Routes to Adolescent Musical Expertise,” in Music and the
Mind, ed. Deliège and Davidson.
“Despite the ever-increasing number”: P. Gorner, “Cecchini’s Guitar Truly Classical,” Chicago
Tribune, July 13, 1968. (Studs Terkel interviewed Cecchini the day before the performance. That
fantastic conversation about music can be found here: http://jackcecchini.com/Interviews.html ).
“There was no connection”: T. Teachout, Duke: A Life of Duke Ellington (New York: Gotham
Books, 2013).
America’s preeminent composer: Kerman and Tomlinson, Listen , 394.

“John played anything”: L. Flanagan, Moonlight in Vermont: The Official Biography of Johnny
Smith (Anaheim Hills, CA: Centerstream, 2015).
“I got a wonderful piano teacher”: F. M. Hall, It’s About Time: The Dave Brubeck Story.
(Fayetteville: University of Arkansas Press, 1996).
“with a drawn knife”; “I wonder if”: M. Dregni, Django: The Life and Music of a Gypsy Legend
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004 [Kindle ebook]). Two other sources provided particularly
important details about Django’s life: C. Delaunay, Django Reinhardt (New York: Da Capo, 1961)
(on the back cover, James Lincoln Collier, author of The Making of Jazz, identifies Django as
“without question, the single most important guitarist”); and a special Django issue of Guitar Player
magazine (November 1976) devoted to legendary musicians recounting their time with him.
creativity erupted: The 5-CD set “Django Reinhardt—Musette to Maestro 1928–1937: The Early
Work of a Guitar Genius” (JSP Records, 2010) includes recordings of a young Reinhardt both before
and after his injury.
Jimi Hendrix, who kept an album of Django’s: Jacob McMurray, senior curator at Seattle’s
Museum of Pop Culture, kindly confirmed this with the museum’s permanent collection.
sepia-toned YouTube clip: “Django Reinhardt Clip Performing Live (1945),” YouTube,
www.youtube.com/watch?v=aZ308aOOX04 . (The date on the You-Tube video is incorrect. The clip
is from the 1938 short film “Jazz ‘Hot.’”)
“one of osmosis” (and other Berliner quotes): P. F. Berliner, Thinking in Jazz (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1994).
“as if the brain turned off”: C. Kalb, “Who Is a Genius?,” National Geographic, May 2017.
“Well, I can’t read either”: Guitar Player, November 1976.
“a concept that went against conservatory training”: Dregni, Django .
“I can’t improvise at all”: A. Midgette, “Concerto on the Fly: Can Classical Musicians Learn to
Improvise,” Washington Post, June 15, 2012, online ed.
“My complete self-taught technique” and detail about hitting siblings with violins: S. Suzuki,
Nurtured by Love, trans. W. Suzuki (Alfred Music, 1993 [Kindle ebook]).
household rules: J. S. Dacey, “Discriminating Characteristics of the Families of Highly Creative
Adolescents,” Journal of Creative Behavior 23, no. 4 (1989): 263–71. (Grant referenced the study in:
“How to Raise a Creative Child. Step One: Back Off,” New York Times , Jan. 30, 2016.)
CHAPTER 4:LEARNING, FAST AND SLOW
“Okay? You’re going to an Eagles game”: The classroom scene is from video, transcript, and
analysis from the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS). The particular
video is “M-US2 Writing Variable Expressions.”
“three dollars for a hot dog”: The teacher briefly misspoke and said “two.” It is corrected for
clarity.
“using procedures”; “making connections”: J. Hiebert et al., “Teaching Mathematics in Seven
Countries,” National Center for Education Statistics, 2003, chap. 5.
bansho : E.R.A. Kuehnert et al. “Bansho: Visually Sequencing Mathematical Ideas,” Teaching
Children Mathematics 24, no. 6 (2018): 362–69.
“Students do not view mathematics as a system ”: L. E. Richland et al., “Teaching the Conceptual
Structure of Mathematics,” Educational Psychology 47, no. 3 (2012): 189–203.
tested sixth graders in the South Bronx: N. Kornell and J. Metcalfe, “The Effects of Memory
Retrieval, Errors and Feedback on Learning,” in Applying Science of Learning in Education , V.A.

Benassi et al., ed. (Society for the Teaching of Psychology, 2014); J. Metcalfe and N. Kornell,
“Principles of Cognitive Science in Education,” Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 14, no. 2 (2007):
225–29.
“hypercorrection effect”: T. S. Eich et al., “The Hypercorrection Effect in Younger and Older
Adults,” Neuropsychology, Development and Cognition. Section B, Aging, Neuropsychology and
Cognition 20, no. 5 (2013): 511–21; J. Metcalfe et al., “Neural Correlates of People’s
Hypercorrection of Their False Beliefs,” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 24, no. 7 (2012): 1571–
83.
Oberon and Macduff: N. Kornell and H. S. Terrace, “The Generation Effect in Monkeys,”
Psychological Science 18, no. 8 (2007): 682–85.
“Like life”: N. Kornell et al., “Retrieval Attempts Enhance Learning, but Retrieval Success (Versus
Failure) Does Not Matter,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
41, no. 1 (2015): 283–94.
Spanish vocabulary learners: H. P. Bahrick and E. Phelps, “Retention of Spanish Vocabulary over 8
Years,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 13, no. 2 (1987):
344–49.
Iowa State researchers read: L. L. Jacoby and W. H. Bartz, “Rehearsal and Transfer to LTM,”
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 11 (1972): 561–65.
“produce misleadingly high levels”: N. J. Cepeda et al., “Spacing Effects in Learning,”
Psychological Science 19, no. 11 (2008): 1095–1102.
In 2007, the U.S. Department of Education: H. Pashler et al., “Organizing Instruction and Study to
Improve Student Learning,” National Center for Education Research, 2007.
an extraordinarily unique study: S. E. Carrell and J. E. West, “Does Professor Quality Matter?,”
Journal of Political Economy 118, no. 3 (2010): 409–32.
A similar study was conducted at Italy’s Bocconi University: M. Braga et al., “Evaluating
Students’ Evaluations of Professors,” Economics of Education Review 41 (2014): 71–88.
“desirable difficulties”: R. A. Bjork, “Institutional Impediments to Effective Training,” in Learning,
Remembering, Believing: Enhancing Human Performance, ed. D. Druckman and R. A. Bjork
(Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 1994), 295–306.
“Above all, the most basic message”: C. M. Clark and R. A. Bjork, “When and Why Introducing
Difficulties and Errors Can Enhance Instruction,” in Applying the Science of Learning in Education,
ed. V. A. Benassi et al. (Society for the Teaching of Psychology, 2014 [ebook]).
said in national surveys: C. Rampell, “Actually, Public Education is Getting Better, Not Worse,”
Washington Post , September 18, 2014.
School has not gotten worse; “jobs that pay well”: G. Duncan and R. J. Murnane, Restoring
Opportunity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press, 2014 [Kindle ebook]).
In a study using college math problems: D. Rohrer and K. Taylor, “The Shuffling of Mathematics
Problems Improves Learning,” Instructional Science 35 (2007): 481–98. See also: D. Rohrer et al.,
“A Randomized Controlled Trial of Interleaved Mathematics Practice,” Journal of Educational
Psychology (May 16, 2019): advance online publication.
butterfly species identification to psychological-disorder diagnosis: M. S. Birnbaum et al., “Why
Interleaving Enhances Inductive Learning,” Memory and Cognition 41 (2013): 392–402.
naval air defense simulations: C. L. Holladay and M.A. Quiñones, “Practice Variability and
Transfer of Training,” Journal of Applied Psychology 88, no. 6 (2003): 1094–1103.
In one of Kornell and Bjork’s interleaving studies, 80 percent of students: N. Kornell and R. A.
Bjork, “Learning Concepts and Categories: Is Spacing the ‘Enemy of Induction’?,” Psychological

Science 19, no. 6 (2008): 585–92.
a particular left-hand jump across fifteen keys: M. Bangert et al., “When Less of the Same Is
More: Benefits of Variability of Practice in Pianists,” Proceedings of the International Symposium on
Performance Science (2013): 117–22.
O’Neal should practice from a foot in front: Bjork makes this suggestion in Daniel Coyle’s The
Talent Code (New York: Bantam, 2009).
hallmark of expert problem solving: See, for example: M.T.H. Chi et al., “Categorization and
Representation of Physics Problems by Experts and Novices,” Cognitive Science 5, no. 2 (1981):
121–52; and J. F. Voss et al., “Individual Differences in the Solving of Social Science Problems,” in
Individual Differences in Cognition, vol. 1, ed. R. F. Dillon and R. R. Schmeck (New York:
Academic Press, 1983).
reviewed sixty-seven early childhood education programs: D. Bailey et al., “Persistence and
Fadeout in Impacts of Child and Adolescent Interventions,” Journal of Research on Educational
Effectiveness 10, no. 1 (2017): 7–39.
The motor-skill equivalent: S. G. Paris, “Reinterpreting the Development of Reading Skills,”
Reading Research Quarterly 40, no. 2 (2005): 184–202.
CHAPTER 5:THINKING OUTSIDE EXPERIENCE
Giordano Bruno: A. A. Martinez, “Giordano Bruno and the Heresy of Many Worlds,” Annals of
Science 73, no. 4 (2016): 345–74.
Johannes Kepler inherited: Sources that give excellent background on the worldviews that Kepler
inherited, and his transformative analogies, are: D. Gentner et al., “Analogical Reasoning and
Conceptual Change: A Case Study of Johannes Kepler,” Journal of the Learning Sciences 6, no. 1
(1997): 3–40; D. Gentner, “Analogy in======================================================== Engineering
Management 38, no. 1 (1991): 63–74. Boisjoly’s “away from goodness” quote is from transcripts of
the Feb 25, 1986 hearing of the presidential commission.
Boisjoly had personally inspected: R. P. Boisjoly et al. “Roger Boisjoly and the Challenger
Disaster,” Journal of Business Ethics 8, no. 4 (1989): 217–230. Boisjoly’s “away from goodness”
quote is from transcripts of the Feb 25, 1986 hearing of the presidential commision.
most complex machine ever built: J. M. Logsdon, “Was the Space Shuttle a Mistake?,” MIT
Technology Review, July 6, 2011.
McDonald and two Thiokol VPs: Transcripts of presidential commission hearings, which provided
information and quotes in this chapter are available at
https://history.nasa.gov/rogersrep/genindex.htm . Allan McDonald also gives a fascinating account of
the investigation and the return of the shuttle to flight in Truth, Lies, and O-Rings (Gainesville:
University Press of Florida, 2009).
“They said because they had flown”: From Diane Vaughan’s book, which includes a fascinating
exploration of “the normalization of deviance” in decision making: The Challenger Launch Decision:
Risky Technology, Culture, and Deviance at NASA (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996).
“In God We Trust, All Others Bring Data”: A number of background interviews with current and
former NASA managers and engineers—especially during a visit to NASA’s Johnson Space Center in
2017—provided helpful context. NASA’s own APPEL Knowledge Services portal was extremely
helpful. It is an incredible repository of information that links to NASA’s voluminous “Lessons
Learned System.” 245 Karl Weick noticed something unusual: K. E. Weick, “The Collapse of
Sensemaking in Organizations: The Mann Gulch Disaster,” Administrative Science Quarterly 38, no.
4 (1993): 628–52.; K. E. Weick, “Drop Your Tools: An Allegory for Organizational Studies,”
Administrative Science Quarterly 41, no. 2 (1996): 301–13; K. E. Weick, “Drop Your Tools: On
Reconfiguring Management Education,” Journal of Management Education 31, no. 1 (2007): 5–16.
eleven feet per second : R. C. Rothermel, “Mann Gulch Fire: A Race That Couldn’t Be Won,”
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, General Technical
Report INT-299, May 1993.
wildland firefighters continued to lose races with fires: K. E. Weick, “Tool Retention and
Fatalities in Wildland Fire Settings,” in Linking Expertise and Naturalistic Decision Making, ed. E.
Salas and G. A. Klein (New York: Psychology Press, 2001 [Kindle ebook]).
“like a jet during take off”: USDA, USDI, and USDC, South Canyon Fire Investigation (Report of
the South Canyon Fire Accident Investigation Team), U.S. Government Printing Office, Region 8,
Report 573-183, 1994.

“still wearing his backpack”; “then I realized I still had my saw”; twenty-three . . . perished
beside them: Weick, “Tool Retention and Fatalities in Wildland Fire Settings.”
grabbed it again in the air; “proxy for unlearning”; “regress to what they know best”;
“existential crisis”: Weick, “Drop Your Tools: An Allegory for Organizational Studies.”
“a common pattern”: J. Orasanu and L. Martin, “Errors in Aviation Decision Making,” Proceedings
of the HESSD ’98 (Workshop on Human Error, Safety and System Development) (1998): 100–107; J.
Orasanu et al., “Errors in Aviation Decision Making,” Fourth Conference on Naturalistic Decision
Making, 1998.
“If I make a decision”: Weick, “Tool Retention and Fatalities in Wildland Fire Settings.”
“Between the lines, it suggested”: M. Kohut, “Interview with Bryan O’Connor,” NASA’s ASK
(Academy Sharing Knowledge ) magazine, issue 45 (January 2012).
“you have to use reason”: transcript, Hearings of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle
Challenger Accident Vol. 4, February 25, 1986.
“must have been really hard”: Several members of the 48th Rescue Squadron provided invaluable
background and corroboration.
“live in the real world”: C. Grupen, Introduction to Radiation Protection (Berlin: Springer, 2010),
90. Shafer’s entire original message is preserved at https:// yarchive.net/ air/ perfect_ safety.html .
But in the first study: K. S. Cameron and S. J. Freeman, “Cultural Congruence, Strength, and Type:
Relationships to Effectiveness,” Research in Organizational Change and Development 5 (1991): 23–
58.
effective leaders and organizations had range: K. S. Cameron and R. E. Quinn, Diagnosing and
Changing Organizational Culture , 3rd Edition (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2011).
In one experiment: S. V. Patil et al., “Accountability Systems and Group Norms: Balancing the
Risks of Mindless Conformity and Reckless Deviation,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 30
(2017): 282–303.
Gene Kranz: G. Kranz, Failure Is Not an Option (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2000). See also: M.
Dunn, “Remaking NASA one step at a time,” Associated Press, October 12, 2003.
“Monday Notes”; William Lucas . . . “often grew angry”: S. J. Dick, ed., NASA’s First 50 Years
(Washington, DC: NASA, 2011 [ebook]). Also, von Braun’s weekly notes are archived at
https://history.msfc.nasa.gov/vonbraun/ vb_ weekly_ notes.html .
“the quality of the notes fell”: R. Launius, “Comments on a Very Effective Communications
System: Marshall Space Flight Center’s Monday Notes,” Roger Launius’s Blog, February 28, 2011.
“proper channels”; “stringent and inhibiting”: Columbia Accident Investigation Board, “History
as Cause: Columbia and Challenger ,” in Columbia Accident Investigation Board Report, vol. 1,
August 2003.
Gravity Probe B: Stanford University maintains an archive with copious information (both technical
and written for the public) on GP-B, at einstein.stanford.edu . For a scientific deep dive, a special
issue of the journal Classical and Quantum Gravity was devoted to GP-B (vol. 32, no. 22 [November
2015]).
technology took twenty years: T. Reichhardt, “Unstoppable Force,” Nature 426 (2003): 380–81.
“was confident that we could succeed”: NASA Case Study, “The Gravity Probe B Launch
Decisions,” NASA, Academy of Program/ Project and Engineering Leadership.
“a healthy tension in the system”: Geveden also discusses healthy tension in R. Wright et al., eds.,
NASA at 50: Interviews with NASA’s Senior Leadership (Washington, DC: NASA, 2012).

first direct test: J. Overduin, “The Experimental Verdict on Spacetime from Gravity Probe B,” in
Vesselin Petkov, ed., Space, Time, and Spacetime (Berlin: Springer, 2010).
Himalayan mountain climbers: E.M. Anicich et al., “Hierarchical Cultural Values Predict Success
and Mortality in High-Stakes Teams,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 112, no. 5 (2015): 1338–43.
“oculostenotic reflex”: Eric Topol is the cardiologist who coined that term. (For a patient who is
actually having a heart attack, a stent can be lifesaving.)
one in fifty patients: K. Stergiopoulos and D. L. Brown, “Initial Coronary Stent Implantation With
Medical Therapy vs Medical Therapy Alone for Stable Coronary Artery Disease: Meta-analysis of
Randomized Controlled Trials,” Archives of Internal Medicine 172, no. 4 (2012): 312–19.
cannot believe that stenting: G. A. Lin et al., “Cardiologists’ Use of Percutaneous Coronary
Interventions for Stable Coronary Artery Disease,” Archives of Internal Medicine 167, no. 15 (2007):
1604–09.
were less likely to die: A. B. Jena et al., “Mortality and Treatment Patterns among Patients
Hospitalized with Acute Cardiovascular Conditions during Dates of National Cardiology Meetings,”
JAMA Internal Medicine 175, no. 2 (2015): 44. See also: A. B. Jena et al., “Acute Myocardial
Infarction during Dates of National Interventional Cardiology Meetings,” Journal of the American
Heart Association 7, no. 6 (2018): e008230.
“At large cardiology conventions”: R. F. Redberg, “Cardiac Patient Outcomes during National
Cardiology Meetings,” JAMA Internal Medicine 175, no. 2 (2015): 245.
compared the surgery with “sham surgery”: R. Sihvonen et al., “Arthroscopic Partial
Meniscectomy Versus Sham Surgery for a Degenerative Meniscal Tear,” New England Journal of
Medicine 369 (2013): 2515–24. Hyperlinks to several other studies with supporting findings can be
found in: D. Epstein, “When Evidence Says No, But Doctors Say Yes,” ProPublica, February 22,
2017.
CHAPTER 12: DELIBERATE AMATEURS
“Very promising!”: Smithies discussed some of his work and notebook pages in his publicly
available Nobel Lecture, “Turning Pages” (December 7, 2007). The University of North Carolina
maintains an extraordinary online archive of digitized versions of more than sixty years of Smithies’s
notebooks, along with audio recordings of Smithies himself going through them and providing
commentary. (Smithies told me that one should always have a notebook, even on Saturday.) The
archive was a wonderful resource for interview preparation, and can be found at
smithies.lib.unc.edu/notebooks .
A 2016 analysis of ten thousand researchers’ careers: A. Clauset et al., “ Data-Driven Predictions
in the Science of Science,” Science 355 (2017): 477–80.
had reportedly tested 240,000 compounds: P. McKenna, “Nobel Prize Goes to Modest Woman
Who Beat Malaria for China,” New Scientist, November 9, 2011, online ed.
a fourth-century Chinese alchemist: Alchemist and herbalist Ge Hong wrote A Handbook of
Prescriptions for Emergencies in the fourth century, during the Jin dynasty. Tu gives background in
her Nobel Lecture: “ Artemisinin—A Gift from Traditional Chinese Medicine to the World”
(December 7, 2015). She shares a photo of a sixteenth-century copy of the handbook in: Y. Tu, “The
Discovery of Artemisinin (Qinghaosu) and Gifts from Chinese Medicine,” Nature Medicine 17, no.
10 (2011): 1217–20.
A study on the decline of malaria: Bhatt et al., “The Effect of Malaria Control on Plasmodium
falciparum in Africa Between 2000 and 2015,” Nature 526 (2015): 207–11.

the label NBGBOKFO: G. Watts, “Obituary: Oliver Smithies,” Lancet 389 (2017): 1004.
Scotch tape to rip thin layers of graphite: Geim details the======================================================== “necessary nor healthy” for children to
be directed toward one career before they can make that decision
themselves—a decision that, again, took her years of adulthood. “So what
does grit look like early in life?” she wrote. “A young child who decides
today that she wants to become a doctor but thinks tomorrow that she’d
rather build houses. A teenager who decides, no, she won’t go out for track
this year and instead will see what it’s like to write for the school
newspaper.” Specialization has benefits, she added, “but before
specialization comes sampling, the exploration of possibilities that, really,
you cannot know anything about until you try them . . . Don’t confuse the
healthy development of a work ethic with the premature commitment to a
singular passion.”
As one researcher suggested to me: “When you get fit, it will look like
grit.” That is, if you help someone find a good fit, they are more likely to
display the characteristics of grit—like sticking with something—even if
they didn’t before.
Needless to say, most people aren’t going to be Tillman Scholars,
executives, or William Shakespeare. And while many of the stories in
Range portray uncommon achievements, I hoped those would serve as
memorable portals of engagement into research that applies to a much
broader swath of humanity.
In fact, international research that studied thousands of workers—more
than three-quarters of whom did not have tertiary education—
produced findings that resonate with a major theme of the book: that
sometimes the actions that provide a head start will undermine long-term
development , whether that is choosing a career or a course of study, or
simply developing a skill or learning new material.
A 2017 study published by four economists in the U.S., Germany, and
China, analyzed education and employment data in eleven countries with

large vocational education or apprenticeship programs, comparing people
within each country who had similar backgrounds—including test scores,
family background, and years of education—but differed in whether they
received career-focused or broader, general education. Naturally, there was
considerable variation between countries and certainly between individuals,
but the general pattern was: people who got narrow, career-focused
education were more likely to be employed right out of school and earned
more right away, but over time both advantages evaporated; decades later,
they had spent less overall time in the labor market and had lower lifetime
earnings. The early specializers often won in the short term, and lost in the
long run. Workers who received general education, the economists
concluded, were better positioned to adapt to change in a wicked world
where work next year might not look like work last year.
The pattern was particularly pronounced in two countries with famously
extensive apprenticeship programs—Denmark and Germany—an important
finding given that, over the last decade, U.S. politicians on both sides of the
aisle have advocated for a move toward the German apprenticeship model.
In 2017, President Trump issued an executive order to expand
apprenticeship programs to prepare workers for “today’s rapidly changing
economy”. The economists, on the other hand, concluded that the more
rapidly a nation’s economy is changing, the greater the long-term advantage
of general education. Of the three countries with widespread apprenticeship
programs—Denmark, Germany, Switzerland—early specialization only
resulted in a lifetime earnings advantage in Switzerland, which has had
easily the slowest growing economy of those three nations in recent
decades. “This comparison is consistent with the idea that those with
general education are more adaptable to changed economic demands,” two
of the economists wrote. “Vocational education has been promoted largely
as a way of improving the transition from schooling to work, but it also
appears to reduce the adaptability of workers to technological and structural
change in the economy.”
Does that mean we should have no early vocational training or
apprenticeships at all? I certainly don’t think so, and one of the economists
who did this work pointed out that apprenticeships still work well in
specific areas, like the building trades, but also that those trades are a small
portion of unfilled jobs. In my opinion, we should preserve a variety of
pathways, to fit a variety of life circumstances. But I also think we need to

be aware of how easy it is to be fooled by head starts, assuming that they
represent terminally stable trajectories, whether the head start be for child
athletes, college students learning math, or workers entering the labor force.
“The advantages of vocational training in smoothing entry into the labor
market,” the economists wrote, “have to be set against disadvantages later
in life, disadvantages that are likely to be more severe as we move more
into being a knowledge economy.”
The question of how broad or specialized to be is important to just about
everyone at some point or another, but usually only discussed with
intuition. Like any complex question that involves human beings, there is
no one-size-fits-all answer. My hope was to make discussions about that
crucial topic more interesting and productive.
I’m a science writer, so in doing that, I wanted to rely heavily on
scientific research that bears on the question from various angles. In talking
with readers after the hardcover publication, though, I’ve increasingly felt
that the stories of late starts or zig-zagging career paths have a specific
importance. The “availability heuristic” is a well-known cognitive bias in
which we tend to rely on the first example that comes to mind when making
a decision or judging an idea. Tiger stories have supplied millions of brains
with availability-heuristic ammo when they think of specialization. I hope
some of the stories in this book—from Federer and Van Gogh to Frances
Hesselbein (now 104, still working)—might stick in readers’ minds and
surface when the Tiger stories do, adding much needed balance to how we
consider the topic.
When I was allotted this space for an afterword to the paperback edition,
I first thought I should stuff it with research that I had to cut from the
hardcover due to space constraints. (My editor talked me off that cliff.)
Instead, I’d like to share one more memorable story.
When asked, Titus Kaphar reflexively says that nobody in his family went
to college. His mother didn’t go to college. His father went to prison, but
not to college. Neither his grandmother nor his grandfather went to college.
Nobody went to college. Except—he corrects himself—a distant cousin
went to college. Kaphar himself certainly wasn’t going to college. He often
didn’t even go to high school, hence the 0.65 GPA.

And yet, in his twenties, he decided to enroll in a few junior college
classes. Allow him to explain: he wanted to date a soon-to-be teacher; she
was four years older, contemplating grad school, and not impressed that he
had no plans for his future.
“So I just went over to the junior college,” Kaphar told me, “kind of as a
joke, not really taking it seriously, because, you know, I’m not an academic.
I’m not a person who does really well in school.” He picked a few classes
more or less at random. He came back and told the object of his affection.
They had a quick laugh about it.
One class was art history. Why? “I probably read the word ‘art’ and
thought, ‘art should be easy,’” Kaphar told me. In an unexpected way, it
was. Kaphar realized that he could remember details of paintings—not just
remember what he had seen, but associate the painting with the style of a
particular artist or artistic movement. “I remember one day we were talking
about Van Gogh,” he recalled, “and I remember seeing the image and being
very aware of where the painting sat in the history of art, where it sat in the
timeline the professor was trying to lay out for us.” He began to contribute
to class discussions. His confidence grew, and he got a B in the class.
“That was a new experience for me,” he told me, “a B overall in the class
at something that was academic. It made me go, ‘Hold up, wait a minute.’ I
realized this was, in fact, something that I was enjoying, and I could feel
myself wanting to push harder. When it became difficult, that grit became
more apparent.” He took more classes, and tested strategies until he found
something that worked, like dictating essays into a recorder for his first
draft, and studying for history tests by focusing on connecting the images in
a book to the surrounding material. Suddenly, college didn’t seem like such
a crazy idea.
Kaphar proceeded to San José State University to study fine arts. In an
art history survey course, to his dismay, the professor skipped over the
section on black painters. So Kaphar decided to compile his own syllabus
on the topic. “I think to some degree, it was like being a reporter doing an
investigation,” he said. A friend’s grandmother was a sculptor, and gave him
books. The first was on the Harlem Renaissance. “That sort of opened the
floodgates,” he recalled. He realized that the traditional artistic canon used
in class was not some magical pantheon, but just another syllabus
assembled by humans. He collected more books, and introduced new names
into class discussion.

Eventually, he took an actual painting class, but the teacher told the class
that he didn’t believe in painting anymore, so he gave no instruction
whatsoever on technique. Instead, Kaphar started looking over other
students’ shoulders and self-teaching. “It was like, last semester I painted an
apple, and it looked like a cannonball,” he told me. “This semester that
actually looks like an apple. Now, it’s loose, a child could do the same
thing, but it looks like an apple. Awesome, let’s keep going.” He began to
study paintings and then try to reverse-engineer them. When he noticed that
shadows in Velázquez paintings didn’t======================================================== who

were confident that they could see a child’s progress. That is not in dispute.
The question is how well they can judge the impact on future learning, and
the evidence says that, like the Air Force cadets, the answer is not very well.
*
Before-our-eyes progress reinforces our instinct to do more of the same,
but just like the case of the typhoid doctor, the feedback teaches the wrong
lesson. Learning deeply means learning slowly. The cult of the head start
fails the learners it seeks to serve .
Knowledge with enduring utility must be very flexible, composed of
mental schemes that can be matched to new problems. The virtual naval
officers in the air defense simulation and the math students who engaged in
interleaved practice were learning to recognize deep structural
commonalities in types of problems. They could not rely on the same type
of problem repeating, so they had to identify underlying conceptual
connections in simulated battle threats, or math problems, that they had
never actually seen before. They then matched a strategy to each new
problem. When a knowledge structure is so flexible that it can be applied
effectively even in new domains or extremely novel situations, it is called
“far transfer.”
There is a particular type of thinking that facilitates far transfer—a type
that Alexander Luria’s Uzbek villagers could not employ—and that can
seem far-fetched precisely because of how far it transfers. And it’s a mode
of broad thinking that none of us employ enough.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 5
Thinking Outside Experience
THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY was approaching. The universe was one in
which celestial bodies moved around the stationary Earth powered by
individual spirits, ineffable planetary souls. The Polish astronomer Nicolaus
Copernicus had proposed that planets moved around the sun, but the idea
was still so unorthodox that Italian philosopher Giordano Bruno was
censured for teaching it, and later burned at the stake as a heretic for
insisting there were other suns surrounded by other planets.
Their spirits may have been driving, but the planets also needed a vehicle
for motion, so they were assumed to be riding on pure crystalline spheres.
The spheres were invisible from Earth and interlocked, like the gears of a
clock, to produce collective motion at a constant speed for all eternity. Plato
and Aristotle had laid the foundation for the accepted model, and it
dominated for two thousand years. That clockwork universe was the one
German astronomer Johannes Kepler inherited. He accepted it, at first.
When the constellation Cassiopeia suddenly gained a new star (it was
actually a supernova, the bright explosion at the end of a star’s life), Kepler
recognized that the idea of the unchanging heavens could not be correct. A
few years later, a comet tracked across the European sky. Shouldn’t it have
cracked the crystalline spheres as it traveled, Kepler wondered? He began
to doubt two millennia worth of accepted wisdom.
By 1596, when he turned twenty-five, Kepler had accepted the
Copernican model of planets orbiting the sun, and now he posed another
profound question: Why do planets that are farther away from the sun move
more slowly? Perhaps the more distant planets had weaker “moving souls.”

But why would that be? Just coincidence? Maybe, he thought, rather than
many spirits, there was just one, inside the sun, which for some reason
acted more powerfully on nearby planets. Kepler was so far outside the
bounds of previous thought that there was no evidence in existence for him
to work from. He had to use analogies.
Smells and heat dissipate predictably farther from their source, which
meant that a mysterious planet-moving power from the sun might as well.
But smells and heat are also detectable everywhere along their path,
whereas the sun’s moving soul, Kepler wrote, is “poured out throughout the
whole world, and yet does not exist anywhere but where there is something
movable.” Was there any proof that such a thing could exist?
Light “makes its nest in the sun,” Kepler wrote, and yet appears not to
exist between its source and an object it lights up. If light can do it, so could
some other physical entity. He began using the words “power” or “force”
instead of “soul” and “spirit.” Kepler’s “moving power” was a precursor to
gravity, an astounding mental leap because it came before science embraced
the notion of physical forces that act throughout the universe.
Given how the moving power seemed to emanate from the sun and
disperse in space, Kepler wondered if light itself or some light-like force
caused planetary motion. Well, then, could the moving power be blocked
like light? Planetary motion did not stop during an eclipse, Kepler reasoned,
so the moving power could not be just like light, or depend on light. He
needed a new analogy.
Kepler read a newly published description of magnetism, and thought
maybe the planets were like magnets, with poles at either end. He realized
that each planet moved more slowly when it was farther in its orbit from the
sun, so perhaps the planets and the sun were attracting and repelling one
another depending on which poles were nearby. That might explain why the
planets moved toward and away from the sun, but why did they keep
moving forward in their orbits? The sun’s power seemed somehow to also
push them forward. On to the next analogy.
The sun rotates on its axis and creates a whirlpool of moving power that
sweeps the planets around like boats in a current. Kepler liked that, but it
raised a new problem. He had realized that orbits were not perfectly
circular, so what kind of strange current was the sun creating? The
whirlpool analogy was incomplete without boatmen.

Boatmen in a whirling river can steer their boats perpendicular to the
current, so maybe planets could steer in the sun’s current, Kepler surmised.
A circular current could explain why all the planets move in the same
direction, and then each planet steered through the current to keep from
getting sucked into the center, which made the orbits not quite circular. But
then who was captaining each ship? That brought Kepler all the way back
to spirits, and he was not happy about it. “Kepler,” he wrote to himself,
“does’t thou wish then to equip each planet with two eyes?”
Each time he got stuck, Kepler unleashed a fusillade of analogies. Not
just light, heat, odor, currents and boatmen, but optics of lenses, balance
scales, a broom, magnets, a magnetic broom, orators gazing at a crowd, and
more. He interrogated each one ruthlessly, every time alighting on new
questions.
He eventually decided that celestial bodies pulled one another, and larger
bodies had more pull. That led him to claim (correctly) that the moon
influenced tides on Earth. Galileo, the embodiment of bold truths, mocked
him for the ridiculous idea of “the moon’s dominion over the waters. ”
Kepler’s intellectual wanderings traced a staggering journey, from
planets imbued with souls and riding on interlocking crystalline spheres in
perfect circles around the stationary Earth, to his illumination of the laws of
planetary motion, which showed that the planets move in ellipses that are
predictable based on their relation to the sun.
More important, Kepler invented astrophysics. He did not inherit an idea
of universal physical forces. There was no concept of gravity as a force, and
he had no notion of momentum that keeps the planets in motion. Analogies
were all he had. He became the first discoverer of causal physical laws for
phenomena in the heavens, and he realized it. “Ye physicists,” he wrote
when he published his laws of planetary motion, “prick your ears, for now
we are going to invade your territory.” The title of his magnum opus: A New
Astronomy Based upon Causes.
In an age when alchemy was still a common approach to natural
phenomena, Kepler filled the universe with invisible forces acting all
around us, and helped usher in the Scientific Revolution. His fastidious
documentation of every meandering path his brain blazed is one of the great
records of a mind undergoing creative transformation. It is a truism to say
that Kepler thought outside the box. But what he really did, whenever he
was stuck, was to think entirely outside the domain. He left a brightly lit

trail of his favorite tools for doing that, the ones that allowed him to cast
outside eyes upon wisdom his peers simply accepted. “I especially love
analogies,” he wrote, “my most faithful masters, acquainted with all the
secrets of nature. . . . One should make great use of them.”
Mention Kepler if you want to get Northwestern University psychologist
Dedre Gentner excited. She gesticulates. Her tortoiseshell glasses bob up
and down. She is probably the world’s foremost authority on analogical
thinking. Deep analogical thinking is the practice of recognizing conceptual
similarities in multiple domains or scenarios that may seem to have little in
common on the surface. It is a powerful tool for solving wicked problems,
and Kepler was an analogy addict, so Gentner is naturally very fond of him.
When she mentions a trivial historical detail about him that might be
misunderstood by modern readers, she suggests that maybe it’s best not to
publish it as it might make him look bad, though he has been dead for
nearly four hundred years.
“In my opinion,” Gentner told me, “our ability to think relationally is one
of the reasons we’re running the planet. Relations are really hard for other
species.” Analogical thinking takes the new and makes it familiar, or takes
the familiar and puts it in a new light, and allows humans to reason through
problems they have never seen in unfamiliar contexts. It also allows us to
understand that which we cannot see at all. Students might learn about the
motion of molecules by analogy to billiard-ball collisions; principles of
electricity can be understood with analogies to water flow through
plumbing. Concepts from biology serve as analogies to inform the======================================================== like hyperspecialization today was actually a bold hybrid at the
time.
Smithies was a professor at the University of North Carolina when we
spoke. He passed away nine months later, at ninety-one. To the end of his
life, he encouraged students to think laterally, broaden their experience, and
forge their own path in search of match quality. “I try to teach people,
‘Don’t end up a clone of your thesis adviser,’” he told me. “Take your skills
to a place that’s not doing the same sort of thing. Take your skills and apply

them to a new problem, or take your problem and try completely new
skills.”
Smithies lived the advice he gave. In his fifties, he took a sabbatical in
order to venture a mere two floors away in the same building to learn how
to work with DNA. He never did find a precursor to insulin, and by the time
he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 2007, it was as a geneticist, for figuring
out how to modify disease-causing genes so that they could be studied in
animals. In that regard, he was a late specializer. I told Smithies that I had
recently talked with the provost of a large research university who was
using data analytics to assess contributions and make hires and promotions.
The provost told me that chemists reliably fall off a cliff twenty years after
they get their PhDs. Smithies laughed. “Yeah, well, my most important
paper was published when I was about sixty,” he said. A 2016 analysis of
ten thousand researchers’ careers determined that there is no standard
relationship between experience and contribution; an individual’s most
impactful paper was as likely to be their first as their second, their tenth, or
their last. (Researchers did tend to publish more frequently at younger ages,
though.)
When I mentioned to Smithies that his starched-shirts memory was an
example of lateral thinking with withered technology, he added that in 1990
he shared the Gairdner Award (a sort of pre-Nobel) with Edwin Southern,
who also wielded a childhood memory that, on its face, seemed totally
unrelated. “His was a memory of cyclostyling,” Smithies said, referring to
an old document-copying device that used glazed paper and a stencil
system. With that in mind, Southern created the “Southern blot,” a
ubiquitous method for detecting specific DNA molecules. Gunpei Yokoi
would have been delighted. And yet those were nothing compared to the
withered technology employed by Tu Youyou, who in 2015 became the first
(and so far only) Chinese national to win the Nobel Prize in Physiology or
Medicine, and the first Chinese woman in any category.
Tu is known as the “professor of the three no’s”: no membership in the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, no research experience outside of China,
and no postgraduate degree. Before Tu, other scientists had reportedly
tested 240,000 compounds searching for a malaria cure. Tu was interested
in both modern medicine and history, and was inspired by a clue in a recipe
for medication made from sweet wormwood, written by a fourth-century
Chinese alchemist. Technology doesn’t get much more withered than that. It

led her to experiment (at first on herself) with a sweet wormwood extract
known as artemisinin. Artemisinin is now regarded as one of the most
profound drug discoveries in medicine. A study on the decline of malaria in
Africa attributed 146 million averted cases to artemisinin-based therapies
between 2000 and 2015. Tu had a lot of disadvantages, but she had an
outsider advantage as well that made it easier for her to look in places
others would not dare. The kind of advantage Smithies sought on Saturday
mornings.
Over his career, Smithies filled and kept 150 notebooks. “That was also
Saturday,” he repeated, as he walked me through important pages. When I
pointed it out, he replied, “Well, I’ve had people say, ‘Why did you come to
work any other day!’”
The breakthroughs, of course, were exceptions. One Saturday morning
experiment accidentally dissolved an important piece of equipment. In
another, Smithies contaminated his shoes with a putrid chemical. He
thought he had aired them out sufficiently, until he heard one elderly
woman ask another if she smelled a dead body. Smithies could not resist
“picking up anything” to experiment with, he said, a habit his colleagues
noticed. Rather than throw out damaged equipment, they would leave it for
him, with the label NBGBOKFO: “no bloody good, but OK for Oliver.”
An enthusiastic, even childish, playful streak is a recurring theme in
research on creative thinkers. University of Manchester physicist Andre
Geim employs (with no relation to Smithies) “Friday night experiments”
(FNEs). It was a Friday night when he began the work that led to his 2000
Ig Nobel Prize. The Ig Nobel is given for work that at first blush seems
ridiculous or trivial. The mascot is an image of Rodin’s The Thinker
sculpture, except “The Stinker” has fallen off his pedestal and is lying on
his back on the ground. Recipients are asked beforehand if they are willing
to accept the award, so they can weigh reputational concerns. Geim won for
levitating a frog with strong magnets. (Frogs, and the water they contain,
are diamagnetic, or repelled by magnetic fields.)
Needless to say, FNEs are not funded, and most amount to nothing. After
the frog, though, another FNE produced “gecko tape,” an adhesive inspired
by a gecko’s feet. And then there was the one that started with using Scotch
tape to rip thin layers of graphite, the material that comprises pencil lead.

That low-tech affair culminated in the 2010 Nobel Prize in Physics, for
Geim and his colleague Konstantin Novoselov’s production of graphene, a
material one-hundred thousand times thinner than a human hair and two
hundred times stronger than steel. It is flexible, more transparent than glass,
and an excellent electrical conductor. Spiders fed graphene have spun silk
many times tougher than the Kevlar in bulletproof vests. Graphene consists
of carbon strips one atom thick, an arrangement previously considered
purely theoretical. When Geim and Novoselov submitted their initial work
to one of the world’s most prestigious journals, one reviewer said it was
impossible, and another deemed it not “a sufficient scientific advance.”
Art historian Sarah Lewis studies creative achievement, and described
Geim’s mindset as representative of the “deliberate amateur.” The word
“amateur,” she pointed out, did not originate as an insult, but comes from
the Latin word for a person who adores a particular endeavor. “A paradox
of innovation and mastery is that breakthroughs often occur when you start
down a road, but wander off for a ways and pretend as if you have just
begun,” Lewis wrote. When Geim was asked (two years before the Nobel)
to describe his research style for a science newsletter, he offered this: “It is
rather unusual, I have to say. I do not dig deep—I graze shallow. So ever
since I was a postdoc, I would go into a different subject every five years or
so. . . . I don’t want to carry on studying the same thing from cradle to
grave. Sometimes I joke that I am not interested in doing re-search, only
search.” Deviating from what Geim calls the “straight railway line” of life
is “not secure . . . psychologically,” but comes with advantages, for
motivation and for “questioning things people who work in that area never
bother to ask.” His Friday evenings are like Smithies’s Saturday mornings;
they balance the rest of the week’s standard practice with wide-roaming
exploration. They embrace what Max Delbrück, a Nobel laureate who
studied the intersection of physics and biology, called “the principle of
limited sloppiness.” Be careful not to be too careful, Delbrück warned, or
you will unconsciously limit your exploration.
Novoselov was Geim’s PhD student, taken on board after Geim’s
colleague told him that Novoselov “seems to be wasting his life” in another
lab. When Novoselov arrived, he found equipment that was similar to that
in his previous lab, but “this flexibility and the opportunity to try yourself in
different areas which was interesting.” A Science profile of him bore the
section titles “Going for Breadth” and “Spread Thin,” which would sound

really bad and like he was falling behind if the article wasn’t also about how
at thirty-six he was the youngest physics Nobel laureate in forty years.
Like Van Gogh or Frances Hesselbein or hordes of young athletes,
Novoselov probably looked from the outside like he was behind, until all of
a sudden he very much wasn’t. He was lucky. He arrived in a workspace
that treated mental meandering as a competitive advantage, not a pest to be
exterminated in the name of efficiency.
That kind of protection from the cult of the head start is increasingly rare.
At some point or other, we all specialize to one degree or another, so the
rush to get there can seem logical. Fortunately, there are pioneers who are
working to balance the cult of the head start. They want to have it all—the
mental meandering along with the wisdom of deep experience; the broad
conceptual skills that make use of Flynn’s scientific spectacles even within
training programs for specialists; and the creative power of interdisciplinary
cross-fertilization. They want to reverse the Tiger trend, not just for
themselves, but for everyone, and even in domains synonymous with
hyperspecialization. The future of discovery, they argue, depends on it.
It only takes a few minutes of conversation to gather that Arturo Casadevall
is a beaker-half-full kind of guy. One of the greatest days of his life was
when gravitational waves were detected, and that’s not his field. “Two black
holes collide in space a billion years ago, and for a billion years those
gravity waves travel through space-time,” he narrated, eyes widening.
“When the original signal began, life on Earth was unicellular, and in that
time humanity manages to build two interferometers and measure it. I
mean, what an accomplishment that is.” He is also an MD-PhD and a star in
his own======================================================== Scientific Discovery: The Case of Johannes Kepler,” in
Model-Based Reasoning: Science, Technology, Values, ed. L. Magnani and N. J. Nersessian (New
York: Kluwer Academic/ Plenum Publishers, 2002), 21–39; D. Gentner et al., “Analogy and
Creativity in the Works of Johannes Kepler,” in Creative Thought: An Investigation of Conceptual
Structures and Processes, ed. T. B. Ward et al. (Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association, 1997).
maybe the planets were like magnets: D. Gentner and A. B. Markman, “Structure Mapping in
Analogy and Similarity,” American Psychologist 52, no. 1 (1997): 45–56. Also, Kepler read a new
publication on magnetism: A. Caswell, “Lectures on Astronomy,” Smithsonian Lectures on
Astronomy, 1858 (British Museum collection).
“the moon’s dominion over the waters”: J. Gleick, Isaac Newton (New York: Vintage, 2007).
no concept of gravity as a force; “Ye physicists” : A. Koestler, The Sleepwalkers: A History of
Man’s Changing Vision of the Universe (New York: Penguin Classics, 2017).
“I especially love analogies”: B. Vickers, “Analogy Versus Identity,” in: Occult and Scientific
Mentalities in the Renaissance, ed. B. Vickers (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984).
“action at a distance”: Gentner et al., “Analogy and Creativity in the Works of Johannes Kepler.”;
E. McMullin, “The Origins of the Field Concept in Physics,” Physics in Perspective 4, no. 1 (2002):
13–39.
Suppose you are a doctor: M. L. Gick and K. J. Holyoak, “Analogical Problem Solving,” Cognitive
Psychology 12 (1980): 306–55.
There once was a general; small-town fire chief; “might well have supposed”; “ ill-defined”
problems: M. L. Gick and K. J. Holyoak, “Schema Induction and Analogical Transfer,” Cognitive
Psychology 15 (1983): 1–38.

An experiment on Stanford international relations students; college football coaches: T.
Gilovich, “Seeing the Past in the Present: The Effect of Associations to Familiar Events on
Judgments and Decisions,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 40, no. 5 (1981): 797–808.
Kahneman had a personal experience: Kahneman’s story is in his Thinking, Fast and Slow (New
York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2011). With background on the inside and outside views, it is also in
D. Kahneman and D. Lovallo, “Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts,” Management Science 39, no. 1
(1993): 17–31.
investors from large private equity firms: D. Lovallo, C. Clarke, and C. Camerer, “Robust
Analogizing and the Outside View,” Strategic Management Journal 33, no. 5 (2012): 496–512.
qualities of the specific horse: M. J. Mauboussin, Think Twice: Harnessing the Power of
Counterintuition (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2009).
the more internal details: L. Van Boven and N. Epley, “The Unpacking Effect in Evaluative
Judgments: When the Whole Is Less Than the Sum of Its Parts,” Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 39 (2003): 263–69.
“natural causes”: A. Tversky and D. J. Koehler, “Support Theory,” Psychological Review 101, no. 4
(1994): 547–67.
90 percent of major infrastructure projects: B. Flyvbjerg et al., “What Causes Cost Overrun in
Transport Infrastructure Projects?” Transport Reviews 24, no. 1 (2004): 3–18.
a massive underestimate: B. Flyvbjerg, “Curbing Optimism Bias and Strategic Misrepresentation in
Planning,” European Planning Studies 16, no. 1 (2008): 3–21. The £1 billion price tag: S.
Brocklehurst, “Going off the Rails,” BBC Scotland , May 30, 2014, online ed.
the movie business: Lovallo, Clarke, and Camerer, “Robust Analogizing and the Outside View.”
Netflix came to a similar conclusion: T. Vanderbilt, “The Science Behind the Netflix Algorithms
That Decide What You’ll Watch Next,” Wired.com , August 7, 2013; and C. Burger, “Personalized
Recommendations at Netflix,” Tastehit.com , February 23, 2016.
Lovallo and Dubin gave some students: F. Dubin and D. Lovallo, “The Use and Misuse of
Analogies in Business,” Working Paper (Sydney: University of Sydney, 2008).
In 2001, the Boston Consulting Group: A short discussion about the impetus for BCG’s exhibits is:
D. Gray, “A Gallery of Metaphors,” Harvard Business Review, September 2003.
Gentner and colleagues gave the Ambiguous Sorting Task: B. M. Rottman et al., “Causal Systems
Categories: Differences in Novice and Expert Categorization of Causal Phenomena,” Cognitive
Science 36 (2012): 919–32.
In one of the most cited studies: M. T. H. Chi et al., “Categorization and Representation of Physics
Problems by Experts and Novices,” Cognitive Science 5, no. 2 (1981): 121–52.
“What matters to me”: Koestler, The Sleepwalkers .
1 percent of the national budget: N. Morvillo, Science and Religion: Understanding the Issues
(Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010).
“If I had believed we could ignore these eight minutes”: Koestler, The Sleepwalkers .
When Dunbar started: An excellent background source on Dunbar’s work is: K. Dunbar, “What
Scientific Thinking Reveals About the Nature of Cognition,” in Designing for Science, ed. K.
Crowley et al. (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2001).
“When all the members”: K. Dunbar, “How Scientists Really Reason,” in The Nature of Insight, ed.
R. J. Sternberg and J. E. Davidson (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995), 365–95.
CHAPTER 6:THE TROUBLE WITH TOO MUCH GRIT

The boy’s mother appreciated: Details of Van Gogh’s life come from several main sources,
including translated letters written by and to Van Gogh. More than nine hundred letters (that is, every
surviving one) are available at the incredible Vincent van Gogh: The Letters website
(vangoghletters.org ), courtesy of the Van Gogh Museum and the Huygens Institute for the History of
the Netherlands. Without another incredible source, I would not have known which letters to read:
Steven Naifeh and Gregory White Smith, Van Gogh: The Life (New York: Random House, 2011).
Naifeh and Smith took the extraordinary step of creating a searchable database of sources at
vangoghbiography.com/notes.php . It was extremely helpful. Two other written sources that were
helpful: N. Denekamp et al., The Vincent van Gogh Atlas (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press and
the Van Gogh Museum, 2016); and J. Hulsker, The Complete Van Gogh (New York: Harrison House/
H. N. Abrams, 1984). Finally, two exhibitions: “Van Gogh’s Bedrooms” at the Art Institute of
Chicago (2016), and the impressionism and post-impressionism collections at the Hermitage
Museum in St. Petersburg, Russia.
“None of it registered”: Naifeh and Smith, Van Gogh: The Life.
“absolutely nothing of them”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, June 1884.
“own desires”; “happier and calmer”; “push on”: Naifeh and Smith, Van Gogh: The Life .
“must sit up”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, September 1877.
“up in Hell”: Émile Zola, Germinal, trans. R. N. MacKenzie (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing,
2011).
“the bars of his cage”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, June 1880.
“I’m writing to you while drawing”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, August 1880.
Guide to the ABCs of Drawing : Naifeh and Smith, Van Gogh: The Life .
“you are no artist”; “you started too late”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, March 1882 (trans.
Johanna van Gogh-Bonger).
“[He] made an astonishing discovery”: Naifeh and Smith, Van Gogh: The Life .
“Painting has proved less difficult”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, August 1882. The painting
that Van Gogh made that day is Beach at Scheveningen in Stormy Weather. The painting was stolen
from the Van Gogh Museum in 2002, but recovered more than a decade later.
An ecstatic review: The review, by G.-Albert Aurier, was titled “Les isolés: Vincent van Gogh.”
life expectancy in the Netherlands: The exact figure is 39.84 and comes from the online publication
Our World in Data (ourworldindata.org ).
Gauguin . . . at the age of thirty-five: The Great Masters (London: Quantum Publishing, 2003).
“failed on an epic scale”: J. K. Rowling, text of speech, “The Fringe Benefits of Failure, and the
Importance of Imagination,” Harvard Gazette, June 5, 2008, online ed.
Nobel laureate economist Theodore Schultz: T. W. Schultz, “Resources for Higher Education,”
Journal of Political Economy 76, no. 3 (1968): 327–47.
found a natural experiment: O. Malamud, “Discovering One’s Talent: Learning from Academic
Specialization,” Industrial and Labor Relations 64, no. 2 (2011): 375–405.
Scots quickly caught up: O. Malamud, “Breadth Versus Depth: The Timing of Specialization in
Higher Education,” Labour 24, no. 4 (2010): 359–90.
more mistakes: D. Lederman, “When to Specialize?,” Inside Higher Ed, November 25, 2009.
“The benefits to increased match quality”: Malamud, “Discovering One’s Talent.”
Steven Levitt . . . leveraged his readership: S. D. Levitt, “Heads or Tails: The Impact of a Coin
Toss on Major Life Decisions and Subsequent Happiness,” NBER Working Paper No. 22487 (2016).

“the willingness to jettison”: Levitt, in the September 30, 2011, Freakonomics Radio program, “The
Upside of Quitting.”
“Teachers tend to leave schools”: C. K. Jackson, “Match Quality, Worker Productivity, and Worker
Mobility: Direct Evidence from Teachers,” Review of Economics and Statistics 95, no. 4 (2013):
1096–1116.
Psychologist Angela Duckworth conducted the most famous study: A. L. Duckworth et al., “Grit:
Perseverance and Passion for Long-Term Goals,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 92,
no. 6 (2007): 1087–1101. (The entire incoming class comprised 1,223 freshman cadets, so
Duckworth surveyed nearly every one.) Table 3 gives a nice summary of the amount of variance
accounted for by grit in results from West Point, the Scripps National Spelling Bee, Ivy League
students’ grades, and adult educational attainment. Additionally, Duckworth made her work very
accessible in her book, Grit: The Power of Passion and Perseverance (New York: Scribner, 2016).
Duckworth learned that: An incisive piece on grit and the Whole Candidate Score is: D. Engber, “Is
‘Grit’ Really the Key to Success?,” Slate, May 8, 2016.
“I worry I’ve contributed”: A. Duckworth, “Don’t Grade Schools on Grit,”======================================================== suddenly seen as
invention,” said sociologist Brian Uzzi, Amaral’s collaborator. Human
creativity, he said, is basically an “import/ export business of ideas.”
Uzzi documented an import/ export trend that began in both the physical
and social sciences in the 1970s, pre-internet: more successful teams tended
to have more far-flung members. Teams that included members from
different institutions were more likely to be successful than those that did
not, and teams that included members based in different countries had an
advantage as well.
Consistent with the import/ export model, scientists who have worked
abroad—whether or not they returned—are more likely to make a greater
scientific impact than those who have not. The economists who documented

that trend suggested one reason could be migrants’ “arbitrage”
opportunities, the chance to take an idea from one market and bring it to
another where it is more rare and valued. 
*
 It echoes Oliver Smithies’s
advice to bring new skills to an old problem, or a new problem to old skills.
The atypical combination of typical forms—say, hip-hop, a Broadway
musical, and American historical biography—is not a strategy fluke of
showbiz.
Uzzi and a team analyzed eighteen million papers from a variety of
scientific domains to see whether atypical knowledge combinations
mattered. If a particular paper cited other areas of research that rarely, if
ever, appeared together, then it was classified as having used an atypical
combination of knowledge. Most papers relied purely on conventional
combinations of previous knowledge. That is, they cited work from other
journals that often appeared together in other studies’ lists of references.
The “hit” papers, those that over the next decade were used by a huge
number of other scientists, featured ample conventional combinations, but
also added an injection of unusual knowledge combinations.
A separate, international team analyzed more than a half million research
articles, and classified a paper as “novel” if it cited two other journals that
had never before appeared together. Just one in ten papers made a new
combination, and only one in twenty made multiple new combinations. The
group tracked the impact of research papers over time. They saw that papers
with new knowledge combinations were more likely to be published in less
prestigious journals, and also much more likely to be ignored upon
publication. They got off to a slow start in the world, but after three years,
the papers with new knowledge combos surpassed the conventional papers,
and began accumulating more citations from other scientists. Fifteen years
after publication, studies that made multiple new knowledge combinations
were way more likely to be in the top 1 percent of most-cited papers.
To recap: work that builds bridges between disparate pieces of
knowledge is less likely to be funded, less likely to appear in famous
journals, more likely to be ignored upon publication, and then more likely
in the long run to be a smash hit in the library of human knowledge.
Casadevall leads by example. A single conversation with him is liable to
include Anna Karenina, the Federalist Papers, the fact that Isaac Newton

and Gottfried Leibniz were philosophers as well as scientists, why the
Roman Empire wasn’t more innovative, and a point about mentoring in the
form of a description of the character Mentor from Homer’s Odyssey. “I
work at it,” he said, smirking. “I always advise my people to read outside
your field, everyday something. And most people say, ‘Well, I don’t have
time to read outside my field.’ I say, ‘No, you do have time, it’s far more
important.’ Your world becomes a bigger world, and maybe there’s a
moment in which you make connections.”
One of Casadevall’s projects was born from a news article he read about
a robot sent into the Chernobyl nuclear accident site, still highly
contaminated thirty years post-disaster. The article happened to mention
that the robot returned with some black mold, a kind that resembled a grotty
shower curtain and that had colonized the abandoned reactor. “So, why
black mold?” Casadevall asked rhetorically. “And then one thing led to
another.” He and colleagues made a remarkable find—that the mold was
nourishing itself with radiation. Not with radioactive substances—with
radiation itself.
Casadevall makes sure to highlight experiences outside the lab and how
they contributed to who he is today. His family fled Cuba and arrived in
Queens when he was eleven. At sixteen, he got his first job, at McDonald’s,
and worked there until he was twenty. It’s still on his résumé, and he made
sure to discuss it in his Johns Hopkins interview. “It was a great, great
experience,” he told me. “I learned a lot working there.” Like handling
pressure. His younger brother worked there, too, and was briefly taken
hostage during a holdup. “He spent two days on the witness stand where the
lawyers made fun of his accent,” Casadevall recalled. “He came out ready
for law school. Now he’s a successful trial lawyer.” After McDonald’s,
Casadevall worked as a bank teller. (“That was held up too!”) His father
wanted him to have something practical to fall back on, so a community
college degree in pest control operations hangs on his office wall, near a
certificate of his election into the prestigious National Academy of
Medicine.
Casadevall is renowned in his area of expertise. He has no trouble getting
research grants, and is frequently one of the scientists who helps determine
who else gets grants. He is a winner if the specialization status quo
continues. And yet he considers his attempt to shatter it the most important
work of his life. The further basic science moves from meandering

exploration toward efficiency, he believes, the less chance it will have of
solving humanity’s greatest challenges.
Laszlo Polgar, in the midst of his chess experiment with his daughters,
proclaimed that “the problems of cancer and AIDS” would more likely be
solved if his system of narrow specialization and efficient education were
used beyond chess, to educate a thousand kids. Casadevall is a student of
innovation history. He grew up as a doctor and scientist when HIV/ AIDS
exploded into an epidemic, and he could hardly disagree more passionately.
“When I went to medical school, I was taught that there were no human
diseases caused by retroviruses, that retroviruses were a curiosity that
occurred in some animal tumors. In 1981, a new disease emerges that
nobody knows anything about. In 1984, it’s found to be a retrovirus, HIV. In
1987, you have the first therapy. In 1996, you have such effective therapy
that people don’t have to die of it anymore. How did that happen? Was it
because companies all of a sudden rushed to make drugs? No. If you really
look back and analyze it, before that time society had spent some of its very
hard-earned money to study a curiosity called retroviruses. Just a curiosity
in animals. So by the time HIV was found to be a retrovirus, you already
knew that if you interfered with the protease [a type of enzyme] that you
could deactivate it. So when HIV arrived, society had right off the shelf a
huge amount of knowledge from investments made in a curiosity that at the
time had no use. It may very well be that if you were to take all the research
funding in the country and you put it in Alzheimer’s disease, you would
never get to the solution. But the answer to Alzheimer’s disease may come
from a misfolding protein in a cucumber. But how are you going to write a
grant on a cucumber? And who are you going to send it to? If somebody
gets interested in a folding protein in a cucumber and it’s a good scientific
question, leave them alone. Let them torture the cucumber.”
Casadevall’s overarching point is that the innovation ecosystem should
intentionally preserve range and inefficiency. He is fighting an uphill battle.
In 2006, when I was starting in journalism, I sat in on funding policy
hearings of a U.S. Senate subcommittee on science and space, chaired by
Texas senator Kay Bailey Hutchison. Hutchison would thumb through a
stack of scientists’ research proposals and read the titles aloud. If a title did
not directly pertain to the creation of a new commercial technology, she

whisked it from the stack and asked the room how exactly that sort of thing
would help the country get ahead of India and China. Among the disciplines
Hutchison classified as distracting from technological innovation were
biology, geology, economics, and archaeology. One can only guess how she
would have assessed the work of Louis Pasteur (who started as an artist) on
chickens with cholera, which led him to lab-created vaccines. Or Einstein’s
fanciful idea to investigate if time passes differently in high versus low
gravity, part of a theory essential to some rather useful technology, like cell
phones, which use global positioning satellites with gravitationally adjusted
clocks that sync with clocks on Earth.
In 1945, former MIT dean Vannevar Bush, who oversaw U.S. military
science during World War II—including the mass production of penicillin
and the Manhattan Project—authored a report at the request of President
Franklin Roosevelt in which he explained successful innovation culture. It
was titled “Science, the Endless Frontier,” and led to the creation of the
National Science Foundation that funded three generations of wildly
successful scientific discovery, from Doppler radar and fiber optics to web
browsers and MRIs. “Scientific progress on a broad front results from the
free play of free intellects, working on subjects of their own choice,” Bush
wrote, “in the manner dictated by their curiosity for exploration of the
unknown.”
A curious phenomenon has appeared in recent years on a near-annual
basis when the Nobel Prizes are awarded. Someone who receives one
explains that their breakthrough could not have occurred today. In 2016,
Japanese biologist Yoshinori Ohsumi closed his Nobel lecture======================================================== going on started flying. Every hour of lab meeting Dunbar recorded
required eight hours of transcribing and labeling problem-solving behaviors
so that he could analyze the process of scientific creativity, and he found an
analogy fest.
Dunbar witnessed important breakthroughs live, and saw that the labs
most likely to turn unexpected findings into new knowledge for humanity
made a lot of analogies, and made them from a variety of base domains.
The labs in which scientists had more diverse professional backgrounds
were the ones where more and more varied analogies were offered, and
where breakthroughs were more reliably produced when the unexpected
arose. Those labs were Keplers by committee. They included members with
a wide variety of experiences and interests. When the moment came to
either dismiss or embrace and grapple with information that puzzled them,
they drew on their range to make analogies. Lots of them.
For relatively straightforward challenges, labs started with analogies to
other, very similar experiments. The more unusual the challenge, the more

distant the analogies, moving away from surface similarities and toward
deep structural similarities. In some lab meetings a new analogy entered the
conversation every four minutes on average, some of them from outside of
biology entirely.
In one instance, Dunbar actually saw two labs encounter the same
experimental problem at around the same time. Proteins they wanted to
measure would get stuck to a filter, which made them hard to analyze. One
of the labs was entirely E. coli experts, and the other had scientists with
chemistry, physics, biology, and genetics backgrounds, plus medical
students. “One lab made an analogy drawing on knowledge from the person
with a medical degree, and they figured it out right there at the meeting,”
Dunbar told me. “The other lab used E. coli knowledge to deal with every
problem. That didn’t work here so they had to just start experimenting for
weeks to get rid of the problem. It put me in an awkward position because I
had seen the answer in another lab’s meeting.” (As part of the conditions of
the study, he was not allowed to share information between labs.)
In the face of the unexpected, the range of available analogies helped
determine who learned something new. In the lone lab that did not make
any new findings during Dunbar’s project, everyone had similar and highly
specialized backgrounds, and analogies were almost never used. “When all
the members of the laboratory have the same knowledge at their disposal,
then when a problem arises, a group of similar minded individuals will not
provide more information to make analogies than a single individual,”
Dunbar concluded.
“It’s sort of like the stock market,” he told me. “You need a mixture of
strategies.”
The trouble with courses of study like Northwestern’s Integrated Science
Program, which impart a broad mixture of strategies, is that they may
require abandoning a head start toward a major or career. That is a tough
sell, even if it better serves learners in the long run.
Whether it is the making-connections knowledge Lindsey Richland
studied, or the broad concepts that Flynn tested, or the distant, deep
structural analogical reasoning that Gentner assessed, there is often no
entrenched interest fighting on the side of range, or of knowledge that must
be slowly acquired. All forces align to incentivize a head start and early,

narrow specialization, even if that is a poor long-term strategy. That is a
problem, because another kind of knowledge, perhaps the most important of
all, is necessarily slowly acquired—the kind that helps you match yourself
to the right challenge in the first place.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 6
The Trouble with Too Much Grit
THE BOY’S MOTHER APPRECIATED music and art, but when the boy tried to
freehand sketch the family cat, he proved such a deficient draftsman that he
destroyed the picture and refused to try again. Instead, he spent his
childhood in the Netherlands playing marbles or sledding with his little
brother, but mostly just looking at things. A prominent parenting handbook
advised against unsupervised wanderings that might “intoxicate” a child’s
imagination, but he wandered alone for hours. He walked in storms, and at
night. He walked for miles just to sit for hours watching a bird’s nest, or
following water bugs on their commutes across a brook. He was especially
obsessed with collecting beetles, labeling each one with its proper Latin
species name.
When he was thirteen, the boy was admitted to a brand-new school
housed in a hulking former royal palace. It was so far from his home that he
had to board with a local family. His mind was elsewhere during class, but
he was a good student, and spent his free time memorizing poetry.
The art teacher was the faculty celebrity, an education pioneer who
argued for design to become a central part of the national economic engine.
That crusade was so successful it led the federal government to mandate
freehand drawing classes in every public school. Rather than holding forth
from the front of the class, the teacher arranged students in the center and
meandered through them like a sewing needle, giving personal attention.
Most students adored him. But he made no impression on the boy. As an
adult, the boy would complain that nobody had ever told him what
perspective was in drawing, even though it was so central to the teacher’s

tenets that knowledge of perspective was written into the new law
expanding art education.
The boy didn’t like living with strangers, so he left the school just before
he turned fifteen. For the next sixteen months, he did little other than take
long nature walks. That could not go on forever, but he had no idea what
else to do. Fortunately, his uncle owned a fantastically successful art
dealership, and had just been knighted. He offered his nephew a job in the
big city. Making art had not inspired the boy, but selling it did. He turned
the observational intensity he had practiced in nature to lithographs and
photographs, categorizing what he saw just as he had his beetles. By twenty,
he was dealing with important clients and traveling abroad for sales trips.
The young man confidently told his parents that he would never have to
look for a job again. He was wrong.
He was a country boy in the city, without enough social grace to smooth
over disagreements with his boss, and he disliked bargaining, which felt
like trying to take advantage of customers. He was soon transferred to a
London office that did not deal directly with customers, and then at twenty-
two he was transferred again, this time to Paris. He arrived in France amid
an artistic revolution. On walks to work, the young man passed the studios
of artists who were in the process of becoming famous. And yet, as with the
art teacher, as a pair of his future biographers would write, “None of it
registered.” He was too busy with a new obsession: religion. Years later,
when he and his little brother discussed those revolutionary artists, he
would say he had “seen absolutely nothing of them.”
When he was finally dismissed from the dealership, he went to work as
an assistant teacher at a boarding school in a seaside town in England.
Working fourteen-hour days, he taught classes from French to math,
oversaw the dorm, took the kids to church, and acted as the handyman. The
school was simply a business venture for the owner, and the young man was
cheap labor. He found another job as a tutor, this time at a fancier boarding
school, but after a few months he decided he would become a missionary in
South America. His parents talked him out of that, insisting that he needed
to “stop following [his] own desires” and return to a stable life course. His
mother wished he would do something in nature that would make him
“happier and calmer.” He decided to follow in his father’s footsteps; he
would train to become a full-fledged pastor.

In the meantime, his father arranged a job as a bookstore clerk. The
young man loved books and worked from 8 a.m. until midnight. When the
store flooded, he astounded his colleagues with his sheer physical
endurance as he carried pile after pile of books to safety. His new goal was
to get accepted to a university so that he could later train as a pastor. Again,
he unleashed his tireless passion. He worked with a tutor, and copied by
hand the text of entire books. “I must sit up as long as I can keep my eyes
open,” he told his brother. He reminded himself that “practice makes
perfect,” but Latin and Greek did not come easily to him. He moved in with
an uncle, a stern war hero who urged him simply, “push on.” The young
man resolved to begin work before his peers rose and finish after they slept.
His uncle would find him reading in the wee morning hours.
And still, he floundered in his studies. Nearing his twenty-fifth birthday,
the young man heard a sermon about how the economic revolution had
made certain citizens, like his art-dealer uncle, fabulously wealthy, while
others had been thrust into abject poverty. He decided to forsake university
to spread the Word more quickly. He opted for a shorter educational course,
but was not adept at giving the succinct, punchy sermons that the school
mandated. He failed in that program as well. But nobody could stop him
from preaching, so he headed for coal country, where inspiration was
needed most .
When the young man arrived and saw the blackened sky, he likened it to
the shading of a Rembrandt. There he would preach to workers so
downtrodden that they referred to the world above the mineshaft as “up in
Hell.” He dove in to spiritual service with his usual verve, giving away his
clothes and money, and doting night and day on the ill and injured. They
were legion.
Shortly after he arrived, a series of explosions killed 121 miners and sent
gas streaming out of the ground, fueling a pillar of fire like some monstrous
Bunsen burner nestled below the earth. The======================================================== most successful young learners
were those who had been through a range of musical instruments”); and J. A. Sloboda and M. J. A.
Howe, “Biographical Precursors of Musical Excellence,” Psychology of Music 19 (1991): 3–21 (“The
exceptional children practiced much less than the average children on their first chosen instrument
but much more than the average children on their third instrument”).
“a mismatch between the instruments”: S. A. O’Neill, “Developing a Young Musician’s Growth
Mindset,” in Music and the Mind, ed. I. Deliège and J. W. Davidson (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2011).
“It seems very clear”: Sloboda and Howe, “Biographical Precursors of Musical Excellence.”
A study that followed up: A. Ivaldi, “Routes to Adolescent Musical Expertise,” in Music and the
Mind, ed. Deliège and Davidson.
“Despite the ever-increasing number”: P. Gorner, “Cecchini’s Guitar Truly Classical,” Chicago
Tribune, July 13, 1968. (Studs Terkel interviewed Cecchini the day before the performance. That
fantastic conversation about music can be found here: http://jackcecchini.com/Interviews.html ).
“There was no connection”: T. Teachout, Duke: A Life of Duke Ellington (New York: Gotham
Books, 2013).
America’s preeminent composer: Kerman and Tomlinson, Listen , 394.

“John played anything”: L. Flanagan, Moonlight in Vermont: The Official Biography of Johnny
Smith (Anaheim Hills, CA: Centerstream, 2015).
“I got a wonderful piano teacher”: F. M. Hall, It’s About Time: The Dave Brubeck Story.
(Fayetteville: University of Arkansas Press, 1996).
“with a drawn knife”; “I wonder if”: M. Dregni, Django: The Life and Music of a Gypsy Legend
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004 [Kindle ebook]). Two other sources provided particularly
important details about Django’s life: C. Delaunay, Django Reinhardt (New York: Da Capo, 1961)
(on the back cover, James Lincoln Collier, author of The Making of Jazz, identifies Django as
“without question, the single most important guitarist”); and a special Django issue of Guitar Player
magazine (November 1976) devoted to legendary musicians recounting their time with him.
creativity erupted: The 5-CD set “Django Reinhardt—Musette to Maestro 1928–1937: The Early
Work of a Guitar Genius” (JSP Records, 2010) includes recordings of a young Reinhardt both before
and after his injury.
Jimi Hendrix, who kept an album of Django’s: Jacob McMurray, senior curator at Seattle’s
Museum of Pop Culture, kindly confirmed this with the museum’s permanent collection.
sepia-toned YouTube clip: “Django Reinhardt Clip Performing Live (1945),” YouTube,
www.youtube.com/watch?v=aZ308aOOX04 . (The date on the You-Tube video is incorrect. The clip
is from the 1938 short film “Jazz ‘Hot.’”)
“one of osmosis” (and other Berliner quotes): P. F. Berliner, Thinking in Jazz (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1994).
“as if the brain turned off”: C. Kalb, “Who Is a Genius?,” National Geographic, May 2017.
“Well, I can’t read either”: Guitar Player, November 1976.
“a concept that went against conservatory training”: Dregni, Django .
“I can’t improvise at all”: A. Midgette, “Concerto on the Fly: Can Classical Musicians Learn to
Improvise,” Washington Post, June 15, 2012, online ed.
“My complete self-taught technique” and detail about hitting siblings with violins: S. Suzuki,
Nurtured by Love, trans. W. Suzuki (Alfred Music, 1993 [Kindle ebook]).
household rules: J. S. Dacey, “Discriminating Characteristics of the Families of Highly Creative
Adolescents,” Journal of Creative Behavior 23, no. 4 (1989): 263–71. (Grant referenced the study in:
“How to Raise a Creative Child. Step One: Back Off,” New York Times , Jan. 30, 2016.)
CHAPTER 4:LEARNING, FAST AND SLOW
“Okay? You’re going to an Eagles game”: The classroom scene is from video, transcript, and
analysis from the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS). The particular
video is “M-US2 Writing Variable Expressions.”
“three dollars for a hot dog”: The teacher briefly misspoke and said “two.” It is corrected for
clarity.
“using procedures”; “making connections”: J. Hiebert et al., “Teaching Mathematics in Seven
Countries,” National Center for Education Statistics, 2003, chap. 5.
bansho : E.R.A. Kuehnert et al. “Bansho: Visually Sequencing Mathematical Ideas,” Teaching
Children Mathematics 24, no. 6 (2018): 362–69.
“Students do not view mathematics as a system ”: L. E. Richland et al., “Teaching the Conceptual
Structure of Mathematics,” Educational Psychology 47, no. 3 (2012): 189–203.
tested sixth graders in the South Bronx: N. Kornell and J. Metcalfe, “The Effects of Memory
Retrieval, Errors and Feedback on Learning,” in Applying Science of Learning in Education , V.A.

Benassi et al., ed. (Society for the Teaching of Psychology, 2014); J. Metcalfe and N. Kornell,
“Principles of Cognitive Science in Education,” Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 14, no. 2 (2007):
225–29.
“hypercorrection effect”: T. S. Eich et al., “The Hypercorrection Effect in Younger and Older
Adults,” Neuropsychology, Development and Cognition. Section B, Aging, Neuropsychology and
Cognition 20, no. 5 (2013): 511–21; J. Metcalfe et al., “Neural Correlates of People’s
Hypercorrection of Their False Beliefs,” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 24, no. 7 (2012): 1571–
83.
Oberon and Macduff: N. Kornell and H. S. Terrace, “The Generation Effect in Monkeys,”
Psychological Science 18, no. 8 (2007): 682–85.
“Like life”: N. Kornell et al., “Retrieval Attempts Enhance Learning, but Retrieval Success (Versus
Failure) Does Not Matter,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
41, no. 1 (2015): 283–94.
Spanish vocabulary learners: H. P. Bahrick and E. Phelps, “Retention of Spanish Vocabulary over 8
Years,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 13, no. 2 (1987):
344–49.
Iowa State researchers read: L. L. Jacoby and W. H. Bartz, “Rehearsal and Transfer to LTM,”
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 11 (1972): 561–65.
“produce misleadingly high levels”: N. J. Cepeda et al., “Spacing Effects in Learning,”
Psychological Science 19, no. 11 (2008): 1095–1102.
In 2007, the U.S. Department of Education: H. Pashler et al., “Organizing Instruction and Study to
Improve Student Learning,” National Center for Education Research, 2007.
an extraordinarily unique study: S. E. Carrell and J. E. West, “Does Professor Quality Matter?,”
Journal of Political Economy 118, no. 3 (2010): 409–32.
A similar study was conducted at Italy’s Bocconi University: M. Braga et al., “Evaluating
Students’ Evaluations of Professors,” Economics of Education Review 41 (2014): 71–88.
“desirable difficulties”: R. A. Bjork, “Institutional Impediments to Effective Training,” in Learning,
Remembering, Believing: Enhancing Human Performance, ed. D. Druckman and R. A. Bjork
(Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 1994), 295–306.
“Above all, the most basic message”: C. M. Clark and R. A. Bjork, “When and Why Introducing
Difficulties and Errors Can Enhance Instruction,” in Applying the Science of Learning in Education,
ed. V. A. Benassi et al. (Society for the Teaching of Psychology, 2014 [ebook]).
said in national surveys: C. Rampell, “Actually, Public Education is Getting Better, Not Worse,”
Washington Post , September 18, 2014.
School has not gotten worse; “jobs that pay well”: G. Duncan and R. J. Murnane, Restoring
Opportunity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press, 2014 [Kindle ebook]).
In a study using college math problems: D. Rohrer and K. Taylor, “The Shuffling of Mathematics
Problems Improves Learning,” Instructional Science 35 (2007): 481–98. See also: D. Rohrer et al.,
“A Randomized Controlled Trial of Interleaved Mathematics Practice,” Journal of Educational
Psychology (May 16, 2019): advance online publication.
butterfly species identification to psychological-disorder diagnosis: M. S. Birnbaum et al., “Why
Interleaving Enhances Inductive Learning,” Memory and Cognition 41 (2013): 392–402.
naval air defense simulations: C. L. Holladay and M.A. Quiñones, “Practice Variability and
Transfer of Training,” Journal of Applied Psychology 88, no. 6 (2003): 1094–1103.
In one of Kornell and Bjork’s interleaving studies, 80 percent of students: N. Kornell and R. A.
Bjork, “Learning Concepts and Categories: Is Spacing the ‘Enemy of Induction’?,” Psychological

Science 19, no. 6 (2008): 585–92.
a particular left-hand jump across fifteen keys: M. Bangert et al., “When Less of the Same Is
More: Benefits of Variability of Practice in Pianists,” Proceedings of the International Symposium on
Performance Science (2013): 117–22.
O’Neal should practice from a foot in front: Bjork makes this suggestion in Daniel Coyle’s The
Talent Code (New York: Bantam, 2009).
hallmark of expert problem solving: See, for example: M.T.H. Chi et al., “Categorization and
Representation of Physics Problems by Experts and Novices,” Cognitive Science 5, no. 2 (1981):
121–52; and J. F. Voss et al., “Individual Differences in the Solving of Social Science Problems,” in
Individual Differences in Cognition, vol. 1, ed. R. F. Dillon and R. R. Schmeck (New York:
Academic Press, 1983).
reviewed sixty-seven early childhood education programs: D. Bailey et al., “Persistence and
Fadeout in Impacts of Child and Adolescent Interventions,” Journal of Research on Educational
Effectiveness 10, no. 1 (2017): 7–39.
The motor-skill equivalent: S. G. Paris, “Reinterpreting the Development of Reading Skills,”
Reading Research Quarterly 40, no. 2 (2005): 184–202.
CHAPTER 5:THINKING OUTSIDE EXPERIENCE
Giordano Bruno: A. A. Martinez, “Giordano Bruno and the Heresy of Many Worlds,” Annals of
Science 73, no. 4 (2016): 345–74.
Johannes Kepler inherited: Sources that give excellent background on the worldviews that Kepler
inherited, and his transformative analogies, are: D. Gentner et al., “Analogical Reasoning and
Conceptual Change: A Case Study of Johannes Kepler,” Journal of the Learning Sciences 6, no. 1
(1997): 3–40; D. Gentner, “Analogy in======================================================== suffering locals marveled at the
young man’s endurance as he tried to soothe families. But they also found
him odd; the children he taught did not listen. Soon, his makeshift ministry
was finished. He was twenty-seven, and despondent. A decade after an
exuberant start as an art dealer, he had no possessions, accomplishments, or
direction.
He poured his heart out in a missive to his little brother, now a respected
art dealer himself. He likened himself to a caged bird in spring who feels

deeply that it is time for him to do something important but cannot recall
what it is, and so “bangs his head against the bars of his cage. And then the
cage stays there and the bird is mad with suffering.” A man, too, he
exhorted, “doesn’t always know himself what he could do, but he feels by
instinct, I’m good for something, even so! . . . I know that I could be a quite
different man! . . . There’s something within me, so what is it!” He had been
a student, an art dealer, a teacher, a bookseller, a prospective pastor, and an
itinerant catechist. After promising starts, he had failed spectacularly in
every path he tried.
His brothers suggested he try carpentry, or look for work as a barber. His
sister thought he would make a fine baker. He was an insatiable reader, so
perhaps a librarian. But in the depths of his despair, he turned his ferocious
energy on the last thing he could think of that he could start right away. His
next letter to his brother was very short: “I’m writing to you while drawing
and I’m in a hurry to get back to it.” Previously, the man had seen drawing
as a distraction from his aim of reaching people with truth. Now he began to
seek truth by documenting the lives around him in drawings. He had
stopped drawing freehand as a child when he realized he was a clumsy
draftsman, so he started at the very beginning, reading Guide to the ABCs of
Drawing .
In the coming years, he would make a few very brief attempts at formal
training. His cousin-in-law was a painter and tried to teach him watercolor.
The cousin would later be listed on the man’s Wikipedia page as the sole
entry beside “Education.” In truth, the man struggled with the fragile touch
required for watercolor, and the mentor/ mentee relationship ended after a
month. His former art-dealer boss, now an esteemed tastemaker in the art
world, pronounced his drawings unworthy of being displayed for sale. “Of
one thing I am sure,” the boss told him, “you are no artist.” He added flatly,
“You started too late.”
When he was nearly thirty-three, he enrolled in art school alongside
students a decade younger, but lasted only a few weeks. He entered the
class drawing competition, and the judges harshly suggested he revert to a
beginner’s class with ten-year-olds.
As he had between careers, he pinballed from one artistic passion to
another. On one day he felt true artists only painted realistic figures, and
then when his figures came out poorly, the next day true artists only cared
for landscapes. One day he strived for realism, another for pure expression.

This week art was a medium for declaring religious devotion, next week
such concerns encumbered pure creation. One year he decided all true art
consisted only of shades of black and gray, and then later that vibrant color
was the real pearl inside the artist’s shell. Each time he fell fully in love,
and then just as fully and quickly back out.
One day, he dragged an easel and oil paints—with which he had almost
no experience—out to a sand dune in a storm. He ran in and out of cover,
slapping and slathering paint on the canvas in staccato strokes between
gusts of wind that peppered the painting with grains of sand. He squeezed
color right from the tube onto the canvas when he had to. The viscous oil
paint and the speed required to apply it in the storm freed his imagination
and his hand from the crippling deficiencies that plagued him when he
strove for perfect realism. More than a century later, his definitive
biographers would write of that day, “[He] made an astonishing discovery:
he could paint.” And he felt it. “I enjoy it tremendously,” he wrote his
brother. “Painting has proved less difficult than I expected.”
He continued to whipsaw from one artistic experiment to another,
avowing and disavowing, roundly condemning the attempt to capture
sunlight in paint only to reverse course and place his canvas outside in the
sunlight to do just that. He obsessed over deeper and darker blacks in
colorless works, and then dispensed with that in an instant and forever in
favor of vibrant color, his about-face so thorough that he would not even
use black to depict the night sky. He started piano lessons because he
thought musical tones might teach him something about color tones.
His peregrinations continued for the few remaining years of his short life,
both geographically and artistically. He finally forsook the goal of ever
becoming a master draftsman, and then one by one left behind all of the
styles that he had previously claimed to be critical, but at which he had
failed. He emerged with a new art: impetuous, slathered with paint, erupting
with color, laden with no formality other than to capture something infinite.
*
 He wanted to make art that anyone could understand, not haughty works
for those with privileged training. For years he had tried and failed to
capture every proportion of a figure accurately. Now he let that go so
entirely that he left figures walking among trees with faces left blank and
hands like mittens.
Whereas he had once demanded live models to portray and images to
copy, now he wielded his mind’s eye. One evening, he looked out his

bedroom window toward the rolling hills in the distance and, as he had with
birds and beetles as a boy, watched the sky pass for hours. When he picked
up the brush, his imagination transformed a nearby town into a tiny village,
its towering church to a humble chapel. The dark green cypress tree in the
foreground became massive, winding up the canvas like seaweed in the
swirling rhythm of the night sky.
It was just a few years from the recommended relegation to a drawing
class for ten-year-olds. But that starry night, along with scores of other
paintings in his new style, the one he devised amid a succession of failures,
would launch a new era of art and inspire new conceptions of beauty and
expression. Works that he dashed off in hours as experiments over the final
two years of his life would become some of the most valuable objects—
culturally and monetarily—that have ever existed in the world.
It is a myth that Vincent van Gogh died in anonymity. An ecstatic review
cast him as a revolutionary months before he died, and made him the talk of
Paris. Claude Monet, the dean of impressionism—the movement Van Gogh
ignored, lamented, and then innovated upon—declared Van Gogh’s work
the cream of an annual exhibition.
Adjusted for inflation, four of Van Gogh’s paintings have sold for more
than $100 million, and they weren’t even the most famous ones. His work
now graces everything from socks to cell phone covers and an eponymous
vodka brand. But he reached far beyond commerce.
“What artists do changed because of Vincent Van Gogh,” artist and writer
Steven Naifeh told me. (Naifeh, with Gregory White Smith, wrote “the
definitive biography,” according to a curator of the Van Gogh Museum.)
Van Gogh’s paintings served as a bridge to modern art and inspired a
widespread devotion that no artist, perhaps no person, has equaled.
Teenagers who have never visited a museum tape his art to their walls;
Japanese travelers leave the ashes of their ancestors at his grave. In 2016,
the Art Institute of Chicago displayed together all three iconic
“Bedrooms”—pictures meant “to rest the brain, or rather the imagination,”
according to Van Gogh; the record number of visitors forced them to create
impromptu crowd control strategies, with a TSA-precheck-style express
lane.

And yet had Van Gogh died at thirty-four rather than thirty-seven (life
expectancy in the Netherlands when he was born was forty), he might not
even merit a historical footnote. The same goes for Paul Gauguin, a painter
who briefly lived with Van Gogh and innovated a style known as
synthetism, in which bold lines separated sections of brilliant color, without
the subtle gradations of classical painting. He, too, became one of the few
artists to crack the $100 million barrier. He spent the first six years of his
professional life with the merchant marine before he found his calling:
bourgeois stockbroker. Only after the market crash of 1882 did Gauguin
become a full-time artist, at the age of thirty-five. His switch is reminiscent
of J. K. Rowling’s. She “failed on an epic scale” in her twenties, she once
said, personally and professionally. A short marriage “imploded,” and she
was a single mother and unemployed former teacher on welfare. Like Van
Gogh in the coal country and Gauguin after the crash, she was “set free” by
failure to try work that better matched her talents and interests.
They all appear to have excelled in spite of their late starts. It would be
easy enough to cherry-pick stories of exceptional late developers
overcoming the odds. But they aren’t exceptions by virtue of their late
starts, and those late starts did not stack the odds against them. Their late
starts were integral to their eventual success.
“Match quality” is a term economists use to describe the degree of fit
between the work someone does and who they are—their abilities and
proclivities.
Northwestern University economist Ofer Malamud’s inspiration for
studying match quality was personal experience. He was born in Israel, but
his father worked for a shipping company, and when Malamud was nine the
family moved to Hong Kong, where he attended an English school. The
English system required that a student home in on an academic
specialization in the last two years of high school. “When you applied to a
college in England, you had to apply to a======================================================== first-year students who were randomized into introductory course
sections in management, economics, or law, and then the courses that
followed them in a prescribed sequence over four years. It showed precisely
the same pattern. Teachers who guided students to overachievement in their
own course were rated highly, and undermined student performance in the
long run.
Psychologist Robert Bjork first used the phrase “desirable difficulties” in
1994. Twenty years later, he and a coauthor concluded a book chapter on
applying the science of learning like this: “Above all, the most basic
message is that teachers and students must avoid interpreting current
performance as learning. Good performance on a test during the learning

process can indicate mastery, but learners and teachers need to be aware
that such performance will often index, instead, fast but fleeting progress.”
Here is the bright side: over the past forty years, Americans have
increasingly said in national surveys that current students are getting a
worse education than they themselves did, and they have been wrong.
Scores from the National Assessment of Educational Progress, “the nation’s
report card,” have risen steadily since the 1970s. Unquestionably, students
today have mastery of basic skills that is superior to students of the past.
School has not gotten worse. The goals of education have just become
loftier.
Education economist Greg Duncan, one of the most influential education
professors in the world, has documented this trend. Focusing on “using
procedures” problems worked well forty years ago when the world was
flush with jobs that paid middle-class salaries for procedural tasks, like
typing, filing, and working on an assembly line. “Increasingly,” according
to Duncan, “jobs that pay well require employees to be able to solve
unexpected problems, often while working in groups. . . . These shifts in
labor force demands have in turn put new and increasingly stringent
demands on schools.”
Here is a math question from the early 1980s basic skills test of all public
school sixth graders in Massachusetts:
Carol can ride her bike 10 miles per hour. If Carol rides her bike to the store, how long will it
take?
To solve this problem, you would need to know:
A) How far it is to the store.
B) What kind of bike Carol has.
C) What time Carol will leave.
D) How much Carol has to spend.
And here is a question Massachusetts sixth graders got in 2011:
Paige, Rosie, and Cheryl each spent exactly $9.00 at the same snack bar.
• Paige bought 3 bags of peanuts.
• Rosie bought 2 bags of peanuts and 2 pretzels.
• Cheryl bought 1 bag of peanuts, 1 pretzel, and 1 milk shake.

A. What is the cost, in dollars, of 1 bag of peanuts? Show or explain how you got your
answer.
B. What is the cost, in dollars, of 1 pretzel? Show or explain how you got your answer .
C. What is the total number of pretzels that can be bought for the cost of 1 milk shake?
Show or explain how you got your answer.
For every problem like the first one, the simple formula “distance = rate
× time” could be memorized and applied. The second problem requires the
connection of multiple concepts that are then applied to a new situation.
The teaching strategies that current teachers experienced when they were
students are no longer good enough. Knowledge increasingly needs not
merely to be durable, but also flexible—both sticky and capable of broad
application.
Toward the end of the eighth-grade math class that I watched with
Lindsey Richland, the students settled into a worksheet for what
psychologists call “blocked” practice. That is, practicing the same thing
repeatedly, each problem employing the same procedure. It leads to
excellent immediate performance, but for knowledge to be flexible, it
should be learned under varied conditions, an approach called varied or
mixed practice, or, to researchers, “interleaving.”
Interleaving has been shown to improve inductive reasoning. When
presented with different examples mixed together, students learn to create
abstract generalizations that allow them to apply what they learned to
material they have never encountered before. For example, say you plan to
visit a museum and want to be able to identify the artist (Cézanne, Picasso,
or Renoir) of paintings there that you have never seen. Before you go,
instead of studying a stack of Cézanne flash cards, and then a stack of
Picasso flash cards, and then a stack of Renoir, you should put the cards
together and shuffle, so they will be interleaved. You will struggle more
(and probably feel less confident) during practice, but be better equipped on
museum day to discern each painter’s style, even for paintings that weren’t
in the flash cards.
In a study using college math problems, students who learned in blocks
—all examples of a particular type of problem at once—performed a lot
worse come test time than students who studied the exact same problems
but all mixed up. The blocked-practice students learned procedures for each
type of problem through repetition. The mixed-practice students learned
how to differentiate types of problems.

The same effect has appeared among learners studying everything from
butterfly species identification to psychological-disorder diagnosis. In
research on naval air defense simulations, individuals who engaged in
highly mixed practice performed worse than blocked practicers during
training, when they had to respond to potential threat scenarios that became
familiar over the course of the training. At test time, everyone faced
completely new scenarios, and the mixed-practice group destroyed the
blocked-practice group.
And yet interleaving tends to fool learners about their own progress. In
one of Kornell and Bjork’s interleaving studies, 80 percent of students were
sure they had learned better with blocked than mixed practice, whereas 80
percent performed in a manner that proved the opposite. The feeling of
learning, it turns out, is based on before-your-eyes progress, while deep
learning is not. “When your intuition says block,” Kornell told me, “you
should probably interleave.”
Interleaving is a desirable difficulty that frequently holds for both
physical and mental skills. A simple motor-skill example is an experiment
in which piano students were asked to learn to execute, in one-fifth of a
second, a particular left-hand jump across fifteen keys. They were allowed
190 practice attempts. Some used all of those practicing the fifteen-key
jump, while others switched between eight-, twelve-,fifteen-, and twenty-
two-key jumps. When the piano students were invited back for a test, those
who underwent the mixed practice were faster and more accurate at the
fifteen-key jump than the students who had only practiced that exact jump.
The “desirable difficulty” coiner himself, Robert Bjork, once commented
on Shaquille O’Neal’s perpetual free-throw woes to say that instead of
continuing to practice from the free-throw line, O’Neal should practice
from a foot in front of and behind it to learn the motor modulation he
needed.
Whether the task is mental or physical, interleaving improves the ability
to match the right strategy to a problem. That happens to be a hallmark of
expert problem solving. Whether chemists, physicists, or political scientists,
the most successful problem solvers spend mental energy figuring out what
type of problem they are facing before matching a strategy to it, rather than
jumping in with memorized procedures. In that way, they are just about the
precise opposite of experts who develop in kind learning environments, like
chess masters, who rely heavily on intuition. Kind learning environment

experts choose a strategy and then evaluate; experts in less repetitive
environments evaluate and then choose.
Desirable difficulties like testing and spacing make knowledge stick. It
becomes durable. Desirable difficulties like making connections and
interleaving make knowledge flexible, useful for problems that never
appeared in training. All slow down learning and make performance suffer,
in the short term. That can be a problem, because like the Air Force cadets,
we all reflexively assess our progress by how we are doing right now . And
like the Air Force cadets, we are often wrong.
In 2017, Greg Duncan, the education economist, along with psychologist
Drew Bailey and colleagues, reviewed sixty-seven early childhood
education programs meant to boost academic achievement. Programs like
Head Start did give a head start, but academically that was about it. The
researchers found a pervasive “fadeout” effect, where a temporary academic
advantage quickly diminished and often completely vanished. On a graph, it
looks eerily like the kind that show future elite athletes catching up to their
peers who got a head start in deliberate practice.
A reason for this, the researchers concluded, is that early childhood
education programs teach “closed” skills that can be acquired quickly with
repetition of procedures, but that everyone will pick up at some point
anyway. The fadeout was not a disappearance of skill so much as the rest of
the world catching up. The motor-skill equivalent would be teaching a kid
to walk a little early. Everyone is going to learn it anyway, and while it
might be temporarily impressive, there is no evidence that rushing it
matters.
The research team recommended that if programs want to impart lasting
academic benefits they should focus instead on “open” skills that scaffold
later knowledge. Teaching kids to read a little early is not a lasting
advantage. Teaching them how to hunt for and connect contextual clues to
understand what they read can be. As with all desirable difficulties, the
trouble is that a head start comes fast, but deep learning is slow. “The
slowest growth,” the researchers wrote, occurs “for the most complex
skills.”
Duncan landed on the Today show discussing his team’s findings. The
counteropinion was supplied by parents and an early childhood teacher