======================================================== have won the Nobel Prize are more likely still.
Compared to other scientists, Nobel laureates are at least twenty-two times
more likely to partake as an amateur actor, dancer, magician, or other type
of performer. Nationally recognized scientists are much more likely than
other scientists to be musicians, sculptors, painters, printmakers,
woodworkers, mechanics, electronics tinkerers, glassblowers, poets, or
writers, of both fiction and nonfiction. And, again, Nobel laureates are far
more likely still. The most successful experts also belong to the wider
world. “To him who observes them from afar,” said Spanish Nobel laureate
Santiago Ramón y Cajal, the father of modern neuroscience, “it appears as
though they are scattering and dissipating their energies, while in reality
they are channeling and strengthening them.” The main conclusion of work
that took years of studying scientists and engineers, all of whom were
regarded by peers as true technical experts, was that those who did not
make a creative contribution to their field lacked aesthetic interests outside
their narrow area. As psychologist and prominent creativity researcher Dean
Keith Simonton observed, “rather than obsessively focus[ing] on a narrow
topic,” creative achievers tend to have broad interests. “This breadth often
supports insights that cannot be attributed to domain-specific expertise
alone.”
Those findings are reminiscent of a speech Steve Jobs gave, in which he
famously recounted the importance of a calligraphy class to his design
aesthetics. “When we were designing the first Macintosh computer, it all
came back to me,” he said. “If I had never dropped in on that single course
in college, the Mac would have never had multiple typefaces or
proportionally spaced fonts.” Or electrical engineer Claude Shannon, who

launched the Information Age thanks to a philosophy course he took to
fulfill a requirement at the University of Michigan. In it, he was exposed to
the work of self-taught nineteenth-century English logician George Boole,
who assigned a value of 1 to true statements and 0 to false statements and
showed that logic problems could be solved like math equations. It resulted
in absolutely nothing of practical importance until seventy years after Boole
passed away, when Shannon did a summer internship at AT& T’s Bell Labs
research facility. There he recognized that he could combine telephone call-
routing technology with Boole’s logic system to encode and transmit any
type of information electronically. It was the fundamental insight on which
computers rely. “It just happened that no one else was familiar with both
those fields at the same time,” Shannon said.
In 1979, Christopher Connolly cofounded a psychology consultancy in
the United Kingdom to help high achievers (initially athletes, but then
others) perform at their best. Over the years, Connolly became curious
about why some professionals floundered outside a narrow expertise, while
others were remarkably adept at expanding their careers—moving from
playing in a world-class orchestra, for example, to running one. Thirty years
after he started, Connolly returned to school to do a PhD investigating that
very question, under Fernand Gobet, the psychologist and chess
international master. Connolly’s primary finding was that early in their
careers, those who later made successful transitions had broader training
and kept multiple “career streams” open even as they pursued a primary
specialty. They “traveled on an eight-lane highway,” he wrote, rather than
down a single-lane one-way street. They had range. The successful adapters
were excellent at taking knowledge from one pursuit and applying it
creatively to another, and at avoiding cognitive entrenchment. They
employed what Hogarth called a “circuit breaker.” They drew on outside
experiences and analogies to interrupt their inclination toward a previous
solution that may no longer work. Their skill was in avoiding the same old
patterns. In the wicked world, with ill-defined challenges and few rigid
rules, range can be a life hack .
Pretending the world is like golf and chess is comforting. It makes for a
tidy kind-world message, and some very compelling books. The rest of this
one will begin where those end—in a place where the popular sport is
Martian tennis, with a view into how the modern world became so wicked
in the first place.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 2
How the Wicked World Was Made
THE TOWN OF DUNEDIN sits at the base of a hilly peninsula that juts off of
New Zealand’s South Island into the South Pacific. The peninsula is famous
for yellow-eyed penguins, and Dunedin boasts, demurely, the world’s
steepest residential street. It also features the University of Otago, the oldest
university in New Zealand, and home to James Flynn, a professor of political
studies who changed how psychologists think about thinking.
He started in 1981, intrigued by a thirty-year-old paper that reported IQ
test scores of American soldiers in World Wars I and II. The World War II
soldiers had performed better, by a lot. A World War I soldier who scored
smack in the middle of his peers—the 50th percentile—would have made
only the 22nd percentile compared to soldiers in World War II. Flynn
wondered if perhaps civilians had experienced a similar improvement. “I
thought, if IQ gains had occurred anywhere,” he told me, “maybe they had
occurred everywhere.” If he was right, psychologists had been missing
something big right before their eyes.
Flynn wrote to researchers in other countries asking for data, and on a dull
November Saturday in 1984, he found a letter in his university mailbox. It
was from a Dutch researcher, and it contained years of raw data from IQ
tests given to young men in the Netherlands. The data were from a test
known as Raven’s Progressive Matrices, designed to gauge the test taker’s
ability to make sense of complexity. Each question of the test shows a set of
abstract designs with one design missing. The test taker must try to fill in the
missing design to complete a pattern. Raven’s was conceived to be the
epitome of a “culturally reduced” test; performance should be unaffected by
material learned in life, inside or outside of school. Should Martians alight

on Earth, Raven’s should be the test capable of determining how bright they
are. And yet Flynn could immediately see that young Dutchmen had made
enormous gains from one generation to the next.
Flynn found more clues in test reference manuals. IQ tests are all
standardized so that the average score is always 100 points. (They are graded
based on a curve, with 100 in the middle.) Flynn noticed that the tests had to
be restandardized from time to time to keep the average at 100, because test
takers were giving more correct answers than they had in the past. In the
twelve months after he received the Dutch letter, Flynn collected data from
fourteen countries. Every single one showed huge gains for both children
and adults. “Our advantage over our ancestors,” as he put it, is “from the
cradle to the grave.”
Flynn had asked the right question. Score gains had occurred everywhere.
Other academics had stumbled upon pieces of the same data earlier, but none
had investigated whether it was part of a global pattern, even those who were
having to tweak the test scoring system to keep the average at 100. “As an
outsider,” Flynn told me, “things strike me as surprising that I think people
trained in psychometrics just accepted.”
The Flynn effect—the increase in correct IQ test answers with each new
generation in the twentieth century—has now been documented in more than
thirty countries. The gains are startling: three points every ten years. To put
that in perspective, if an adult who scored average today were compared to
adults a century ago, she would be in the 98th percentile.
When Flynn published his revelation in 1987, it hit the community of
researchers who study cognitive ability like a firebomb. The American
Psychological Association convened an entire meeting on the issue, and
psychologists invested in the immutable nature of IQ test scores offered an
array of explanations to usher the effect away, from more education and
better nutrition—which presumably contributed—to test-taking experience,
but none fit the unusual pattern of score improvements. On tests that gauged
material picked up in school or with independent reading or study—general
knowledge, arithmetic, vocabulary—scores hardly budged. Meanwhile,
performance on more abstract tasks that are never formally taught, like the
Raven’s matrices, or “similarities” tests, which require a description of how
two things are alike, skyrocketed.

A young person today asked to give similarities between “dusk” and
“dawn” might immediately realize that both connote times of day. But they
would be far more likely than their grandmothers to produce a higher-level
similarity: both separate day from night. A child today who scores average
on similarities would be in the 94th percentile of her grandparents’
generation. When a group of Estonian researchers used national test scores
to compare word understandings of schoolkids in the 1930s to those in 2006,
they saw that improvement came very specifically on the most abstract
words. The more abstract the word, the bigger the improvement. The kids
barely bested their grandparents on words for directly observable objects or
phenomena (“hen,” “eating,” “illness”), but they improved massively on
imperceptible concepts (“law,” “pledge,” “citizen”).
The gains around the world on Raven’s Progressive Matrices—where
change was least expected—were the biggest of all. “The huge Raven’s
gains show that today’s children are far better at solving problems on the
spot without a previously learned method for doing so,” Flynn concluded.
They are more able to extract rules and patterns where none are given. Even
in countries that have recently had a decrease in verbal and math IQ test
scores, Raven’s scores went======================================================== (1974): 475–94. For more on work that extended Luria’s findings,
see: M. Cole and S. Scribner, Culture and Thought (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1974).
The word “percent”: Google Books Ngram Viewer search for “percent.” See also: J. B. Michel et
al., “Quantitative Analysis of Culture Using Millions of Digitized Books,” Science 331 (2011): 176–
82.
They do very well on Raven’s: Flynn, Does Your Family Make You Smarter?
provides peace of mind: S. Arbesman, Overcomplicated (New York: Portfolio, 2017), 158–60.

“cognitively flexible”: C. Schooler, “Environmental Complexity and the Flynn Effect,” in The
Rising Curve, ed. U. Neisser (Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 1998). And see:
A. Inkeles and D. H. Smith, Becoming Modern: Individual Change in Six Developing Countries
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1974).
“No historian who takes in the sweep of human history”: S. Pinker, The Better Angels of our
Nature (New York: Penguin, 2011).
more slowly for women: Flynn, Are We Getting Smarter? .
“the traits that earn good grades”: Flynn, How to Improve Your Mind (Malden, MA: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2012). Flynn kindly provided me with the test and answer key.
econ professors have been shown: R. P. Larrick et al., “Teaching the Use of Cost-Benefit Reasoning
in Everyday Life,” Psychological Science 1, no. 6 (1990): 362–70; R. P. Larrick et al., “Who Uses the
Cost-Benefit Rules of Choice?,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 56 (1993):
331–47. (Hogarth’s “what strikes me” quote in the footnote is from his Educating Intuition, p. 222).
Chemists, on the other hand: J. F. Voss et al., “Individual Differences in the Solving of Social
Science Problems,” in Individual Differences in Cognition, vol. 1, ed. 44–R. F. Dillon and R. R.
Schmeck (New York: Academic Press, 1983); D. R. Lehman et al., “The Effects of Graduate Training
on Reasoning,” American Psychologist 43, no. 6 (1988): 431–43.
“is intended as an introduction”: “The College Core Curriculum,” University of Chicago,
https://college.uchicago.edu/ academics/ college-core-curriculum .
registration filled up in the first minute: M. Nijhuis, “How to Call B.S. on Big Data: A Practical
Guide,” The New Yorker, June 3, 2017, online ed.
“Computational thinking is using abstraction”: J. M. Wing, “Computational Thinking,”
Communications of the ACM 49, no. 3 (2006): 33–35.
narrow vocational training: B. Caplan, The Case Against Education (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2018), 233–35.
a career unrelated to their major: J. R. Abel and R. Deitz, “Agglomeration and Job Matching
among College Graduates.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 51 (2015): 14–24.
“No tool is omnicompetent”: A. J. Toynbee, A Study of History, vol. 12, Reconsiderations (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1964), 42.
“Everyone is so busy doing research”: Center for Evidence-Based Medicine video, “Doug Altman
—Scandal of Poor Medical Research,” https://www.youtube.com / watch? v= ZwDNPldQO1Q .
like Fermi-izing, can go a long way: In addition to the Larrick and Lehman studies above, see: D. F.
Halpern, “Teaching Critical Thinking for Transfer Across Domains,” American Psychologist 53, no.
4 (1998): 449–55; W. Chang et al., “Developing Expert Political Judgment,” Judgment and Decision
Making 11, no. 5 (2016): 509–26.
“how Fermi estimation can cut”: “Case Studies: Bullshit in the Wild,” Calling Bullshit,
https://callingbullshit.org/case_studies.html .
CHAPTER 3: WHEN LESS OF THE SAME IS MORE
The citations for this chapter will be extensive but necessarily abbreviated. Explanation: The most
extensive research on life and music at the ospedali was conducted by Jane L. Baldauf-Berdes. Some
of her work can be found in books, like Women Musicians of Venice (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1996), which she barely completed before she died of cancer. She was still very much in the
thick of her work. In the course of reporting, I learned that she left her research files to the David M.
Rubenstein Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Duke University. Thanks to the library and its staff,
I had access to forty-eight boxes full of Baldauf-Berdes’s research material, from translations of

original documents and photographs of antique instruments, to rosters of musicians and
correspondence with other historians. Her passion for the topic bursts from those boxes. A few details
in this chapter that come from her research are, I believe, published here for the first time. I only
hope she would be glad that some curious writer came along and made a little use of it. I would like
to dedicate this chapter to Jane L. Baldauf-Berdes. 50–
exploding from its traditional bounds: J. Kerman and G. Tomlinson, Listen (Brief Fourth Edition) .
(Boston: Bedford/ St. Martin’s, 2000), chaps. 7 and 9. (Vivaldi as “undisputed champion” is from p.
117.)
full weight of entertainment: This is from pp. 118–38 of the modern publication of a
contemporaneous account that provided an important source throughout the chapter on eighteenth-
century music in Europe: P. A. Scholes, ed., Dr. Burney’s Musical Tours in Europe, vol. 1, An
Eighteenth-Century Musical Tour in France and Italy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1959).
dominated for a century: E. Selfridge-Field, “Music at the Pietà Before Vivaldi,” Early Music 14,
no. 3 (1986): 373–86; R. Thackray, “Music Education in Eighteenth Century Italy,” reprint from
Studies in Music 9 (1975): 1–7.
“Only in Venice”: E. Arnold and J. Baldauf-Berdes, Maddalena Lombardini Sirmen (Lanham, MD:
Scarecrow Press, 2002).
reserved for men: J. Spitzer and N. Zaslaw, The Birth of the Orchestra (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2004), 175. Also: Scholes, ed., Burney’s Musical Tours in Europe, vol. 1, 137.
“They sing like angels”: A. Pugh, Women in Music (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991).
“The sight of girls”: Hester L. Piozzi, Autobiography, Letters and Literary Remains of Mrs. Piozzi
(Thrale) (Tredition Classics, 2012 [Kindle ebook]).
“feminine instruments”; “first of her sex”: Arnold and Baldauf-Berdes, Maddalena Lombardini
Sirmen .
“angelic Sirens”: Coli’s writing appeared in 1687 in Pallade Veneta, a (largely forgotten) periodical
that carried commentary in letter form. The best source on the periodical is: E. Selfridge-Field,
Pallade Veneta: Writings on Music in Venetian Society, 1650–1750 (Venice: Fondazione Levi, 1985).
“the premier violinist in Europe”; “unsurpassed”: J. L. Baldauf-Berdes, “Anna Maria della Pietà:
The Woman Musician of Venice Personified,” in Cecilia Reclaimed, ed. S. C. Cook and J. S. Tsou
(Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1994).
An expense report: This is from another remarkable source, a book of scanned original documents
compiled by Micky White, a British former sports photographer and Vivaldi enthusiast who moved to
Venice and made it her mission to pore over the Pietà’s immense archives: M. White, Antonio
Vivaldi: A Life in Documents (with CD-ROM) (Florence: Olschki, 2013), 87.
ordered by the Senate: Baldauf-Berdes, “Anna Maria della Pietà.”
“I had brought with me”: Rousseau was a musical autodidact. His quotes come from his famous
autobiographical work, The Confessions .
“Missing are the fingers”: The anonymous poem (c. 1740) was translated by Baldauf-Berdes and
M. Civera from R. Giazotto, Vivaldi (Turin: ERI, 1973).
“My request was granted”: Lady Anna Riggs Miller, Letters from Italy Describing the Manners,
Customs, Antiquities, Paintings, etc. of that Country in the Years MDCCLXX and MDCCLXXI, vol. 2
(Printed for E. and C. Dilly, 1777), 360–61.
some trinket left: D. E. Kaley, “The Church of the Pietà” (Venice: International Fund for
Monuments, 1980).
An eighteenth-century roster: From one of the many lists of musicians and instruments that
Baldauf-Berdes compiled from archival research. This particular one is in Box 1 of 48 in the

Baldauf-Berdes collection at Duke’s Rubinstein Library.
“penitential mood”: Baldauf-Berdes, Women Musicians of Venice (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1996).
“It was really curious”: Scholes, ed., Burney’s Musical Tours in Europe, vol. 1.
“acquiring skills not expected of my sex”: Arnold and Baldauf-Berdes, Maddalena Lombardini
Sirmen .
Pelegrina della Pietà: One of the many orphans listed on a Pietà roster, she is also expertly
discussed by Micky White in a BBC Four film called Vivaldi’s Women .
“all styles”: R. Rolland, A Musical Tour Through the Land of the Past (New York: Henry Holt,
1922).
“Vivaldi had at his disposal”: M. Pincherle, “Vivaldi and the ‘Ospitali’ of Venice,” Musical
Quarterly 24, no. 3 (1938): 300–312.
“might never have been composed at all”: D. Arnold. “Venetian Motets and Their Singers,”
Musical Times 119 (1978): 319–21. (The specific piece discussed is Exsultate, jubilate, but the author
uses it as representative of Mozart’s sacred music.)
Napoleon’s troops: Arnold and Baldauf-Berdes, Maddalena Lombardini Sirmen .
went entirely unidentified: In a research proposal written for the Gladys Krieble Delmas
Foundation in 1989, Baldauf-Berdes chronicled this and other instances of the figlie being forgotten.
The series she intended to publish, unfortunately, was one of those she was never able to complete.
left the world having been: Baldauf-Berdes, “Anna Maria della Pietà.”
“able indigents”: G. J. Buelow, ed., The Late Baroque Era (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1993).
“how to choose”: R. Lane, “How to Choose a Musical Instrument for My Child,”
Upperbeachesmusic.com , January 5, 2017.
he didn’t really like the first two instruments: M. Steinberg, “Yo-Yo Ma on Intonation, Practice,
and the Role of Music in Our Lives,” Strings, September 17, 2015, online ed.
A study of music students: J. A. Sloboda et al., “The Role of Practice in the Development of
Performing Musicians,” British Journal of Psychology 87 (1996): 287–309. See also: G. E.
McPherson et al., “Playing an Instrument,” in The Child as Musician, ed. G. E. McPherson (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2006) (“[I]t was discovered some of the======================================================== diseases,” Jill said, “and they
keep thinking they have what they’re reading about.”
It all came flooding back when she Googled images of Priscilla. Not just
competition photos, but pictures of her at home, holding her baby daughter.
There were the protruding veins, the familiar fall of a shirtsleeve over
fatless arms, the visible division between muscles in the hips and butt. “I
knew we were cut from the same cloth,” Jill said. “A very rare cloth.”
It was Jill’s third visual lock. First was her own family’s Emery-Dreifuss,
then when she thought they also had lipodystrophy, and now she saw in
Priscilla the same pattern of missing fat. But if they shared a fat condition,
how did Priscilla get a double helping of muscle while she got almost none?
“This is my kryptonite, but this is her rocket fuel,” Jill thought. “We’re like
comic book superheroes that are just as divergent as can be. I mean, her
body has found a way around [muscle loss] somehow.” For a year, she
pondered how to ask Priscilla to get a genetic test without showing up at a
track meet and chasing her in a motorized scooter.
Jill happened to be near her television when I was talking about athletes
and genetics on a morning program. “I thought, ‘Oh, this is divine
providence,’” she told me. She sent the packet, and asked if I would reach
out to Priscilla. Priscilla’s agent, Kris Mychasiw, and I happened to follow
one another on Twitter, so I messaged him. He humored me as I tried to
explain the very unlikely idea that these two women were some kind of
biological opposites, but also that I was very impressed with Jill’s effort. He
passed the message to Priscilla.
“He was just like, ‘This lady in Iowa. She says she has the same gene as
you, and wants to have a conversation,’” Priscilla recalled. “I was kind of
like, ‘Um, I don’t know, Kris.’” He told her just to take my call.
Thanks to her physique, media in Europe openly accused Priscilla of
steroid use. Someone posted a picture of her online, straining to the
Olympic finish, with a male bodybuilder’s head pasted on her body. “That
was pretty messed up,” Priscilla told me. At the 2009 World Championships
in Berlin, she was drug tested minutes before winning the silver medal,
even though drug testing was technically not allowed that close to a race.
When I called, she was eager to share photos, to show that she was already
unusually lean and veiny in high school. One photo showed women in her
family flexing. An elderly relative is showing off rippling biceps, a thick

cord of vein snaking across her elbow. After our conversation, Priscilla
agreed to speak with Jill.
They bonded easily on the phone—over how they’d been teased about
their veins as kids—and Priscilla agreed to meet Jill and her mom in a hotel
lobby in Toronto. When Priscilla arrived, “Oh my gosh,” Jill thought, “it’s
like seeing family.” They retreated to a hotel hallway to compare body
parts, vastly different in size but with the same topography exposed by a
lack of fat. “There is something real here,” Priscilla recalled thinking.
“Let’s research. Let’s find out. ”
It took a year to find a doctor willing to analyze Priscilla’s lamin gene.
Finally, Jill went to a medical conference and approached the foremost
expert in lipodystrophy, Dr. Abhimanyu Garg, of the University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center. He agreed to do the test, and a lipodystrophy
evaluation.
Jill was right again. Not only do she and Priscilla both have
lipodystrophy, but they have the exact same rare subcategory of partial
lipodystrophy, known as Dunnigan type.
Priscilla’s and Jill’s typos are neighbors on the same gene. That splinter
of distance in location seems to make an extraordinary difference, taking
muscle and fat from Jill, but taking only fat from Priscilla while piling on
muscle.
Dr. Garg called Priscilla immediately, and caught her at the mall with her
kids. “I was just dreaming about getting a juicy burger and fries,” Priscilla
told me. She asked if she could call him back after lunch. He said that she
could not. “He’s like, ‘You’re only allowed to have salad. You’re on track
for a [pancreatitis] attack.’ I was like, ‘Say what?’”
Despite an Olympian’s training regimen, due to her unmonitored
lipodystrophy Priscilla had three times the normal level of fat in her blood.
“That was a severe problem,” Garg told me. Priscilla had to overhaul her
diet immediately, and started medication.
Jill had prolonged her dad’s life, and now—wielding Google Images—
spurred a life-altering medical intervention for a professional athlete. “You
pretty much saved me from having to go to the hospital!” Priscilla told Jill
when she called her.
Even Garg was startled by what Jill had done. They were the most
extreme cases of muscle development he had ever seen in lipodystrophy
patients—on opposite ends of the spectrum, of course. Jill and Priscilla

would never have ended up in the same doctor’s office under normal
circumstances. “I can understand a patient can learn more about their
disease,” Garg told me. “But to reach out to someone else, and figure out
their problem also. It is a remarkable feat. ”
Jill did not stop there. She came across the work of a French biologist,
Etienne Lefai, a hyperspecialist who studies a protein called SREBP1,
which helps cells determine whether to use fat from a meal right away or
store it for fuel later. Lefai showed that when the protein builds up in
animals, it can cause either extreme muscle atrophy or extreme muscle
growth. Jill contacted him out of the blue and suggested that he may have
uncovered the actual biological mechanism that makes her and Priscilla so
different, SREBP1 interacting with lamin.
“Okay, that triggers a kind of reflection from my side saying, ‘That’s a
really good question. That’s a really, really good question!’” Lefai told me
in a thick French accent. He has begun investigating whether a lamin gene
mutation can alter the regulation of SREBP1, and in turn cause a
simultaneous loss of muscle and fat. “I had no idea of what I can do with
genetic diseases before she contacted me,” he said. “Now, I have changed
the path of my team.”
The more information specialists create, the more opportunity exists for
curious dilettantes to contribute by merging strands of widely available but
disparate information—undiscovered public knowledge, as Don Swanson
called it. The larger and more easily accessible the library of human
knowledge, the more chances for inquisitive patrons to make connections at
the cutting edge. An operation like InnoCentive, which at first blush seems
totally counterintuitive, should become even more fruitful as specialization
accelerates.
It isn’t just the increase in new knowledge that generates opportunities
for nonspecialists, though. In a race to the forefront, a lot of useful
knowledge is simply left behind to molder. That presents another kind of
opportunity for those who want to create and invent but who cannot or
simply do not want to work at the cutting edge. They can push forward by
looking back; they can excavate old knowledge but wield it in a new way.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 9
Lateral Thinking with Withered Technology
DURING TWO CENTURIES of closed-borders isolation, Japan banned hanafuda
—“flower cards,” so called because the twelve different suits are
represented by flowers. The playing cards were associated with gambling
and unwanted Western cultural influence. By the late nineteenth century,
Japan was reintroducing itself to the world, and the ban was finally lifted.
So it was in the fall of 1889 that a young man opened a tiny wooden shop in
Kyoto and hung a sign in the window: “Nintendo.”
The precise meaning of the Japanese characters is lost to history. They
may have meant “leave luck to heaven,” but were more likely a poetic way
to say “the company that is allowed to sell hanafuda .” By 1950, there were
a hundred workers, and the founder’s twenty-two-year-old great-grandson
took over. But trouble was coming. As the 1964 Tokyo Olympics
approached, Japanese adults were turning to pachinko for gambling, and a
bowling craze swallowed entertainment dollars. In a desperate attempt to
diversify a company that had survived on hanafuda for three-quarters of a
century, the young president began scattershot investing. Food would never
go out of fashion, so he shifted the company to instant rice and meals
branded with cartoon characters. (Popeye noodle soup, anyone?) Then there
was the failed taxi fleet venture, and the failed rent-by-the-hour “love
hotels,” which landed the president in the gossip pages. Nintendo sunk into
debt. The president resolved to hire top young university graduates to help
him innovate.
That was a nonstarter. Nintendo was a small operation in Kyoto; coveted
Japanese students wanted big Tokyo companies. On the bright side, there

was still the playing card business, which had become more cost-effective
with machine-made cards. In 1965, the president settled for hiring a young
local electronics graduate named Gunpei Yokoi, who had struggled through
his degree and applied to major electronics manufacturers but gotten no
offers. “What will you do at Nintendo?” Yokoi’s classmates asked him. He
wasn’t worried. “I didn’t want to leave Kyoto anyway,” he said later. “I
never had a specific dream for my work, and it was just fine.” 
*
 His job was
to service the card-making machines. There were only a few, so Yokoi was
the entire maintenance department.
He had long been an enthusiastic hobbyist: piano, ballroom dancing,
choir, skin diving, model trains, working on cars, and most of all
monozukuri —literally, “thing making.” He was a tinkerer. Before car
stereos, he connected a tape recorder to his car radio so he could replay
content later on. In his first few months at Nintendo, there was so little to do
that he spent his time playing with company equipment. One day, he cut
crisscrossing pieces of wood and fashioned a simple extendable arm, like
the jack-in-the-box kind he had seen======================================================== McDonald told me that
engineers who pushed to abort might have been cast as “Chicken Littles.”
Chicken Little doesn’t fare well in the space business. As NASA engineer
Mary Shafer once articulated, “Insisting on perfect safety is for people who
don’t have the balls to live in the real world.” It is no wonder that
organizations struggle to cultivate experts who are both proficient with their
tools and prepared to drop them. But there is an organizational strategy that
can help. The strategy, strange as it sounds, is to send a mixed message.
“Congruence” is a social science term for cultural “fit” among an
institution’s components—values, goals, vision, self-concepts, and
leadership styles. Since the 1980s, congruence has been a pillar of
organizational theory. An effective culture is both consistent and strong.
When all signals point clearly in the same direction, it promotes self-
reinforcing consistency, and people like consistency.
Plenty of profiles of individual businesses were written in support of
congruence. But in the first study that systematically examined a broad
swath of organizations across an industry, researchers who studied cultural
congruence at 334 institutions of higher education found that it had no
influence on any measure of organizational success whatsoever.
Administrators, department heads, and trustees in strongly congruent
institutions did have an easier time classifying the culture when asked, but
there was no impact at all on performance, from the academic and career
development of students to the satisfaction of faculty and the financial
health of the college. The researcher who led that work went on to study

thousands of businesses. She found that the most effective leaders and
organizations had range; they were, in effect, paradoxical. They could be
demanding and nurturing, orderly and entrepreneurial, even hierarchical
and individualistic all at once. A level of ambiguity, it seemed, was not
harmful. In decision making, it can broaden an organization’s toolbox in a
way that is uniquely valuable .
Philip Tetlock and Barbara Mellers showed that thinkers who tolerate
ambiguity make the best forecasts; one of Tetlock’s former graduate
students, University of Texas professor Shefali Patil, spearheaded a project
with them to show that cultures can build in a form of ambiguity that forces
decision makers to use more than one tool, and to become more flexible and
learn more readily.
In one experiment, subjects played the role of corporate human resources
managers who had to predict the performance of job applicants. The
managers were presented with a standard evaluation process that showed
them how a candidate’s skills were typically weighted, and then told that
they would be evaluated (and paid) based on how they made decisions. In a
sped-up simulation of real life, after each prediction they could see how the
candidate actually performed according to company records. In some
batches of applications, the candidates performed as the standard evaluation
process predicted; in others, they weren’t even close. Yet, over and over, the
individual managers conformed to standard procedure no matter what the
results told them, even when it clearly was not working, and even when a
better system was easily discoverable. They failed to learn with experience.
Until a wrinkle was added. Conformist managers were given fake Harvard
Business Review research proclaiming that successful groups prioritize
independence and dissent. Miraculously, their minds were opened and they
started learning. They began to see when the standard evaluation process
clearly needed to be modified or discarded. They were learning with
experience, and their predictions became more accurate. The managers
were benefitting from incongruence . The formal, conformist company
process rules were balanced out by an informal culture of individual
autonomy in decision making and dissent from the typical way of doing
things.
Incongruence worked in the other direction as well. HR managers who
were given a standard evaluation process but told that only the accuracy of
their predictions mattered began by ditching the process and making up

their own rules. They never learned when the standard process did indeed
work. In that case, the cure was fake Harvard Business Review research
indicating that successful groups prioritize cohesion, loyalty, and finding
common ground. Again, the HR managers became learning machines; they
suddenly hewed closer to the traditional process when it had value, but
continued to deviate readily when it didn’t, as NASA should have.
Business school students are widely taught to believe the congruence
model, that a good manager can always align every element of work into a
culture where all influences are mutually reinforcing—whether toward
cohesion or individualism. But cultures can actually be too internally
consistent. With incongruence, “you’re building in cross-checks,” Tetlock
told me.
The experiments showed that an effective problem-solving culture was
one that balanced standard practice—whatever it happened to be—with
forces that pushed in the opposite direction. If managers were used to
process conformity, encouraging individualism helped them to employ
“ambidextrous thought,” and learn what worked in each situation. If they
were used to improvising, encouraging a sense of loyalty and cohesion did
the job. The trick was expanding the organization’s range by identifying the
dominant culture and then diversifying it by pushing in the opposite
direction.
By the time of the Challenger launch, NASA’s “can do” culture
manifested as extreme process accountability combined with collectivist
social norms. Everything was congruent for conformity to the standard
procedures. The process was so rigid it spurned evidence that didn’t
conform to the usual rules, and so sacred that Larry Mulloy felt protected
by a signed piece of paper testifying that he had followed the usual process.
Dissent was valued at flight readiness reviews, but at the most important
moment, the most important engineering group asked for an offline caucus
where they found a way, in private, to conform. Like the one engineer said,
without data, “the boss’s opinion is better than mine. ”
The more I spoke with Captain Lesmes, the more it seemed to me that he
had felt strongly outcome accountable—searching for a solution even if it
deviated from standard procedure—within an extraordinarily potent
collective culture that ensured he would not make the decision to deviate
easily. He had, as Patil, Tetlock, and Mellers wrote, harnessed “the power of
cross-pressures in promoting flexible, ambidextrous thought.” The subtitle

of that paper: “Balancing the Risks of Mindless Conformity and Reckless
Deviation.”
Superforecasting teams harnessed the same cultural cross-pressure. A
team was judged purely by the accuracy of its members’ forecasts. But
internally the Good Judgment Project incentivized collective culture.
Commenting was an expectation; teammates were encouraged to vote for
useful comments and recognized for process milestones, like a certain
number of lifetime comments.
Prior to Challenger, there was a long span when NASA culture harnessed
incongruence. Gene Kranz, the flight director when Apollo 11 first landed
on the moon, lived by that same mantra, the valorized process—“In God
We Trust, All Others Bring Data”—but he also made a habit of seeking out
opinions of technicians and engineers at every level of the hierarchy. If he
heard the same hunch twice, it didn’t take data for him to interrupt the usual
process and investigate.
Wernher von Braun, who led the Marshall Space Flight Center’s
development of the rocket that propelled the moon mission, balanced
NASA’s rigid process with an informal, individualistic culture that
encouraged constant dissent and cross-boundary communication. Von
Braun started “Monday Notes”: every week engineers submitted a single
page of notes on their salient issues. Von Braun handwrote comments in the
margins, and then circulated the entire compilation. Everyone saw what
other divisions were up to, and how easily problems could be raised.
Monday Notes were rigorous, but informal.
On a typed page of notes from two days after the moon landing in 1969,
von Braun homed in on a short section in which an engineer guessed why a
liquid oxygen tank unexpectedly lost pressure. The issue was already
irrelevant for the moon mission, but could come up again in future flights.
“Let’s pin this down as precisely as possible,” von Braun wrote. “We must
know whether there’s more behind this, that calls for checks or remedies.”
Like Kranz, von Braun went looking for problems, hunches, and bad news.
He even rewarded those who exposed problems. After Kranz and von
Braun’s time, the “All Others Bring Data” process culture remained, but the
informal culture and power of individual hunches shriveled.
In 1974, William Lucas took over the Marshall Space Flight Center. A
NASA chief historian wrote that Lucas was a brilliant engineer but “often
grew angry when he learned of problems.” Allan McDonald described him

to me as a “ shoot-the-messenger type guy.” Lucas transformed von Braun’s
Monday Notes into a system purely for upward communication. He did not
write feedback and the notes did not circulate. At one point they morphed
into standardized forms that had to be filled out. Monday Notes became one
more rigid formality in a process culture. “Immediately, the quality of the
notes fell,” wrote another official NASA historian.
Lucas retired shortly after the Challenger disaster, but the entrenched
process culture persisted. NASA’s only other fatal shuttle accident, the
space shuttle Columbia disintegration in 2003, was a cultural carbon copy
of the Challenger . NASA clung to its usual process tools in an unusual
circumstance. The Columbia disaster engendered an even stronger ill-fated
congruence between process accountability and group-focused======================================================== most successful young learners
were those who had been through a range of musical instruments”); and J. A. Sloboda and M. J. A.
Howe, “Biographical Precursors of Musical Excellence,” Psychology of Music 19 (1991): 3–21 (“The
exceptional children practiced much less than the average children on their first chosen instrument
but much more than the average children on their third instrument”).
“a mismatch between the instruments”: S. A. O’Neill, “Developing a Young Musician’s Growth
Mindset,” in Music and the Mind, ed. I. Deliège and J. W. Davidson (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2011).
“It seems very clear”: Sloboda and Howe, “Biographical Precursors of Musical Excellence.”
A study that followed up: A. Ivaldi, “Routes to Adolescent Musical Expertise,” in Music and the
Mind, ed. Deliège and Davidson.
“Despite the ever-increasing number”: P. Gorner, “Cecchini’s Guitar Truly Classical,” Chicago
Tribune, July 13, 1968. (Studs Terkel interviewed Cecchini the day before the performance. That
fantastic conversation about music can be found here: http://jackcecchini.com/Interviews.html ).
“There was no connection”: T. Teachout, Duke: A Life of Duke Ellington (New York: Gotham
Books, 2013).
America’s preeminent composer: Kerman and Tomlinson, Listen , 394.

“John played anything”: L. Flanagan, Moonlight in Vermont: The Official Biography of Johnny
Smith (Anaheim Hills, CA: Centerstream, 2015).
“I got a wonderful piano teacher”: F. M. Hall, It’s About Time: The Dave Brubeck Story.
(Fayetteville: University of Arkansas Press, 1996).
“with a drawn knife”; “I wonder if”: M. Dregni, Django: The Life and Music of a Gypsy Legend
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004 [Kindle ebook]). Two other sources provided particularly
important details about Django’s life: C. Delaunay, Django Reinhardt (New York: Da Capo, 1961)
(on the back cover, James Lincoln Collier, author of The Making of Jazz, identifies Django as
“without question, the single most important guitarist”); and a special Django issue of Guitar Player
magazine (November 1976) devoted to legendary musicians recounting their time with him.
creativity erupted: The 5-CD set “Django Reinhardt—Musette to Maestro 1928–1937: The Early
Work of a Guitar Genius” (JSP Records, 2010) includes recordings of a young Reinhardt both before
and after his injury.
Jimi Hendrix, who kept an album of Django’s: Jacob McMurray, senior curator at Seattle’s
Museum of Pop Culture, kindly confirmed this with the museum’s permanent collection.
sepia-toned YouTube clip: “Django Reinhardt Clip Performing Live (1945),” YouTube,
www.youtube.com/watch?v=aZ308aOOX04 . (The date on the You-Tube video is incorrect. The clip
is from the 1938 short film “Jazz ‘Hot.’”)
“one of osmosis” (and other Berliner quotes): P. F. Berliner, Thinking in Jazz (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1994).
“as if the brain turned off”: C. Kalb, “Who Is a Genius?,” National Geographic, May 2017.
“Well, I can’t read either”: Guitar Player, November 1976.
“a concept that went against conservatory training”: Dregni, Django .
“I can’t improvise at all”: A. Midgette, “Concerto on the Fly: Can Classical Musicians Learn to
Improvise,” Washington Post, June 15, 2012, online ed.
“My complete self-taught technique” and detail about hitting siblings with violins: S. Suzuki,
Nurtured by Love, trans. W. Suzuki (Alfred Music, 1993 [Kindle ebook]).
household rules: J. S. Dacey, “Discriminating Characteristics of the Families of Highly Creative
Adolescents,” Journal of Creative Behavior 23, no. 4 (1989): 263–71. (Grant referenced the study in:
“How to Raise a Creative Child. Step One: Back Off,” New York Times , Jan. 30, 2016.)
CHAPTER 4:LEARNING, FAST AND SLOW
“Okay? You’re going to an Eagles game”: The classroom scene is from video, transcript, and
analysis from the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS). The particular
video is “M-US2 Writing Variable Expressions.”
“three dollars for a hot dog”: The teacher briefly misspoke and said “two.” It is corrected for
clarity.
“using procedures”; “making connections”: J. Hiebert et al., “Teaching Mathematics in Seven
Countries,” National Center for Education Statistics, 2003, chap. 5.
bansho : E.R.A. Kuehnert et al. “Bansho: Visually Sequencing Mathematical Ideas,” Teaching
Children Mathematics 24, no. 6 (2018): 362–69.
“Students do not view mathematics as a system ”: L. E. Richland et al., “Teaching the Conceptual
Structure of Mathematics,” Educational Psychology 47, no. 3 (2012): 189–203.
tested sixth graders in the South Bronx: N. Kornell and J. Metcalfe, “The Effects of Memory
Retrieval, Errors and Feedback on Learning,” in Applying Science of Learning in Education , V.A.

Benassi et al., ed. (Society for the Teaching of Psychology, 2014); J. Metcalfe and N. Kornell,
“Principles of Cognitive Science in Education,” Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 14, no. 2 (2007):
225–29.
“hypercorrection effect”: T. S. Eich et al., “The Hypercorrection Effect in Younger and Older
Adults,” Neuropsychology, Development and Cognition. Section B, Aging, Neuropsychology and
Cognition 20, no. 5 (2013): 511–21; J. Metcalfe et al., “Neural Correlates of People’s
Hypercorrection of Their False Beliefs,” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 24, no. 7 (2012): 1571–
83.
Oberon and Macduff: N. Kornell and H. S. Terrace, “The Generation Effect in Monkeys,”
Psychological Science 18, no. 8 (2007): 682–85.
“Like life”: N. Kornell et al., “Retrieval Attempts Enhance Learning, but Retrieval Success (Versus
Failure) Does Not Matter,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
41, no. 1 (2015): 283–94.
Spanish vocabulary learners: H. P. Bahrick and E. Phelps, “Retention of Spanish Vocabulary over 8
Years,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 13, no. 2 (1987):
344–49.
Iowa State researchers read: L. L. Jacoby and W. H. Bartz, “Rehearsal and Transfer to LTM,”
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 11 (1972): 561–65.
“produce misleadingly high levels”: N. J. Cepeda et al., “Spacing Effects in Learning,”
Psychological Science 19, no. 11 (2008): 1095–1102.
In 2007, the U.S. Department of Education: H. Pashler et al., “Organizing Instruction and Study to
Improve Student Learning,” National Center for Education Research, 2007.
an extraordinarily unique study: S. E. Carrell and J. E. West, “Does Professor Quality Matter?,”
Journal of Political Economy 118, no. 3 (2010): 409–32.
A similar study was conducted at Italy’s Bocconi University: M. Braga et al., “Evaluating
Students’ Evaluations of Professors,” Economics of Education Review 41 (2014): 71–88.
“desirable difficulties”: R. A. Bjork, “Institutional Impediments to Effective Training,” in Learning,
Remembering, Believing: Enhancing Human Performance, ed. D. Druckman and R. A. Bjork
(Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 1994), 295–306.
“Above all, the most basic message”: C. M. Clark and R. A. Bjork, “When and Why Introducing
Difficulties and Errors Can Enhance Instruction,” in Applying the Science of Learning in Education,
ed. V. A. Benassi et al. (Society for the Teaching of Psychology, 2014 [ebook]).
said in national surveys: C. Rampell, “Actually, Public Education is Getting Better, Not Worse,”
Washington Post , September 18, 2014.
School has not gotten worse; “jobs that pay well”: G. Duncan and R. J. Murnane, Restoring
Opportunity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press, 2014 [Kindle ebook]).
In a study using college math problems: D. Rohrer and K. Taylor, “The Shuffling of Mathematics
Problems Improves Learning,” Instructional Science 35 (2007): 481–98. See also: D. Rohrer et al.,
“A Randomized Controlled Trial of Interleaved Mathematics Practice,” Journal of Educational
Psychology (May 16, 2019): advance online publication.
butterfly species identification to psychological-disorder diagnosis: M. S. Birnbaum et al., “Why
Interleaving Enhances Inductive Learning,” Memory and Cognition 41 (2013): 392–402.
naval air defense simulations: C. L. Holladay and M.A. Quiñones, “Practice Variability and
Transfer of Training,” Journal of Applied Psychology 88, no. 6 (2003): 1094–1103.
In one of Kornell and Bjork’s interleaving studies, 80 percent of students: N. Kornell and R. A.
Bjork, “Learning Concepts and Categories: Is Spacing the ‘Enemy of Induction’?,” Psychological

Science 19, no. 6 (2008): 585–92.
a particular left-hand jump across fifteen keys: M. Bangert et al., “When Less of the Same Is
More: Benefits of Variability of Practice in Pianists,” Proceedings of the International Symposium on
Performance Science (2013): 117–22.
O’Neal should practice from a foot in front: Bjork makes this suggestion in Daniel Coyle’s The
Talent Code (New York: Bantam, 2009).
hallmark of expert problem solving: See, for example: M.T.H. Chi et al., “Categorization and
Representation of Physics Problems by Experts and Novices,” Cognitive Science 5, no. 2 (1981):
121–52; and J. F. Voss et al., “Individual Differences in the Solving of Social Science Problems,” in
Individual Differences in Cognition, vol. 1, ed. R. F. Dillon and R. R. Schmeck (New York:
Academic Press, 1983).
reviewed sixty-seven early childhood education programs: D. Bailey et al., “Persistence and
Fadeout in Impacts of Child and Adolescent Interventions,” Journal of Research on Educational
Effectiveness 10, no. 1 (2017): 7–39.
The motor-skill equivalent: S. G. Paris, “Reinterpreting the Development of Reading Skills,”
Reading Research Quarterly 40, no. 2 (2005): 184–202.
CHAPTER 5:THINKING OUTSIDE EXPERIENCE
Giordano Bruno: A. A. Martinez, “Giordano Bruno and the Heresy of Many Worlds,” Annals of
Science 73, no. 4 (2016): 345–74.
Johannes Kepler inherited: Sources that give excellent background on the worldviews that Kepler
inherited, and his transformative analogies, are: D. Gentner et al., “Analogical Reasoning and
Conceptual Change: A Case Study of Johannes Kepler,” Journal of the Learning Sciences 6, no. 1
(1997): 3–40; D. Gentner, “Analogy in======================================================== were then given a chance to get paid if they read contrary
arguments, two-thirds decided they would rather not even look at the
counterarguments, never mind seriously entertain them. The aversion to
contrary ideas is not a simple artifact of stupidity or ignorance. Yale law and
psychology professor Dan Kahan has shown that more scientifically literate
adults are actually more likely to become dogmatic about politically
polarizing topics in science. Kahan thinks it could be because they are
better at finding evidence to confirm their feelings: the more time they
spend on the topic, the more hedgehog-like they become.
In a study during the run-up to the Brexit vote, a small majority of both
Remainers and Brexiters were able to correctly interpret made-up statistics
about the efficacy of a rash-curing skin cream, but when voters were given
the same exact data presented as if it indicated that immigration either
increased or decreased crime, hordes of Brits suddenly became innumerate
and misinterpreted statistics that disagreed with their political beliefs.
Kahan found the same phenomenon in the United States using skin cream
and gun control. Kahan also documented a personality feature that fought

back against that propensity: science curiosity. Not science knowledge,
science curiosity .
Kahan and colleagues measured science curiosity cleverly, smuggling
relevant questions into what looked like consumer marketing surveys, and
tracking how people pursued follow-up information after viewing videos
with particular content, some of them science-related. The most science-
curious folk always chose to look at new evidence, whether or not it agreed
with their current beliefs. Less science-curious adults were like hedgehogs:
they became more resistant to contrary evidence and more politically
polarized as they gained subject matter knowledge. Those who were high in
science curiosity bucked that trend. Their foxy hunt for information was
like a literal fox’s hunt for prey: roam freely, listen carefully, and consume
omnivorously. Just as Tetlock says of the best forecasters, it is not what they
think, but how they think. The best forecasters are high in active open-
mindedness. They are also extremely curious, and don’t merely consider
contrary ideas, they proactively cross disciplines looking for them. “Depth
can be inadequate without breadth,” wrote Jonathan Baron, the psychologist
who developed measurements of active open-mindedness.
Charles Darwin must have been one of the most curious and actively
open-minded human beings in history. His first four models of evolution
were forms of creationism or intelligent design. (The fifth model treated
creation as a separate question.) He made a point of copying into his notes
any fact or observation he encountered that ran contrary to a theory he was
working on. He relentlessly attacked his own ideas, dispensing with one
model after another, until he arrived at a theory that fit the totality of the
evidence. But before he even started on that life’s work, he needed a push
from an actively open-minded teammate—or mentor, really. John Stevens
Henslow was the priest, geologist, and botany professor who arranged
Darwin’s place aboard the HMS Beagle . Before the ship set sail, he told
Darwin to read a controversial new book, Principles of Geology, by Charles
Lyell. Lyell argued that Earth had changed very gradually over time by
processes that continued in the present. Henslow could not accept Lyell’s
description of geology as entirely separate from theology, warning Darwin
“on no account to accept the views therein advocated.” But, in foxlike
fashion, he set aside his own revulsion and urged his mentee to read the
book. It was a revelation. According to science historian Janet Browne, “In

one of the most remarkable interchanges in the history of science, Lyell’s
book taught Darwin how to think about nature.”
None of this is to say that hedgehog experts are unnecessary. They
produce vital knowledge. Einstein was a hedgehog. He saw simplicity
beneath complexity, and found elegant theories to prove it. But he also
spent the last thirty years of his life in a rigid quest for a single theory of
everything that would explain away the messy apparent randomness
inherent to quantum mechanics, a field spawned in part by his own work.
As astrophysicist Glen Mackie wrote, “A consensus seems to exist: in later
years, Einstein worked with mathematical blinkers, immune to relevant
discoveries, and unable to change his method of investigation.” God does
not play dice with the universe, Einstein asserted, figuratively. Niels Bohr,
his contemporary who illuminated the structure of atoms (using analogies to
Saturn’s rings and the solar system), replied that Einstein should keep an
open mind and not tell God how to run the universe.
Beneath complexity, hedgehogs tend to see simple, deterministic rules of
cause and effect framed by their area of expertise, like repeating patterns on
a chessboard. Foxes see complexity in what others mistake for simple cause
and effect. They understand that most cause-and-effect relationships are
probabilistic, not deterministic. There are unknowns, and luck, and even
when history apparently repeats, it does not do so precisely. They recognize
that they are operating in the very definition of a wicked learning
environment, where it can be very hard to learn, from either wins or losses.
In wicked domains that lack automatic feedback, experience alone does not
improve performance. Effective habits of mind are more important, and
they can be developed. In four straight years of forecasting tournaments,
Tetlock and Mellers’s research group showed that an hour of basic training
in foxy habits improved accuracy. One habit was a lot like the analogical
thinking that helped the venture capitalists and movie enthusiasts in chapter
5 make better projections of investment returns and film revenues.
Basically, forecasters can improve by generating a list of separate events
with deep structural similarities, rather than focusing only on internal
details of the specific event in question. Few events are 100 percent novel—
uniqueness is a matter of degree, as Tetlock puts it—and creating the list
forces a forecaster implicitly to think like a statistician.

For example, in 2015, forecasters were asked if Greece would exit the
eurozone that year. No country had ever left, so the question seemed totally
unique. But there were plenty of examples of international negotiation
failures, exits from international agreements, and forced currency
conversions that allowed the best forecasters to ground themselves in what
usually happens without focusing narrowly on all the unique details of the
present situation. Starting with the details—the inside view—is dangerous.
Hedgehog experts have more than enough knowledge about the minutiae of
an issue in their specialty to do just what Dan Kahan suggested: cherry-pick
details that fit their all-encompassing theories. Their deep knowledge works
against them. Skillful forecasters depart from the problem at hand to
consider completely unrelated events with structural commonalities rather
than relying on intuition based on personal experience or a single area of
expertise.
Another aspect of the forecaster training involved ferociously dissecting
prediction results in search of lessons, especially for predictions that turned
out bad. They made a wicked learning environment, one with no automatic
feedback, a little more kind by creating rigorous feedback at every
opportunity. In Tetlock’s twenty-year study, both foxes and hedgehogs were
quick to update their beliefs after successful predictions, by reinforcing
them even more strongly. When an outcome took them by surprise,
however, foxes were much more likely to adjust their ideas. Hedgehogs
barely budged. Some hedgehogs made authoritative predictions that turned
out wildly wrong, and then updated their theories in the wrong direction .
They became even more convinced of the original beliefs that led them
astray. “Good judges are good belief updaters,” according to Tetlock. If they
make a bet and lose, they embrace the logic of a loss just as they would the
reinforcement of a win.
That is called, in a word: learning. Sometimes, it involves putting
experience aside entirely.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 11
Learning to Drop Your Familiar Tools
JAKE, THE ATHLETIC-LOOKING sandy blond, speaks first. He wants to race the
car. “What if everybody just agrees?” he asks. “I say, race this thang.”
It was early afternoon in fall, and Jake and six of his second-year
Harvard Business School classmates found a shady spot where they could
eat their lunches and talk. 
*
 Their professor had given them three pages
containing one of the most famous business school case studies ever
created, known as Carter Racing. The crux is whether the fictional Carter
Racing team’s car should compete in the biggest race of the season, which
begins in one hour.
The argument in favor of racing: thanks to a custom turbocharger, Carter
Racing has placed in the money (top five) in twelve of twenty-four races.
That success secured an oil company sponsorship, and a trial sponsorship
from prestigious (and also fictional) Goodstone Tire. Carter Racing won the
last race, its fourth win of the season. Today’s race will be on national TV,
and if Carter Racing finishes in the top five, it will likely draw a $2 million
sponsorship from Goodstone. If Carter Racing chooses not to race and
withdraws, it would lose part of its entry fee and have to pay back some
sponsor money. The team would end a stellar season $80,000 in the hole,
and may never get another shot this big. Racing seems like a no-brainer.
The argument against racing: in seven of twenty-four races, the engine
failed, each time damaging the car. In the last two races, the mechanics used
a new engine-prep procedure and had no trouble, but they aren’t sure what
caused the problem before. If the======================================================== McDonald told me that
engineers who pushed to abort might have been cast as “Chicken Littles.”
Chicken Little doesn’t fare well in the space business. As NASA engineer
Mary Shafer once articulated, “Insisting on perfect safety is for people who
don’t have the balls to live in the real world.” It is no wonder that
organizations struggle to cultivate experts who are both proficient with their
tools and prepared to drop them. But there is an organizational strategy that
can help. The strategy, strange as it sounds, is to send a mixed message.
“Congruence” is a social science term for cultural “fit” among an
institution’s components—values, goals, vision, self-concepts, and
leadership styles. Since the 1980s, congruence has been a pillar of
organizational theory. An effective culture is both consistent and strong.
When all signals point clearly in the same direction, it promotes self-
reinforcing consistency, and people like consistency.
Plenty of profiles of individual businesses were written in support of
congruence. But in the first study that systematically examined a broad
swath of organizations across an industry, researchers who studied cultural
congruence at 334 institutions of higher education found that it had no
influence on any measure of organizational success whatsoever.
Administrators, department heads, and trustees in strongly congruent
institutions did have an easier time classifying the culture when asked, but
there was no impact at all on performance, from the academic and career
development of students to the satisfaction of faculty and the financial
health of the college. The researcher who led that work went on to study

thousands of businesses. She found that the most effective leaders and
organizations had range; they were, in effect, paradoxical. They could be
demanding and nurturing, orderly and entrepreneurial, even hierarchical
and individualistic all at once. A level of ambiguity, it seemed, was not
harmful. In decision making, it can broaden an organization’s toolbox in a
way that is uniquely valuable .
Philip Tetlock and Barbara Mellers showed that thinkers who tolerate
ambiguity make the best forecasts; one of Tetlock’s former graduate
students, University of Texas professor Shefali Patil, spearheaded a project
with them to show that cultures can build in a form of ambiguity that forces
decision makers to use more than one tool, and to become more flexible and
learn more readily.
In one experiment, subjects played the role of corporate human resources
managers who had to predict the performance of job applicants. The
managers were presented with a standard evaluation process that showed
them how a candidate’s skills were typically weighted, and then told that
they would be evaluated (and paid) based on how they made decisions. In a
sped-up simulation of real life, after each prediction they could see how the
candidate actually performed according to company records. In some
batches of applications, the candidates performed as the standard evaluation
process predicted; in others, they weren’t even close. Yet, over and over, the
individual managers conformed to standard procedure no matter what the
results told them, even when it clearly was not working, and even when a
better system was easily discoverable. They failed to learn with experience.
Until a wrinkle was added. Conformist managers were given fake Harvard
Business Review research proclaiming that successful groups prioritize
independence and dissent. Miraculously, their minds were opened and they
started learning. They began to see when the standard evaluation process
clearly needed to be modified or discarded. They were learning with
experience, and their predictions became more accurate. The managers
were benefitting from incongruence . The formal, conformist company
process rules were balanced out by an informal culture of individual
autonomy in decision making and dissent from the typical way of doing
things.
Incongruence worked in the other direction as well. HR managers who
were given a standard evaluation process but told that only the accuracy of
their predictions mattered began by ditching the process and making up

their own rules. They never learned when the standard process did indeed
work. In that case, the cure was fake Harvard Business Review research
indicating that successful groups prioritize cohesion, loyalty, and finding
common ground. Again, the HR managers became learning machines; they
suddenly hewed closer to the traditional process when it had value, but
continued to deviate readily when it didn’t, as NASA should have.
Business school students are widely taught to believe the congruence
model, that a good manager can always align every element of work into a
culture where all influences are mutually reinforcing—whether toward
cohesion or individualism. But cultures can actually be too internally
consistent. With incongruence, “you’re building in cross-checks,” Tetlock
told me.
The experiments showed that an effective problem-solving culture was
one that balanced standard practice—whatever it happened to be—with
forces that pushed in the opposite direction. If managers were used to
process conformity, encouraging individualism helped them to employ
“ambidextrous thought,” and learn what worked in each situation. If they
were used to improvising, encouraging a sense of loyalty and cohesion did
the job. The trick was expanding the organization’s range by identifying the
dominant culture and then diversifying it by pushing in the opposite
direction.
By the time of the Challenger launch, NASA’s “can do” culture
manifested as extreme process accountability combined with collectivist
social norms. Everything was congruent for conformity to the standard
procedures. The process was so rigid it spurned evidence that didn’t
conform to the usual rules, and so sacred that Larry Mulloy felt protected
by a signed piece of paper testifying that he had followed the usual process.
Dissent was valued at flight readiness reviews, but at the most important
moment, the most important engineering group asked for an offline caucus
where they found a way, in private, to conform. Like the one engineer said,
without data, “the boss’s opinion is better than mine. ”
The more I spoke with Captain Lesmes, the more it seemed to me that he
had felt strongly outcome accountable—searching for a solution even if it
deviated from standard procedure—within an extraordinarily potent
collective culture that ensured he would not make the decision to deviate
easily. He had, as Patil, Tetlock, and Mellers wrote, harnessed “the power of
cross-pressures in promoting flexible, ambidextrous thought.” The subtitle

of that paper: “Balancing the Risks of Mindless Conformity and Reckless
Deviation.”
Superforecasting teams harnessed the same cultural cross-pressure. A
team was judged purely by the accuracy of its members’ forecasts. But
internally the Good Judgment Project incentivized collective culture.
Commenting was an expectation; teammates were encouraged to vote for
useful comments and recognized for process milestones, like a certain
number of lifetime comments.
Prior to Challenger, there was a long span when NASA culture harnessed
incongruence. Gene Kranz, the flight director when Apollo 11 first landed
on the moon, lived by that same mantra, the valorized process—“In God
We Trust, All Others Bring Data”—but he also made a habit of seeking out
opinions of technicians and engineers at every level of the hierarchy. If he
heard the same hunch twice, it didn’t take data for him to interrupt the usual
process and investigate.
Wernher von Braun, who led the Marshall Space Flight Center’s
development of the rocket that propelled the moon mission, balanced
NASA’s rigid process with an informal, individualistic culture that
encouraged constant dissent and cross-boundary communication. Von
Braun started “Monday Notes”: every week engineers submitted a single
page of notes on their salient issues. Von Braun handwrote comments in the
margins, and then circulated the entire compilation. Everyone saw what
other divisions were up to, and how easily problems could be raised.
Monday Notes were rigorous, but informal.
On a typed page of notes from two days after the moon landing in 1969,
von Braun homed in on a short section in which an engineer guessed why a
liquid oxygen tank unexpectedly lost pressure. The issue was already
irrelevant for the moon mission, but could come up again in future flights.
“Let’s pin this down as precisely as possible,” von Braun wrote. “We must
know whether there’s more behind this, that calls for checks or remedies.”
Like Kranz, von Braun went looking for problems, hunches, and bad news.
He even rewarded those who exposed problems. After Kranz and von
Braun’s time, the “All Others Bring Data” process culture remained, but the
informal culture and power of individual hunches shriveled.
In 1974, William Lucas took over the Marshall Space Flight Center. A
NASA chief historian wrote that Lucas was a brilliant engineer but “often
grew angry when he learned of problems.” Allan McDonald described him

to me as a “ shoot-the-messenger type guy.” Lucas transformed von Braun’s
Monday Notes into a system purely for upward communication. He did not
write feedback and the notes did not circulate. At one point they morphed
into standardized forms that had to be filled out. Monday Notes became one
more rigid formality in a process culture. “Immediately, the quality of the
notes fell,” wrote another official NASA historian.
Lucas retired shortly after the Challenger disaster, but the entrenched
process culture persisted. NASA’s only other fatal shuttle accident, the
space shuttle Columbia disintegration in 2003, was a cultural carbon copy
of the Challenger . NASA clung to its usual process tools in an unusual
circumstance. The Columbia disaster engendered an even stronger ill-fated
congruence between process accountability and group-focused======================================================== similar.
“That’s usually exactly the wrong way to go about it regardless of what
you’re using analogy for,” Lovallo told me.
The good news is that it is easy to ride analogies from the intuitive inside
view to the outside view. In 2001, the Boston Consulting Group, one of the
most successful in the world, created an intranet site to provide consultants
with collections of material to facilitate wide-ranging analogical thinking.
The interactive “exhibits” were sorted by discipline (anthropology,
psychology, history, and others), concept (change, logistics, productivity,
and so on), and strategic theme (competition, cooperation, unions and
alliances, and more). A consultant generating strategies for a post-merger
integration might have perused the exhibit on how William the Conqueror
“merged” England with the Norman Kingdom in the eleventh century. An
exhibit that described Sherlock Holmes’s observational strategies could
have provided ideas for learning from details that experienced professionals
take for granted. And a consultant working with a rapidly expanding start-
up might have gleaned ideas from the writing of a Prussian military
strategist who studied the fragile equilibrium between maintaining
momentum after a victory and overshooting a goal by so much that it turns

into a defeat. If that all sounds incredibly remote from pressing business
concerns, that is exactly the point.
Dedre Gentner wanted to find out if everyone can be a bit more like Kepler,
capable of wielding distant analogies to understand problems. So she helped
create the “Ambiguous Sorting Task. ”
It consists of twenty-five cards, each one describing a real-world
phenomenon, like how internet routers or economic bubbles work. Each
card falls into two main categories, one for its domain (economics, biology,
and so on) and one for its deep structure. Participants are asked to sort the
cards into like categories.
For a deep structure example, you might put economic bubbles and
melting polar ice caps together as positive-feedback loops. (In economic
bubbles, consumers buy stocks or property with the idea that the price will
increase; that buying causes the price to increase, which leads to more
buying. When ice caps melt, they reflect less sunlight back to space, which
warms the planet, causing more ice to melt.) Or perhaps you would put the
act of sweating and actions of the Federal Reserve together as negative-
feedback loops. (Sweating cools the body so that more sweating is no
longer required. The Fed lowers interest rates to spur the economy; if the
economy grows too quickly, the Fed raises rates to slow down the activity it
launched.) The way gas prices lead to an increase in grocery prices and the
steps needed for a message to traverse neurons in your brain are both
examples of causal chains, where one event leads to another, which leads to
another, in linear order.
Alternatively, you might group Federal Reserve rate changes, economic
bubbles, and gas price changes together because they are all in the same
domain: economics. And you might put sweating and neurotransmission
together under biology.
Gentner and colleagues gave the Ambiguous Sorting Task to
Northwestern University students from an array of majors and found that all
of the students figured out how to group phenomena by domains. But fewer
could come up with groupings based on causal structure. There was a group
of students, however, who were particularly good at finding common deep
structures: students who had taken classes in a range of domains, like those
in the Integrated Science Program.

Northwestern’s website for the program features an alum’s description:
“Think of the Integrated Science Program as a biology minor, chemistry
minor, physics minor, and math minor combined into a single major. The
primary intent of this program is to expose students to all fields of the
natural and mathematical sciences so that they can see commonalities
among different fields of the natural sciences. . . . The ISP major allows you
to see connections across different disciplines.”
A professor I asked about the Integrated Science Program told me that
specific academic departments are generally not big fans. They want
students to take more specialized classes in a single department. They are
concerned about the students falling behind. They would rather rush them to
specialization than equip them with ideas from what Gentner referred to as
a “variety of base domains,” which foster analogical thinking and
conceptual connections that can help students categorize the type of
problem they are facing. That is precisely a skill that sets the most adept
problem solvers apart.
In one of the most cited studies of expert problem solving ever
conducted, an interdisciplinary team of scientists came to a pretty simple
conclusion: successful problem solvers are more able to determine the deep
structure of a problem before they proceed to match a strategy to it. Less
successful problem solvers are more like most students in the Ambiguous
Sorting Task: they mentally classify problems only by superficial, overtly
stated features, like the domain context. For the best performers, they wrote,
problem solving “begins with the typing of the problem.”
As education pioneer John Dewey put it in Logic, The Theory of Inquiry,
“a problem well put is half-solved.”
Before he began his tortuous march of analogies toward reimagining the
universe, Kepler had to get very confused on his homework. Unlike Galileo
and Isaac Newton, he documented his confusion. “What matters to me,”
Kepler wrote, “is not merely to impart to the reader what I have to say, but
above all to convey to him the reasons, subterfuges, and lucky hazards
which led me to my discoveries. ”
Kepler was a young man when he showed up to work at Tycho Brahe’s
observatory—so cutting edge at the time that it cost 1 percent of the
national budget of Denmark. He was given the assignment nobody wanted:

Mars and its perplexing orbit. The orbit had to be a circle, Kepler was told,
so he had to figure out why Brahe’s observations didn’t match that. Every
once in a while, Mars appears to reverse course in the sky, do a little loop,
and then carry on in the original direction, a feat known as retrograde
motion. Astronomers proposed elaborate contortions to explain how Mars
could accomplish this while riding the interlocking spheres of the sky.
As usual, Kepler could not accept contortions. He asked peers for help,
but his pleas fell on deaf ears. His predecessors had always managed to
explain away the Mars deviations without scrapping the overall scheme.
Kepler’s short Mars assignment (he guessed it would take eight days)
turned into five years of calculations trying to describe where Mars
appeared in the sky at any given moment. No sooner had Kepler done it
with great accuracy than he threw it away.
It was close, but not perfect. The imperfection was minuscule. Just two of
Brahe’s observations differed from Kepler’s calculations of where Mars
should be, and by just eight minutes of arc, a sliver of sky one-eighth the
width of a pinkie finger held at arm’s length. Kepler could have assumed
his model was correct and those two observations were slightly off, or he
could dispense with five years of work. He chose to trash his model. “If I
had believed we could ignore these eight minutes,” he wrote, “I would have
patched my hypothesis accordingly.” The assignment no one wanted
became Kepler’s keyhole view into a new understanding of the universe. He
was in uncharted territory. The analogies began in earnest, and he
reinvented astronomy. Light, heat, smells, boats, brooms, magnets—it
began with those pesky observations that didn’t quite fit, and ended in the
complete undoing of Aristotle’s clockwork universe.
Kepler did something that turns out to be characteristic of today’s world-
class research labs. Psychologist Kevin Dunbar began documenting how
productive labs work in the 1990s, and stumbled upon a modern version of
Keplerian thinking. Faced with an unexpected finding, rather than assuming
the current theory is correct and that an observation must be off, the
unexpected became an opportunity to venture somewhere new—and
analogies served as the wilderness guide.
When Dunbar started, he simply set out to document the process of
discovery in real time. He focused on molecular biology labs because they
were blazing new trails, particularly in genetics and treatments for viruses,
like HIV. He spent a year with four labs in the United States, playing a fly

on the wall, visiting the labs every day for months, and later extended the
work to more labs in the United States, Canada, and Italy. He became such
a familiar presence that scientists called him to make sure he knew about
impromptu meetings. The surface features of the labs were very different.
One had dozens of members, others were small. A few were all men, one
was all women. All had international reputations.
The weekly lab meetings made the most interesting viewing. Once a
week, the entire team came together—lab director, grad students,
postdoctoral fellows, technicians—to discuss some challenge a lab member
was facing. The meetings were nothing like the heads-down, solitary work
in stereotypical portrayals of scientists, huddled over their test tubes.
Dunbar saw free-flowing and spontaneous exchange. Ideas were batted
back and forth, new experiments proposed, obstacles discussed. “Those are
some of the most creative moments in science,” he told me. So he recorded
them.
The first fifteen minutes could be housekeeping—whose turn it was to
order supplies, or who had left a mess. Then the action started. Someone
presented an unexpected or confusing finding, their version of Kepler’s
Mars orbit. Prudently, scientists’ first instinct was to blame themselves,
some error in calculation or poorly calibrated equipment. If it kept up, the
lab accepted the result as real, and ideas about what to try and what might
be======================================================== could
ask twenty chemists right now what cream of tartar is, and a lot of them
would have no idea,” he said. “I thought about the process that
differentiates solutions, and it wasn’t part of any curriculum or on
anybody’s résumé. I realized there was always going to be this somewhat
serendipitous outside thinking that was going to make a solution more
clever, cost-effective, efficacious, more on the money than anyone else’s.
And so I went from that idea, how problems are solved, to ‘How does one
build an organization that solves problems that way?’” Years later, when
Bingham became the VP of research and development strategy at Eli Lilly,
he had a chance to try to build his clever organization.

In the spring of 2001, Bingham collected twenty-one problems that had
stymied Eli Lilly scientists and asked a top executive if he could post them
on a website for anyone to see. The executive would only consider it if the
consulting firm McKinsey thought it was a good idea. “McKinsey’s
opinion,” Bingham recalled, “was, ‘Who knows? Why don’t you launch it
and tell us the answer.’” Bingham did, but when the scientists who
contributed problems saw them online, “every one of them wrote to the
chief scientific officer saying that the problem cannot be released, it’s too
confidential, ‘Why the hell do you think anyone other than us can solve that
problem?’” They had a point. If the most highly educated, highly
specialized, well-resourced chemists in the world were stuck on technical
problems, why would anyone else be able to help? The chief scientific
officer (CSO) had every single problem removed from the site.
Bingham lobbied. It was at least worth a try on problems that would
definitely not give away a trade secret, and if it didn’t work, no harm done.
The CSO bought his argument. The site relaunched, and by the fall answers
started rolling in. It happened to be the middle of the U.S. anthrax scare, so,
Bingham told me, he was the rare mail recipient who was excited to be
getting sent white powders. “I’m popping them in a spectrometer,” he said,
“and going, ‘Woohoo, we got another one!’” Strangers were creating
substances that had befuddled Eli Lilly chemists. As Bingham had guessed,
outside knowledge was the key. “It validated the hypothesis we had going
in, but it still surprised me how these knowledge pockets were hidden under
other degrees. I wasn’t really expecting submissions from attorneys.”
One molecular synthesis solution came from a lawyer whose relevant
knowledge came from working on chemical patents. The man wrote, “I was
thinking of tear gas,” when he came up with the solution. It was his version
of Bingham’s cream of tartar. “Tear gas didn’t have anything to do with the
problem,” Bingham said. “But he saw parallels to the chemical structure of
a molecule that we needed.”
Bingham had noticed that established companies tended to approach
problems with so-called local search, that is, using specialists from a single
domain, and trying solutions that worked before. Meanwhile, his invitation
to outsiders worked so well that it was spun off as an entirely separate
company. Named InnoCentive, it facilitates entities in any field acting as
“seekers,” paying to post “challenges” and rewards for outside “solvers.” A
little more than one-third of challenges were completely solved, a

remarkable portion given that InnoCentive selected for problems that had
stumped the specialists who posted them. Along the way, InnoCentive
realized it could help seekers tailor their posts to make a solution more
likely. The trick: to frame the challenge so that it attracted a diverse array of
solvers. The more likely a challenge was to appeal not just to scientists but
also to attorneys and dentists and mechanics, the more likely it was to be
solved.
Bingham calls it “outside-in” thinking: finding solutions in experiences
far outside of focused training for the problem itself. History is littered with
world-changing examples.
Napoleon once fretted that his armies could only carry a few days’ worth
of provisions. “Hunger is more savage than the sword,” a fourth-century
Roman military chronicler wrote. The French emperor was a science and
technology booster, so in 1795 he offered a reward for research on food
preservation. A raft of the world’s most formidable minds had been working
on the problem for more than a century, including Irish scientist Robert
Boyle, the “father of modern chemistry.” Where great minds of science
failed, Parisian foodie and confectioner Nicolas Appert prevailed .
Appert was a “jack of all trades,” according to the Can Manufacturers
Institute. He had traversed the gustatory universe as a candy maker, vintner,
chef, brewer, pickle maker, and more. His exceptionally wide-ranging
culinary wanderings gave him an advantage over scientists who focused on
the science of preservation. “Having spent my days in the pantries, the
breweries, store-houses, and cellars of Champagne, as well as in the shops,
manufactories, and warehouses of confectioners, distillers, and grocers,” he
wrote in the aptly titled Art of Preserving All Kinds of Animal and Vegetable
Substances for Several Years, “I have been able to avail myself, in my
process, of a number of advantages, which the greater number of those
persons have not possessed, who have devoted themselves to the art of
preserving provisions.” He placed food inside of thick champagne bottles,
which he sealed to make airtight and then placed in boiling water for hours.
Appert’s innovation begat canned food. He preserved a whole sheep in a
crock just to show it off. His solution preserved nutrients so well that
scurvy, the vitamin C deficiency known as “the sailor’s nightmare,” went
from deadly curse to avoidable nuisance. The main scientific epiphany—
heat kills microbes—was still sixty years from being discovered by Louis
Pasteur. Appert’s method revolutionized public health, and, unfortunately

for Napoleon, crossed the English Channel. In 1815, it fed the English
troops at Waterloo.
Alph Bingham’s critics were aware that clever outsiders and dilettantes
had made technical breakthroughs in the past, but they assumed it was
purely that, an artifact of the past that would not translate into the era of
hyperspecialization. Help us, an international pharmaceutical giant,
conceive and create a molecule that we will use as a stepping-stone to
synthesize some other molecule so obscure that we don’t mind sharing this
information publicly, because we’re stuck and nobody outside our walls will
have any idea where we’re going with this anyway. Even Bingham’s
expectations proved too humble when it came to the contributions of
outside-in solvers to problems that stumped specialists. “When a problem
NASA worked on for thirty years gets solved,” he told me, “I’m definitely
still surprised.”
Specifically, NASA was unable to predict solar particle storms,
radioactive material spewed by the sun that can gravely damage astronauts
and the equipment they depend on. Solar physicists were understandably
skeptical that outsiders could help, but after three decades of being stuck,
there was nothing to lose; NASA posted through InnoCentive in 2009.
Within six months, Bruce Cragin, an engineer retired from Sprint Nextel
and living in rural New Hampshire, solved the challenge using radio waves
picked up by telescopes. Pre-retirement, Cragin had collaborated with
scientists, and found that those specialist teams often got mired in working
out small details at the expense of practical solutions. “I think it helped me
being out of that,” he said, “having moved on.” A NASA official noted,
diplomatically, that “there was some resistance” to Cragin’s solution at first,
“because it was using a different methodology.”
That was exactly the point. Still, Appert and Cragin had some
tangentially relevant work experience. Other outside-in solvers thrive
because they have none at all.
In 1989, the Exxon Valdez oil tanker famously hit a reef and leaked its
payload into the Prince William Sound. It was a monumental environmental
and commercial fishing disaster. When oil mixes with water, spill workers
refer to the resulting goop as “chocolate mousse.” Throw in low

temperature and spill responders are working with material that has the
viscosity of peanut butter. It is devilishly difficult to remove.
Almost twenty years after the Exxon Valdez spill, thirty-two thousand
gallons of oil remained stubbornly stuck along Alaska’s coast. One of the
most intractable challenges for oil spill remediation was pumping oil out of
recovery barges after it was skimmed from the water. In 2007, Scott Pegau,
research program manager at the Alaska-based Oil Spill Recovery Institute,
figured he might as well try InnoCentive. He offered a $20,000 reward for a
solution to getting cold chocolate mousse out of recovery barges.
Ideas rolled in. Most were too expensive to be practical. And then there
was the solution from John Davis, so cheap and simple it made Pegau
chuckle. “Everyone kind of looked at it,” Pegau told me, “and just said,
‘Yep, this should work.’”
Davis, an Illinois-based chemist, had been pondering the oil spill
challenge while waiting for flights during work travel. Naturally, he started
with chemistry solutions, but made an about-face. “You’re already dealing
with a chemical pollutant more or less,” Davis told me, “so you want to do
as little chemistry as possible” in order to avoid adding more pollutants. He
abandoned his specialty and turned to a distant analogy. “I visualized the
problem as drinking a slushy,” he said. “You end up having to whip around
the straw to stir it up. How could you make it so you don’t have to work so
hard to get that slushy out?”
The slushy question in turn reminded Davis of a brief experience in
construction. Years earlier, he was enlisted for a day to help build a long
flight of concrete steps that ran down from a friend’s house to an adjacent
lake. “They just needed an extra person to carry the======================================================== right.
Macduff got less than one in five. There was, though, an exception: the lists
on which they never had hints at all.
For those lists, on day one of practice the duo had performed terribly.
They were literally monkeys hitting buttons. But they improved steadily
each training day. On test day, Oberon nailed almost three-quarters of the
lists that he had learned with no hints. Macduff got about half of them.
The overall experiment results went like this: the more hints that were
available during training, the better the monkeys performed during early
practice, and the worse they performed on test day. For the lists that
Macduff spent three days practicing with automatic hints, he got zero
correct. It was as if the pair had suddenly unlearned every list that they

practiced with hints. The study conclusion was simple: “training with hints
did not produce any lasting learning.”
Training without hints is slow and error-ridden. It is, essentially, what we
normally think of as testing, except for the purpose of learning rather than
evaluation—when “test” becomes a dreaded four-letter word. The eighth-
grade math teacher was essentially testing her students in class, but she was
facilitating or outright giving them the answers.
Used for learning, testing, including self-testing, is a very desirable
difficulty. Even testing prior to studying works, at the point when wrong
answers are assured. In one of Kornell’s experiments, participants were
made to learn pairs of words and later tested on recall. At test time, they did
the best with pairs that they learned via practice quizzes, even if they had
gotten the answers on those quizzes wrong. Struggling to retrieve
information primes the brain for subsequent learning, even when the
retrieval itself is unsuccessful. The struggle is real, and really useful. “Like
life,” Kornell and team wrote, “retrieval is all about the journey.”
If that eighth-grade classroom followed a typical academic plan over the
course of the year, it is precisely the opposite of what science recommends
for durable learning—one topic was probably confined to one week and
another to the next. Like a lot of professional development efforts, each
particular concept or skill gets a short period of intense focus, and then on
to the next thing, never to return. That structure makes intuitive sense, but it
forgoes another important desirable difficulty: “spacing,” or distributed
practice.
It is what it sounds like—leaving time between practice sessions for the
same material. You might call it deliberate not-practicing between bouts of
deliberate practice. “There’s a limit to how long you should wait,” Kornell
told me, “but it’s longer than people think. It could be anything, studying
foreign language vocabulary or learning how to fly a plane, the harder it is,
the more you learn.” Space between practice sessions creates the hardness
that enhances learning. One study separated Spanish vocabulary learners
into two groups—a group that learned the vocab and then was tested on it
the same day, and a second that learned the vocab but was tested on it a
month later. Eight years later, with no studying in the interim, the latter

group retained 250 percent more. For a given amount of Spanish study,
spacing made learning more productive by making it easy to make it hard.
It does not take nearly that long to see the spacing effect. Iowa State
researchers read people lists of words, and then asked for each list to be
recited back either right away, after fifteen seconds of rehearsal, or after
fifteen seconds of doing very simple math problems that prevented
rehearsal. The subjects who were allowed to reproduce the lists right after
hearing them did the best. Those who had fifteen seconds to rehearse before
reciting came in second. The group distracted with math problems finished
last. Later, when everyone thought they were finished, they were all
surprised with a pop quiz: write down every word you can recall from the
lists. Suddenly, the worst group became the best. Short-term rehearsal gave
purely short-term benefits. Struggling to hold on to information and then
recall it had helped the group distracted by math problems transfer the
information from short-term to long-term memory. The group with more
and immediate rehearsal opportunity recalled nearly nothing on the pop
quiz. Repetition, it turned out, was less important than struggle.
It isn’t bad to get an answer right while studying. Progress just should not
happen too quickly, unless the learner wants to end up like Oberon (or,
worse, Macduff), with a knowledge mirage that evaporates when it matters
most. As with excessive hint-giving, it will, as a group of psychologists put
it, “produce misleadingly high levels of immediate mastery that will not
survive the passage of substantial periods of time.” For a given amount of
material, learning is most efficient in the long run when it is really
inefficient in the short run. If you are doing too well when you test yourself,
the simple antidote is to wait longer before practicing the same material
again, so that the test will be more difficult when you do. Frustration is not
a sign you are not learning, but ease is.
Platforms like Medium and LinkedIn are absolutely rife with posts about
shiny new, unsupported learning hacks that lead to mind-blowingly rapid
progress—from special dietary supplements and “ brain-training” apps to
audio cues meant to alter brain waves. In 2007, the U.S. Department of
Education published a report by six scientists and an accomplished teacher
who were asked to identify learning strategies that truly have scientific
backing. Spacing, testing, and using making-connections questions were on
the extremely short list. All three impair performance in the short term.

As with the making-connections questions Richland studied, it is difficult
to accept that the best learning road is slow, and that doing poorly now is
essential for better performance later. It is so deeply counterintuitive that it
fools the learners themselves, both about their own progress and their
teachers’ skill. Demonstrating that required an extraordinarily unique study.
One that only a setting like the U.S. Air Force Academy could provide.
In return for full scholarships, cadets at the Air Force Academy commit to
serve as military officers for a minimum of eight years after graduation. 
*
They submit to a highly structured and rigorous academic program heavy
on science and engineering. It includes a minimum of three math courses
for every student.
Every year, an algorithm randomly assigns incoming cadets to sections of
Calculus I, each with about twenty students. To examine the impact of
professors, two economists compiled data on more than ten thousand cadets
who had been randomly assigned to calculus sections taught by nearly a
hundred professors over a decade. Every section used the exact same
syllabus, the exact same exam, and the exact same postcourse professor
evaluation form for cadets to fill out.
After Calculus I, students were randomized again to Calculus II sections,
again with the same syllabus and exam, and then again to more advanced
math, science, and engineering courses. The economists confirmed that
standardized test scores and high school grades were spread evenly across
sections, so the instructors were facing similar challenges. The Academy
even standardized test-grading procedures, so every student was evaluated
in the same manner. “Potential ‘bleeding heart’ professors,” the economists
wrote, “had no discretion to boost grades.” That was important, because
they wanted to see what differences individual teachers made.
Unsurprisingly, there was a group of Calculus I professors whose
instruction most strongly boosted student performance on the Calculus I
exam, and who got sterling student evaluation ratings. Another group of
professors consistently added less to student performance on the exam, and
students judged them more harshly in evaluations. But when the economists
looked at another, longer-term measure of teacher value added—how those
students did on subsequent math and engineering courses that required
Calculus I as a prerequisite—the results were stunning. The Calculus I

teachers who were the best at promoting student overachievement in their
own class were somehow not great for their students in the long run.
“Professors who excel at promoting contemporaneous student
achievement,” the economists wrote, “on average, harm the subsequent
performance of their students in more advanced classes.” What looked like
a head start evaporated.
The economists suggested that the professors who caused short-term
struggle but long-term gains were facilitating “deep learning” by making
connections. They “broaden the curriculum and produce students with a
deeper understanding of the material.” It also made their courses more
difficult and frustrating, as evidenced by both the students’ lower Calculus I
exam scores and their harsher evaluations of their instructors. And vice
versa. The calculus professor who ranked dead last in deep learning out of
the hundred studied—that is, his students underperformed in subsequent
classes—was sixth in student evaluations, and seventh in student
performance during his own class. Students evaluated their instructors
based on how they performed on tests right now —a poor measure of how
well the teachers set them up for later development—so they gave the best
marks to professors who provided them with the least long-term benefit.
The economists concluded that students were actually selectively punishing
the teachers who provided them the most long-term benefit. Tellingly,
Calculus I students whose teachers had fewer qualifications and less
experience did better in that class, while the students of more experienced
and qualified teachers struggled in Calculus I but did better in subsequent
courses.
A similar study was conducted at Italy’s Bocconi University, on twelve
hundred======================================================== suddenly seen as
invention,” said sociologist Brian Uzzi, Amaral’s collaborator. Human
creativity, he said, is basically an “import/ export business of ideas.”
Uzzi documented an import/ export trend that began in both the physical
and social sciences in the 1970s, pre-internet: more successful teams tended
to have more far-flung members. Teams that included members from
different institutions were more likely to be successful than those that did
not, and teams that included members based in different countries had an
advantage as well.
Consistent with the import/ export model, scientists who have worked
abroad—whether or not they returned—are more likely to make a greater
scientific impact than those who have not. The economists who documented

that trend suggested one reason could be migrants’ “arbitrage”
opportunities, the chance to take an idea from one market and bring it to
another where it is more rare and valued. 
*
 It echoes Oliver Smithies’s
advice to bring new skills to an old problem, or a new problem to old skills.
The atypical combination of typical forms—say, hip-hop, a Broadway
musical, and American historical biography—is not a strategy fluke of
showbiz.
Uzzi and a team analyzed eighteen million papers from a variety of
scientific domains to see whether atypical knowledge combinations
mattered. If a particular paper cited other areas of research that rarely, if
ever, appeared together, then it was classified as having used an atypical
combination of knowledge. Most papers relied purely on conventional
combinations of previous knowledge. That is, they cited work from other
journals that often appeared together in other studies’ lists of references.
The “hit” papers, those that over the next decade were used by a huge
number of other scientists, featured ample conventional combinations, but
also added an injection of unusual knowledge combinations.
A separate, international team analyzed more than a half million research
articles, and classified a paper as “novel” if it cited two other journals that
had never before appeared together. Just one in ten papers made a new
combination, and only one in twenty made multiple new combinations. The
group tracked the impact of research papers over time. They saw that papers
with new knowledge combinations were more likely to be published in less
prestigious journals, and also much more likely to be ignored upon
publication. They got off to a slow start in the world, but after three years,
the papers with new knowledge combos surpassed the conventional papers,
and began accumulating more citations from other scientists. Fifteen years
after publication, studies that made multiple new knowledge combinations
were way more likely to be in the top 1 percent of most-cited papers.
To recap: work that builds bridges between disparate pieces of
knowledge is less likely to be funded, less likely to appear in famous
journals, more likely to be ignored upon publication, and then more likely
in the long run to be a smash hit in the library of human knowledge.
Casadevall leads by example. A single conversation with him is liable to
include Anna Karenina, the Federalist Papers, the fact that Isaac Newton

and Gottfried Leibniz were philosophers as well as scientists, why the
Roman Empire wasn’t more innovative, and a point about mentoring in the
form of a description of the character Mentor from Homer’s Odyssey. “I
work at it,” he said, smirking. “I always advise my people to read outside
your field, everyday something. And most people say, ‘Well, I don’t have
time to read outside my field.’ I say, ‘No, you do have time, it’s far more
important.’ Your world becomes a bigger world, and maybe there’s a
moment in which you make connections.”
One of Casadevall’s projects was born from a news article he read about
a robot sent into the Chernobyl nuclear accident site, still highly
contaminated thirty years post-disaster. The article happened to mention
that the robot returned with some black mold, a kind that resembled a grotty
shower curtain and that had colonized the abandoned reactor. “So, why
black mold?” Casadevall asked rhetorically. “And then one thing led to
another.” He and colleagues made a remarkable find—that the mold was
nourishing itself with radiation. Not with radioactive substances—with
radiation itself.
Casadevall makes sure to highlight experiences outside the lab and how
they contributed to who he is today. His family fled Cuba and arrived in
Queens when he was eleven. At sixteen, he got his first job, at McDonald’s,
and worked there until he was twenty. It’s still on his résumé, and he made
sure to discuss it in his Johns Hopkins interview. “It was a great, great
experience,” he told me. “I learned a lot working there.” Like handling
pressure. His younger brother worked there, too, and was briefly taken
hostage during a holdup. “He spent two days on the witness stand where the
lawyers made fun of his accent,” Casadevall recalled. “He came out ready
for law school. Now he’s a successful trial lawyer.” After McDonald’s,
Casadevall worked as a bank teller. (“That was held up too!”) His father
wanted him to have something practical to fall back on, so a community
college degree in pest control operations hangs on his office wall, near a
certificate of his election into the prestigious National Academy of
Medicine.
Casadevall is renowned in his area of expertise. He has no trouble getting
research grants, and is frequently one of the scientists who helps determine
who else gets grants. He is a winner if the specialization status quo
continues. And yet he considers his attempt to shatter it the most important
work of his life. The further basic science moves from meandering

exploration toward efficiency, he believes, the less chance it will have of
solving humanity’s greatest challenges.
Laszlo Polgar, in the midst of his chess experiment with his daughters,
proclaimed that “the problems of cancer and AIDS” would more likely be
solved if his system of narrow specialization and efficient education were
used beyond chess, to educate a thousand kids. Casadevall is a student of
innovation history. He grew up as a doctor and scientist when HIV/ AIDS
exploded into an epidemic, and he could hardly disagree more passionately.
“When I went to medical school, I was taught that there were no human
diseases caused by retroviruses, that retroviruses were a curiosity that
occurred in some animal tumors. In 1981, a new disease emerges that
nobody knows anything about. In 1984, it’s found to be a retrovirus, HIV. In
1987, you have the first therapy. In 1996, you have such effective therapy
that people don’t have to die of it anymore. How did that happen? Was it
because companies all of a sudden rushed to make drugs? No. If you really
look back and analyze it, before that time society had spent some of its very
hard-earned money to study a curiosity called retroviruses. Just a curiosity
in animals. So by the time HIV was found to be a retrovirus, you already
knew that if you interfered with the protease [a type of enzyme] that you
could deactivate it. So when HIV arrived, society had right off the shelf a
huge amount of knowledge from investments made in a curiosity that at the
time had no use. It may very well be that if you were to take all the research
funding in the country and you put it in Alzheimer’s disease, you would
never get to the solution. But the answer to Alzheimer’s disease may come
from a misfolding protein in a cucumber. But how are you going to write a
grant on a cucumber? And who are you going to send it to? If somebody
gets interested in a folding protein in a cucumber and it’s a good scientific
question, leave them alone. Let them torture the cucumber.”
Casadevall’s overarching point is that the innovation ecosystem should
intentionally preserve range and inefficiency. He is fighting an uphill battle.
In 2006, when I was starting in journalism, I sat in on funding policy
hearings of a U.S. Senate subcommittee on science and space, chaired by
Texas senator Kay Bailey Hutchison. Hutchison would thumb through a
stack of scientists’ research proposals and read the titles aloud. If a title did
not directly pertain to the creation of a new commercial technology, she

whisked it from the stack and asked the room how exactly that sort of thing
would help the country get ahead of India and China. Among the disciplines
Hutchison classified as distracting from technological innovation were
biology, geology, economics, and archaeology. One can only guess how she
would have assessed the work of Louis Pasteur (who started as an artist) on
chickens with cholera, which led him to lab-created vaccines. Or Einstein’s
fanciful idea to investigate if time passes differently in high versus low
gravity, part of a theory essential to some rather useful technology, like cell
phones, which use global positioning satellites with gravitationally adjusted
clocks that sync with clocks on Earth.
In 1945, former MIT dean Vannevar Bush, who oversaw U.S. military
science during World War II—including the mass production of penicillin
and the Manhattan Project—authored a report at the request of President
Franklin Roosevelt in which he explained successful innovation culture. It
was titled “Science, the Endless Frontier,” and led to the creation of the
National Science Foundation that funded three generations of wildly
successful scientific discovery, from Doppler radar and fiber optics to web
browsers and MRIs. “Scientific progress on a broad front results from the
free play of free intellects, working on subjects of their own choice,” Bush
wrote, “in the manner dictated by their curiosity for exploration of the
unknown.”
A curious phenomenon has appeared in recent years on a near-annual
basis when the Nobel Prizes are awarded. Someone who receives one
explains that their breakthrough could not have occurred today. In 2016,
Japanese biologist Yoshinori Ohsumi closed his Nobel lecture======================================================== dates to 1592. In the New Latin form “Johannes factotum ”, it was
contained in a pamphlet by a playwright criticizing his own industry. The
jab refers to a poet with no university education who was apparently
involved in various other roles, like copying scripts and bit-part acting, even
trying to write plays. The poet on the receiving end of the insult: a young
William Shakespeare. The phrase evolved over time, and today it’s usually
“jack of all trades, master of none.” I think it is culturally telling that we
habitually hack off the end of the long version: “A jack of all trades is a
master of none, but oftentimes better than a master of one.”
Lately I’ve been thinking in a more personal way about the implications
of these cultural cues, and of the research in Range . Between the time I
turned in the final manuscript and the time the hardcover was published, I
became a parent. I’ve been asking myself how, in this new adventure, I
might (eventually) wield some of what I learned. That, in turn, led me to a
bit of analogical thinking: at the moment, I’m conceiving of my role as akin
to the role of a coach-like mentor in the Army’s “talent-based branching”
program. I realize it might seem odd for me to liken my parenting strategy
to a military program—one that I mentioned only in a footnote here . But
this is not a surface analogy: it’s a deeper, structural analogy.
The talent-based branching program grew out of the Army’s realization
(discussed in chapter 6) that it had developed a match quality problem,
particularly with West Point and ROTC cadets who received scholarships.
The Army persisted in a traditional model of talent development: assigning
future officers to a career path before they knew much about their own
abilities and interests, or much of anything about the career. Cadets could
express preferences, but it amounted to requesting a profession they did not
know well enough for the person they had not yet become. And once they
chose, they were stuck. In a knowledge economy, bursting with sampling

and lateral mobility, cadets simply left the service (in droves) if they turned
out to have a subpar career match. The talent-based branching program was
designed to help young officers get a better understanding of potential
careers earlier in the selection process, and discover their own interests and
talents at the same time. Essentially, it provides them with a sampling
period.
As officers-in-training cycle through classes, internship-like work
experiences, and field training that exposes them to different jobs, they are
encouraged to take part in constant self-reflection, both on their own (which
they can track in an online portal) and with mentors. (Learning about and
reflecting on their own strengths and weaknesses, according to an Army
Strategic Studies Institute monograph, “can sometimes be a bit of a shock.”)
The idea is to foster better match quality, and in turn to improve
performance, satisfaction, and retention. When talent-based branching was
piloted with West Point cadets, nearly 90 percent of participating cadets
changed at least one of their top three career preferences. Once again: we
learn who we are in practice, not in theory.
I think that’s a useful model for parenting. First, I’d like to facilitate a
sampling period for my kid—to expose him to a variety of experiences and
possibilities. (A 2019 OECD report found that children already significantly
narrow their ideas of possible careers by age seven. “We must fight to keep
their horizons open,” said Andreas Schleicher, OECD’s director for
education and skills.) And then my role is that of the mentor, supporting my
son by helping him get the maximum amount of signal about his own
talents, interests, and options from each experience. I hope that will help
guide him to good match quality, broaden his toolbox en route, and form a
habit of regular reflection reminiscent of the dark horses from chapter 7,
who repeatedly say to themselves: “Here’s who I am at the moment, here
are my motivations, here’s what I’ve found I like to do, here’s what I’d like
to learn, and here are the opportunities. Which of these is the best match
right now? And maybe a year from now I’ll switch because I’ll find
something better.”
Shortly after Range came out, Ruth Brennan Morrey—a former college
soccer captain, pro triathlete, Olympic Trials marathon qualifier, and
psychology PhD—tagged me in an apt tweet: “Listening to @DavidEpstein
Range in the car with twelve-year-old daughter. ‘Mom, why do we make
“What I want to be when I grow up” signs on the first day of school? We

should make “Top 5 things I want to learn about this year” signs.’ Smart
cookie. :-)” I think I’ll borrow the twelve-year-old’s idea.
Ultimately, I think the idea of helping individuals get the maximum
match quality signal from each zig and zag is a good model, whether one is
“managing” kids, mentees, teammates, employees, or, as management
scholar Peter Drucker put it twenty years ago in a prophetic Harvard
Business Review article, “managing oneself.” The summary atop the article
—which predicts that workers would increasingly have longer and
multifaceted careers—reads: “Success in the knowledge economy comes to
those who know themselves—their strengths, their values, and how they
best perform.”
That is often easier said than done. One of the most common questions I
received after the hardcover publication of Range came from people who
viewed themselves as latecomers or generalists; the refrain was that they
believe employers will view their varied background as a liability, so they
downplay it. They would ask me how to make it a selling point, or at least
not a liability.
I get it. Weeks before publication, I had the honor of participating for the
second time on the final selection committee for the Pat Tillman
Foundation, which awards scholarships to veterans to aid professional
development and career changes. I was hyperconscious of the fact that
when I began reviewing an application by perusing the candidate’s résumé,
my first, reflexive impression was sometimes that they appeared a bit
scattered. But then I would delve more deeply into their journey, and what
appeared scattered at first blush became something completely different.
Let’s say a hypothetical candidate started work after high school or college.
They didn’t feel fulfilled, so they joined the military. Once enlisted, they
ended up doing something other than what they expected—say, organizing
medical care for citizens of a remote village in another country—and during
that time they learned something about international relations, or about
bureaucratic dysfunction, or about the administration of public health
initiatives. Meanwhile, they also learned they were good (or not so good) at
and interested in things they had not expected, and they returned to civilian
life with new ideas about a field to enter or a business to start. Viewed
holistically, what initially looked scattered on a résumé morphed into a

journey in which the traveler was responding to lived experience with
changes of direction, rather than continuing down an initial path just
because they started there. In my experience with the foundation, applicants
who win a scholarship are often those who explain a varied path—including
stops along the way that sometimes seem far afield—as a series of lessons
and subsequent pivots. I think that is a good strategy to keep in mind: rather
than hiding diverse experience, explain it.
People who told me that they downplayed their broad backgrounds
worried that their online résumés would not serve them well. I think that’s a
valid concern, and a shame if it holds them back. LinkedIn is the most
popular résumé database, and the site’s own research has found that one of
the strongest predictors of who will eventually become an executive is the
number of different job functions an individual has worked across. Based
on that analysis, LinkedIn’s principal economist, Guy Berger, gave
straightforward advice: “My recommendation for those of you who want to
become executives is to work across as many job functions as possible.”
Executives with more varied careers have also been found to be “more
likely to have novel strategies . . . which is key to a sustainable competitive
advantage,” according to Gina Dokko, a professor at the University of
California-Davis Graduate School of Management. “Research has
established pretty firmly that diverse groups of people are better at
innovation and problem solving, but more recent research is finding that
diverse career histories within a single person can also benefit
performance.”
Plus, career-path swerves are now common. Separate LinkedIn research
found that nearly half of professionals who switch jobs move to a different
industry—up about 10 percent from a decade ago—and 60 percent move to
a completely new job function. So perhaps it would be a good idea for sites
that host résumés, and organizations that review them, to include some
function that allows users the chance to share their résumé as a narrative
journey in which they can explain the lessons of their zigs and zags, rather
than just list them as bullet points. In my mind, a system that leads people
to downplay previous experiences, as if they were entirely wasted, is a
counterproductive one. We shouldn’t be ashamed of broad experience, or of
needing time to find match quality. Take it from Angela Duckworth, the
researcher whose work popularized the psychological construct of “grit.”

Two days before Range was published, an edition of Duckworth’s weekly
email was titled, “Summer is for Sampling.” “Many parents ask me for
advice on how to get their kids to stick to one thing for years and years like
the paragons of grit I study,” Duckworth wrote. “I can empathize. In the
decade of adult life it took me to commit to becoming a psychologist, I was
desperate for direction to match my determination.”
Duckworth added that it is neither======================================================== the Oscar-
nominated war documentary Restrepo. “That cut was the best thing that
ever could have happened to me,” he told me. “It gave me this template for
seeing my career. Virtually every good thing in my life I can trace back to a
misfortune, so my feeling is you don’t know what’s good and what’s bad
when things happen. You do not know. You have to wait to find out.”
My favorite fiction writers might be darker dark horses still. Haruki
Murakami wanted to be a musician, “but I couldn’t play the instruments
very well,” he said. He was twenty-nine and running a jazz bar in Tokyo
when he went to a spring baseball game and the crack of the bat—“a
beautiful, ringing double,” Murakami wrote—gave him the revelation that
he could write a novel. Why did that thought come to him? “I didn’t know
then, and I don’t know now.” He started writing at night. “The sensation of
writing felt very fresh.” Murakami’s fourteen novels (all feature music
prominently) have been translated into more than fifty languages.

Fantasy writer Patrick Rothfuss began studying chemical engineering in
college, which “led to a revelation that chemical engineering is boring.” He
then spent nine years bouncing between majors “before being kindly asked
to graduate already.” After that, according to his official bio, “Patrick went
to grad school. He’d rather not talk about it.” Meanwhile, he was slowly
working on a novel. That novel, The Name of the Wind (in which chemistry
appears repeatedly), sold millions of copies worldwide and is source
material for a potential TV successor to Game of Thrones .
Hillary Jordan just happened to live downstairs from me in a Brooklyn
apartment building, and told me that she worked in advertising for fifteen
years before beginning to write fiction. Her first novel, Mudbound, won the
Bellwether Prize for socially engaged fiction. The film version was
purchased by Netflix and in 2018 received four Oscar nominations.
Unlike Jordan, Maryam Mirzakhani actually expected to be a novelist
from the start. She was enchanted by bookstores near her school when she
was young and dreamed of writing. She had to take math classes, but “I was
just not interested in thinking about it,” she said later. Eventually she came
to see math as exploration. “It is like being lost in a jungle and trying to use
all the knowledge that you can gather to come up with some new tricks, and
with some luck, you might find a way out.” In 2014, she became the first
woman to win the Fields Medal, the most famous math prize in the world.
Of the athletes I met when I worked at Sports Illustrated, the one I most
admired was British Ironman triathlete (and writer and humanitarian)
Chrissie Wellington, who sat atop a road bike for the first time in her life at
age twenty-seven. She was working on a sewage sanitation project in Nepal
when she found that she enjoyed cycling, and could keep up with Sherpas at
altitude in the Himalayas. Two years after returning home, she won the first
of four Ironman world championships, and then proceeded to go 13–0 at the
Ironman distance over a career that started late and spanned just five years.
“My passion for the sport hasn’t waned,” she said when she retired, “but my
passion for new experiences and new challenges is what is now burning the
most brightly.”
I’m a fan of Irish theater, and my favorite performer is Irish actor Ciarán
Hinds, more widely known for his HBO roles—Julius Caesar in Rome and
Game of Thrones ’ Mance Rayder, the “King Beyond the Wall”—and as a
star of AMC’s The Terror. (His voice may be best known as head troll
Grand Pabbie in Disney’s Frozen .) This book gave me an excuse to ask

Hinds about his career path, and he recalled having been a “flighty
gadabout” unsure of his direction when he enrolled as a law student at
Queen’s University Belfast. His attention was quickly diverted “due to a
keen interest in snooker, poker, and experimental dance,” he told me. One
of Hinds’s class tutors had seen him as a twelve-year-old portraying Lady
Macbeth in a school play, and suggested he bag legal studies and apply to
drama school. “He also had the goodness to speak to my parents on the
matter, who were rather trepidatious,” Hinds told me. “Off I went to study
at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, and my life in the professional
theater began.”
The Van Gogh biography by Steven Naifeh and his late partner and
coauthor Gregory White Smith is one of the best books I have ever read in
any genre. Naifeh and Smith met in law school as both were realizing it was
not for them. They started cowriting books on an eclectic array of topics,
from true crime to men’s style, even as an editor told them they needed to
pick one genre and stick with it. Their willingness to dive into new areas
paid unexpected dividends. When an editor at another publishing house
asked them to write a guide to using lawyers’ services, it led them to found
Best Lawyers, which spawned a massive industry of peer-recommendation
publications. “If we hadn’t taken that idea [to create a reference to help
people select lawyers] and run with it,” Naifeh told me, “our lives would
have been dramatically different, and it wasn’t like anything we had done
before.” They might never have had the means and freedom to spend a
decade researching their Van Gogh biography, or their biography of Jackson
Pollock that won the Pulitzer Prize.
Pollock, Naifeh told me, “was literally one of the least talented draftsmen
at the Art Students League.” Naifeh argues that, as with Van Gogh,
Pollock’s lack of traditional drawing skill was what led him to invent his
own rules for making art. As schools offering standardized paths in art have
proliferated, “one of the problems is that artists tend to be products of those
schools,” said Naifeh, an artist himself.
Maybe that has helped fuel an explosion of interest in so-called outsider
art, by practitioners who began without a standard path in sight. Of course,
there is nothing wrong with coming through the formal talent development
system, but if that’s the only pipeline that exists, some of the brightest
talents get missed. “Outsider artists” are the self-taught jazz masters of
visual art, and the originality of their work can be stunning. In 2018, the

National Gallery of Art featured a full exhibition dedicated to self-taught
artists; art history programs at Stanford, Duke, Yale, and the Art Institute of
Chicago now offer seminars in outsider art. Katherine Jentleson, who in
2015 was appointed as a full-time curator of self-taught art at the High
Museum of Art in Atlanta, told me that these artists typically started just by
experimenting and doing things they liked, while working other jobs. “The
majority did not begin their art making in earnest until after retirement,”
Jentleson said.
She introduced me to the sculptor and painter Lonnie Holley, a prominent
self-taught artist who grew up extremely poor in Alabama. In 1979, when
he was twenty-nine, his sister’s two children died in a fire. The family could
not afford gravestones, so Holley gathered discarded sandstone at a nearby
foundry and carved them himself. “I didn’t even know what art was!” he
told me, his eyes wide, as if taken by surprise at his own story. But it felt
good. He carved gravestones for other families and started making
sculptures out of anything he could find. I was standing with him near the
door of an Atlanta gallery featuring his work when he grabbed a paper clip
and quickly bent it into an intricate silhouette of a face, which he jabbed
decoratively into the eraser of a pencil the woman at the front desk was
using. It is hard to imagine a time before he made art, since it seems like he
can hardly touch something before his hands begin exploring what else it
might become .
Jentleson also pointed me to Paradise Garden, ninety miles north-west of
Atlanta, the painting-and sculpture-filled property of the late minister
Howard Finster, the Frances Hesselbein of modern art. Finster had long
compiled bricolage displays on his land, from collections of tools to
assortments of fruit-bearing plants. He was fixing a bicycle one day in
1976, when he was fifty-nine, and saw what looked like a face in a splotch
of white paint on his thumb. “A warm feelin’ come over my body,” he
recalled. Finster immediately began an oeuvre of tens of thousands of
artworks that filled his property, including thousands of paintings in his
unique, semi-cartoonish style, often densely packed with animals and
figures—Elvis, George Washington, angels—and set fancifully in
apocalyptic landscapes. In short order, he was appearing on Johnny
Carson’s Tonight Show and creating album covers for R.E.M. and Talking
Heads. Upon entry to the garden, I was greeted by a giant self-portrait of a
smirking Finster in a burgundy suit, affixed to a cinderblock wall. At the

bottom are the words “I began painting pictures in Jan-1976—without any
training. This is my painting. A person don’t know what he can do unless he
tryes. Trying things is the answer to find your talent.”
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 8
The Outsider Advantage
ALPH BINGHAM WILL be the first to admit it: he is hyperspecialized, at least in
theory. “My PhD isn’t even in chemistry, it’s in organic chemistry!” he
exclaimed. “If there’s not a carbon in it, I’m technically not qualified,
okay?”
In graduate school in the 1970s, Bingham and his classmates had to
devise ways to create particular molecules. “This was a bunch of smart guys
and women and we could make these molecules,” he told me, “but
somehow someone’s solution was always cleverer than the others. I was
paying attention, and I noticed that the most clever solution always came
from a piece of knowledge that was not a part of the normal curriculum.”
One day, he was the cleverest.
He had come up with an elegant solution to synthesize a molecule in four
short steps, and the key piece of knowledge involved cream of tartar, a
baking ingredient Bingham happened to know from childhood. “You======================================================== became the youngest
grandmaster ever, male or female. When Susan was asked on television if
she wanted to win the world championship in the men’s or women’s
category, she cleverly responded that she wanted to win the “absolute
category.”
None of the sisters ultimately reached Laszlo’s highest goal of becoming
the overall world champion, but all were outstanding. In 1996, Susan
participated in the women’s world championship, and won. Sofia peaked at
the rank of international master, a level down from grandmaster. Judit went
furthest, climbing up to eighth in the overall world ranking in 2004.
Laszlo’s experiment had worked. It worked so well that in the early
1990s he suggested that if his early specialization approach were applied to
a thousand children, humanity could tackle problems like cancer and AIDS.
After all, chess was just an arbitrary medium for his universal point. Like
the Tiger Woods story, the Polgar story entered an endless pop culture loop
in articles, books, TV shows, and talks as an example of the life-hacking
power of an early start. An online course called “Bring Up Genius!”
advertises lessons in the Polgar method to “build up your own Genius Life
Plan.” The bestseller Talent Is Overrated used the Polgar sisters and Tiger
Woods as proof that a head start in deliberate practice is the key to success
in “virtually any activity that matters to you.”
The powerful lesson is that anything in the world can be conquered in the
same way. It relies on one very important, and very unspoken, assumption:
that chess and golf are representative examples of all the activities that
matter to you.

Just how much of the world, and how many of the things humans want to
learn and do, are really like chess and golf?
Psychologist Gary Klein is a pioneer of the “naturalistic decision
making” (NDM) model of expertise; NDM researchers observe expert
performers in their natural course of work to learn how they make high-
stakes decisions under time pressure. Klein has shown that experts in an
array of fields are remarkably similar to chess masters in that they
instinctively recognize familiar patterns.
When I asked Garry Kasparov, perhaps the greatest chess player in
history, to explain his decision process for a move, he told me, “I see a
move, a combination, almost instantly,” based on patterns he has seen
before. Kasparov said he would bet that grandmasters usually make the
move that springs to mind in the first few seconds of thought. Klein studied
firefighting commanders and estimated that around 80 percent of their
decisions are also made instinctively and in seconds. After years of
firefighting, they recognize repeating patterns in the behavior of flames and
of burning buildings on the verge of collapse. When he studied nonwartime
naval commanders who were trying to avoid disasters, like mistaking a
commercial flight for an enemy and shooting it down, he saw that they very
quickly discerned potential threats. Ninety-five percent of the time, the
commanders recognized a common pattern and chose a common course of
action that was the first to come to mind.
One of Klein’s colleagues, psychologist Daniel Kahneman, studied
human decision making from the “heuristics and biases” model of human
judgment. His findings could hardly have been more different from Klein’s.
When Kahneman probed the judgments of highly trained experts, he often
found that experience had not helped at all. Even worse, it frequently bred
confidence but not skill.
Kahneman included himself in that critique. He first began to doubt the
link between experience and expertise in 1955, as a young lieutenant in the
psychology unit of the Israel Defense Forces. One of his duties was to
assess officer candidates through tests adapted from the British army. In one
exercise, teams of eight had to get themselves and a length of telephone
pole over a six-foot wall without letting the pole touch the ground, and
without any of the soldiers or the pole touching the wall. 
*
 The difference in
individuals’ performances were so stark, with clear leaders, followers,
braggarts, and wimps naturally emerging under the stress of the task, that

Kahneman and his fellow evaluators grew confident they could analyze the
candidates’ leadership qualities and identify how they would perform in
officer training and in combat. They were completely mistaken. Every few
months, they had a “statistics day” where they got feedback on how
accurate their predictions had been. Every time, they learned they had done
barely better than blind guessing. Every time, they gained experience and
gave confident judgments. And every time, they did not improve.
Kahneman marveled at the “complete lack of connection between the
statistical information and the compelling experience of insight.” Around
that same time, an influential book on expert judgment was published that
Kahneman told me impressed him “enormously.” It was a wide-ranging
review of research that rocked psychology because it showed experience
simply did not create skill in a wide range of real-world scenarios, from
college administrators assessing student potential to psychiatrists predicting
patient performance to human resources professionals deciding who will
succeed in job training. In those domains, which involved human behavior
and where patterns did not clearly repeat, repetition did not cause learning.
Chess, golf, and firefighting are exceptions, not the rule.
The difference between what Klein and Kahneman documented in
experienced professionals comprised a profound conundrum: Do specialists
get better with experience, or not?
In 2009, Kahneman and Klein took the unusual step of coauthoring a
paper in which they laid out their views and sought common ground. And
they found it. Whether or not experience inevitably led to expertise, they
agreed, depended entirely on the domain in question. Narrow experience
made for better chess and poker players and firefighters, but not for better
predictors of financial or political trends, or of how employees or patients
would perform. The domains Klein studied, in which instinctive pattern
recognition worked powerfully, are what psychologist Robin Hogarth
termed “kind” learning environments. Patterns repeat over and over, and
feedback is extremely accurate and usually very rapid. In golf or chess, a
ball or piece is moved according to rules and within defined boundaries, a
consequence is quickly apparent, and similar challenges occur repeatedly.
Drive a golf ball, and it either goes too far or not far enough; it slices,
hooks, or flies straight. The player observes what happened, attempts to
correct the error, tries again, and repeats for years. That is the very
definition of deliberate practice, the type identified with both the ten-

thousand-hours rule and the rush to early specialization in technical
training. The learning environment is kind because a learner improves
simply by engaging in the activity and trying to do better. Kahneman was
focused on the flip side of kind learning environments; Hogarth called them
“wicked.”
In wicked domains, the rules of the game are often unclear or incomplete,
there may or may not be repetitive patterns and they may not be obvious,
and feedback is often delayed, inaccurate, or both.
In the most devilishly wicked learning environments, experience will
reinforce the exact wrong lessons. Hogarth noted a famous New York City
physician renowned for his skill as a diagnostician. The man’s particular
specialty was typhoid fever, and he examined patients for it by feeling
around their tongues with his hands. Again and again, his testing yielded a
positive diagnosis before the patient displayed a single symptom. And over
and over, his diagnosis turned out to be correct. As another physician later
pointed out, “He was a more productive carrier, using only his hands, than
Typhoid Mary.” Repetitive success, it turned out, taught him the worst
possible lesson. Few learning environments are that wicked, but it doesn’t
take much to throw experienced pros off course. Expert firefighters, when
faced with a new situation, like a fire in a skyscraper, can find themselves
suddenly deprived of the intuition formed in years of house fires, and prone
to poor decisions. With a change of the status quo, chess masters too can
find that the skill they took years to build is suddenly obsolete .
In a 1997 showdown billed as the final battle for supremacy between
natural and artificial intelligence, IBM supercomputer Deep Blue defeated
Garry Kasparov. Deep Blue evaluated two hundred million positions per
second. That is a tiny fraction of possible chess positions—the number of
possible game sequences is more than atoms in the observable universe—
but plenty enough to beat the best human. According to Kasparov, “Today
the free chess app on your mobile phone is stronger than me.” He is not
being rhetorical.
“Anything we can do, and we know how to do it, machines will do it
better,” he said at a recent lecture. “If we can codify it, and pass it to
computers, they will do it better.” Still, losing to Deep Blue gave him an
idea. In playing computers, he recognized what artificial intelligence

scholars call Moravec’s paradox: machines and humans frequently have
opposite strengths and weaknesses.
There is a saying that “chess is 99 percent tactics.” Tactics are short
combinations of moves that players use to get an immediate advantage on
the board. When players study all those patterns, they are mastering tactics.
Bigger-picture planning in chess—how to manage the little battles to win
the war—is called strategy. As Susan Polgar has written, “you can get a lot
further by being very good in tactics”—that is, knowing a lot of patterns
—“and have only a basic understanding of strategy.”
Thanks to their calculation power, computers are tactically flawless
compared to humans. Grandmasters predict the near future, but computers
do it better. What if, Kasparov wondered, computer======================================================== dates to 1592. In the New Latin form “Johannes factotum ”, it was
contained in a pamphlet by a playwright criticizing his own industry. The
jab refers to a poet with no university education who was apparently
involved in various other roles, like copying scripts and bit-part acting, even
trying to write plays. The poet on the receiving end of the insult: a young
William Shakespeare. The phrase evolved over time, and today it’s usually
“jack of all trades, master of none.” I think it is culturally telling that we
habitually hack off the end of the long version: “A jack of all trades is a
master of none, but oftentimes better than a master of one.”
Lately I’ve been thinking in a more personal way about the implications
of these cultural cues, and of the research in Range . Between the time I
turned in the final manuscript and the time the hardcover was published, I
became a parent. I’ve been asking myself how, in this new adventure, I
might (eventually) wield some of what I learned. That, in turn, led me to a
bit of analogical thinking: at the moment, I’m conceiving of my role as akin
to the role of a coach-like mentor in the Army’s “talent-based branching”
program. I realize it might seem odd for me to liken my parenting strategy
to a military program—one that I mentioned only in a footnote here . But
this is not a surface analogy: it’s a deeper, structural analogy.
The talent-based branching program grew out of the Army’s realization
(discussed in chapter 6) that it had developed a match quality problem,
particularly with West Point and ROTC cadets who received scholarships.
The Army persisted in a traditional model of talent development: assigning
future officers to a career path before they knew much about their own
abilities and interests, or much of anything about the career. Cadets could
express preferences, but it amounted to requesting a profession they did not
know well enough for the person they had not yet become. And once they
chose, they were stuck. In a knowledge economy, bursting with sampling

and lateral mobility, cadets simply left the service (in droves) if they turned
out to have a subpar career match. The talent-based branching program was
designed to help young officers get a better understanding of potential
careers earlier in the selection process, and discover their own interests and
talents at the same time. Essentially, it provides them with a sampling
period.
As officers-in-training cycle through classes, internship-like work
experiences, and field training that exposes them to different jobs, they are
encouraged to take part in constant self-reflection, both on their own (which
they can track in an online portal) and with mentors. (Learning about and
reflecting on their own strengths and weaknesses, according to an Army
Strategic Studies Institute monograph, “can sometimes be a bit of a shock.”)
The idea is to foster better match quality, and in turn to improve
performance, satisfaction, and retention. When talent-based branching was
piloted with West Point cadets, nearly 90 percent of participating cadets
changed at least one of their top three career preferences. Once again: we
learn who we are in practice, not in theory.
I think that’s a useful model for parenting. First, I’d like to facilitate a
sampling period for my kid—to expose him to a variety of experiences and
possibilities. (A 2019 OECD report found that children already significantly
narrow their ideas of possible careers by age seven. “We must fight to keep
their horizons open,” said Andreas Schleicher, OECD’s director for
education and skills.) And then my role is that of the mentor, supporting my
son by helping him get the maximum amount of signal about his own
talents, interests, and options from each experience. I hope that will help
guide him to good match quality, broaden his toolbox en route, and form a
habit of regular reflection reminiscent of the dark horses from chapter 7,
who repeatedly say to themselves: “Here’s who I am at the moment, here
are my motivations, here’s what I’ve found I like to do, here’s what I’d like
to learn, and here are the opportunities. Which of these is the best match
right now? And maybe a year from now I’ll switch because I’ll find
something better.”
Shortly after Range came out, Ruth Brennan Morrey—a former college
soccer captain, pro triathlete, Olympic Trials marathon qualifier, and
psychology PhD—tagged me in an apt tweet: “Listening to @DavidEpstein
Range in the car with twelve-year-old daughter. ‘Mom, why do we make
“What I want to be when I grow up” signs on the first day of school? We

should make “Top 5 things I want to learn about this year” signs.’ Smart
cookie. :-)” I think I’ll borrow the twelve-year-old’s idea.
Ultimately, I think the idea of helping individuals get the maximum
match quality signal from each zig and zag is a good model, whether one is
“managing” kids, mentees, teammates, employees, or, as management
scholar Peter Drucker put it twenty years ago in a prophetic Harvard
Business Review article, “managing oneself.” The summary atop the article
—which predicts that workers would increasingly have longer and
multifaceted careers—reads: “Success in the knowledge economy comes to
those who know themselves—their strengths, their values, and how they
best perform.”
That is often easier said than done. One of the most common questions I
received after the hardcover publication of Range came from people who
viewed themselves as latecomers or generalists; the refrain was that they
believe employers will view their varied background as a liability, so they
downplay it. They would ask me how to make it a selling point, or at least
not a liability.
I get it. Weeks before publication, I had the honor of participating for the
second time on the final selection committee for the Pat Tillman
Foundation, which awards scholarships to veterans to aid professional
development and career changes. I was hyperconscious of the fact that
when I began reviewing an application by perusing the candidate’s résumé,
my first, reflexive impression was sometimes that they appeared a bit
scattered. But then I would delve more deeply into their journey, and what
appeared scattered at first blush became something completely different.
Let’s say a hypothetical candidate started work after high school or college.
They didn’t feel fulfilled, so they joined the military. Once enlisted, they
ended up doing something other than what they expected—say, organizing
medical care for citizens of a remote village in another country—and during
that time they learned something about international relations, or about
bureaucratic dysfunction, or about the administration of public health
initiatives. Meanwhile, they also learned they were good (or not so good) at
and interested in things they had not expected, and they returned to civilian
life with new ideas about a field to enter or a business to start. Viewed
holistically, what initially looked scattered on a résumé morphed into a

journey in which the traveler was responding to lived experience with
changes of direction, rather than continuing down an initial path just
because they started there. In my experience with the foundation, applicants
who win a scholarship are often those who explain a varied path—including
stops along the way that sometimes seem far afield—as a series of lessons
and subsequent pivots. I think that is a good strategy to keep in mind: rather
than hiding diverse experience, explain it.
People who told me that they downplayed their broad backgrounds
worried that their online résumés would not serve them well. I think that’s a
valid concern, and a shame if it holds them back. LinkedIn is the most
popular résumé database, and the site’s own research has found that one of
the strongest predictors of who will eventually become an executive is the
number of different job functions an individual has worked across. Based
on that analysis, LinkedIn’s principal economist, Guy Berger, gave
straightforward advice: “My recommendation for those of you who want to
become executives is to work across as many job functions as possible.”
Executives with more varied careers have also been found to be “more
likely to have novel strategies . . . which is key to a sustainable competitive
advantage,” according to Gina Dokko, a professor at the University of
California-Davis Graduate School of Management. “Research has
established pretty firmly that diverse groups of people are better at
innovation and problem solving, but more recent research is finding that
diverse career histories within a single person can also benefit
performance.”
Plus, career-path swerves are now common. Separate LinkedIn research
found that nearly half of professionals who switch jobs move to a different
industry—up about 10 percent from a decade ago—and 60 percent move to
a completely new job function. So perhaps it would be a good idea for sites
that host résumés, and organizations that review them, to include some
function that allows users the chance to share their résumé as a narrative
journey in which they can explain the lessons of their zigs and zags, rather
than just list them as bullet points. In my mind, a system that leads people
to downplay previous experiences, as if they were entirely wasted, is a
counterproductive one. We shouldn’t be ashamed of broad experience, or of
needing time to find match quality. Take it from Angela Duckworth, the
researcher whose work popularized the psychological construct of “grit.”

Two days before Range was published, an edition of Duckworth’s weekly
email was titled, “Summer is for Sampling.” “Many parents ask me for
advice on how to get their kids to stick to one thing for years and years like
the paragons of grit I study,” Duckworth wrote. “I can empathize. In the
decade of adult life it took me to commit to becoming a psychologist, I was
desperate for direction to match my determination.”
Duckworth added that it is neither======================================================== technology” concept to be
approved for the Game Boy. “It was difficult to get Nintendo to
understand,” he said later. Yokoi was convinced, though, that if users were
drawn into the games, technological power would be an afterthought. “If
you draw two circles on a blackboard, and say, ‘That’s a snowman,’
everyone who sees it will sense the white color of the snow,” he argued.
When the Game Boy was released, Yokoi’s colleague came to him “with
a grim expression on his face,” Yokoi recalled, and reported that a
competitor handheld had hit the market. Yokoi asked him if it had a color
screen. The man said that it did. “Then we’re fine,” Yokoi replied.
Yokoi’s strategy of finding novel uses for technology, after others had
moved on, smacks of exactly what a well-known psychological creativity
exercise asks for. In the Unusual (or Alternative) Uses Task, test takers have
to come up with original uses for an object. Given the prompt “brick,” a test
taker will generate familiar uses first (part of a wall, a doorstop, a weapon).
To score higher, they have to generate uses that are conceptually distant and
rarely given by other test takers, but still feasible. For the brick: a
paperweight; a nutcracker; a theatrical coffin at a doll’s funeral; a water
displacement device dropped in a toilet tank to use less per flush. (In 2015,
Ad Age awarded “Pro Bono Campaign of the Year” to the cheeky lateral
thinkers of the “Drop-A-Brick” project, which manufactured rubber bricks
for use in California toilets during a drought.)

There is, to be sure, no comprehensive theory of creativity. But there is a
well-documented tendency people have to consider only familiar uses for
objects, an instinct known as functional fixedness. The most famous
example is the “candle problem,” in which participants are given a candle, a
box of tacks, and a book of matches and told to attach the candle to the wall
such that wax doesn’t drip on the table below. Solvers try to melt the candle
to the wall or tack it up somehow, neither of which work. When the
problem is presented with the tacks outside of their box, solvers are more
likely to view the empty box as a potential candle holder, and to solve the
problem by tacking it to the wall and placing the candle inside. For Yokoi,
the tacks were always outside the box.
Unquestionably, Yokoi needed narrow specialists. The first true electrical
engineer Nintendo hired was Satoru Okada, who said bluntly, “Electronics
was not Yokoi’s strong point.” Okada was Yokoi’s codesigner on the Game
& Watch and Game Boy. “I handled more of the internal systems of the
machine,” he recalled, “with Yokoi handling more of the design and
interface aspects.” Okada was the Steve Wozniak to Yokoi’s Steve Jobs.
Yokoi was the first to admit it. “I don’t have any particular specialist
skills,” he once said. “I have a sort of vague knowledge of everything.” He
advised young employees not just to play with technology for its own sake,
but to play with ideas. Do not be an engineer, he said, be a producer. “The
producer knows that there’s such a thing as a semiconductor, but doesn’t
need to know its inner workings. . . . That can be left to the experts.” He
argued, “Everyone takes the approach of learning detailed, complex skills.
If no one did this then there wouldn’t be people who shine as engineers. . . .
Looking at me, from the engineer’s perspective, it’s like, ‘Look at this
idiot,’ but once you’ve got a couple hit products under your belt, this word
‘idiot’ seems to slip away somewhere.”
He spread his philosophy as his team grew, and asked everyone to
consider alternate uses for old technology. He realized that he had been
fortunate to come to a playing card company rather than an established
electronic toymaker with entrenched solutions, so his ideas were not
thwarted because of his technical limitations. As the company grew, he
worried that young engineers would be too concerned about looking stupid
to share ideas for novel uses of old technology, so he began intentionally
blurting out crazy ideas at meetings to set the tone. “Once a young person

starts saying things like, ‘Well, it’s not really my place to say . . .’ then it’s
all over,” he said.
Tragically, Yokoi died in a traffic accident in 1997. But his philosophy
survived. In 2006, Nintendo’s president said that the Nintendo Wii was a
direct outgrowth of Yokoi’s doctrine. “If I can speak without fear of being
misunderstood,” the president explained, “I would like to say that Nintendo
is not producing next-generation game consoles.” The Wii used extremely
simple games and technology from a previous console, but motion-based
controls were a literal game changer. Given its basic hardware, the Wii was
criticized as not innovative. Harvard Business School professor Clayton
Christensen argued that it was actually the most important kind of
innovation, an “empowering innovation”—one that creates both new
customers and new jobs, like the rise of personal computers before it—
because it brought video games to an entirely new (often older) audience.
Nintendo “simply innovated in a different way,” Christensen and a
colleague wrote. “It understood that the barrier to new consumers using
video game systems was the complexity of game play, not the quality of
existing graphics.” Queen Elizabeth II of England made headlines when she
saw her grandson Prince William playing Wii Bowling and decided to get in
on the action herself.
Yokoi’s greatest failure came when he departed from his own design
tenets. One of his last Nintendo projects was the Virtual Boy, a gaming
headset that employed experimental technology. It relied on a processor that
produced high radio emissions, and before cell phones, no one knew if that
was safe so close to a user’s head. A metal plate had to be constructed
around the processor, which in turn made the unit too heavy to work as
goggles. It was transformed into a device that sat on a table and required the
user to assume an unnatural posture to see the screen. It was ahead of its
time, but nobody bought it.
Yokoi’s greatest triumphs occurred when he thought laterally. He needed
specialists, but his concern was that as companies grew and technology
progressed, vertical-thinking hyperspecialists would continue to be valued
but lateral-thinking generalists would not. “The shortcut [for a lack of
ideas] is competition in the realm of computing power,” Yokoi explained.
“When it comes to that . . . the screen manufacturers and expert graphics
designers come out on top. Then Nintendo’s reason for existence

disappears.” He felt that the lateral and vertical thinkers were best together,
even in highly technical fields.
Eminent physicist and mathematician Freeman Dyson styled it this way:
we need both focused frogs and visionary birds. “Birds fly high in the air
and survey broad vistas of mathematics out to the far horizon,” Dyson
wrote in 2009. “They delight in concepts that unify our thinking and bring
together diverse problems from different parts of the landscape. Frogs live
in the mud below and see only the flowers that grow nearby. They delight in
the details of particular objects, and they solve problems one at a time.” As
a mathematician, Dyson labeled himself a frog, but contended, “It is stupid
to claim that birds are better than frogs because they see farther, or that
frogs are better than birds because they see deeper.” The world, he wrote, is
both broad and deep. “We need birds and frogs working together to explore
it.” Dyson’s concern was that science is increasingly overflowing with
frogs, trained only in a narrow specialty and unable to change as science
itself does. “This is a hazardous situation,” he warned, “for the young
people and also for the future of science.”
Fortunately, it is possible, even today, even at the cutting edge, even in
the most hyperspecialized specialties, to cultivate land where both birds and
frogs can thrive.
Andy Ouderkirk laughed as he recalled the story. “It was with three
gentlemen who owned the company, and I’ll just forever remember them
holding up a vial and just looking at me and saying, ‘This is a breakthrough
in glitter.’”
Standard glitter sparkles; this glitter blazed, as if the vial held a colony of
magical prismatic fireflies. Ouderkirk envisioned a lot of applications for
multilayer optical film, but glitter was a pleasant surprise. “Here I am, a
physical chemist,” he told me. “I usually think of breakthroughs as being
very sophisticated advanced technologies.”
Ouderkirk was an inventor at Minnesota-based 3M, one of twenty-eight
“corporate scientists,” the highest title among the company’s sixty-five
hundred scientists and engineers. The road to breakthrough glitter began
when he endeavored to challenge the conception of a two-hundred-year-old
principle of physics known as Brewster’s law, which had been interpreted to
mean that no surface could reflect light near perfectly at every angle.

Ouderkirk wondered if layering many thin plastic surfaces on top of one
another, each with distinct optical qualities, could create a film that custom-
reflected and -refracted various wavelengths of light in all directions. A
group of optics specialists he consulted assured him it could not be done,
which was exactly what he wanted to hear. “If they say, ‘It’s a great idea, go
for it, makes sense,’ what is the chance you’re the first person to come up
with it? Precisely zero,” he told me.
In fact, he was certain it was physically possible. Mother Nature offered
proof of concept. The iridescent blue morpho butterfly has no blue pigment
whatsoever; its wings glow azure and sapphire from thin layers of scales
that refract and reflect particular wavelengths of blue light. There were
more pedestrian examples too. The plastic of a water bottle refracts light
differently depending on the light’s angle. “Everybody knows this, that
knows anything about polymers,” Ouderkirk said. “It’s in front of you
literally every day. But nobody ever======================================================== On Wednesday, he
performed so beautifully that the audience demanded an encore of all seven
movements. In 1998, alongside Sir Edmund Hillary, who with Tenzing
Norgay was the first to summit Mount Everest, Smith was awarded
Smithsonian’s Bicentennial Medal for outstanding cultural contributions.
Pianist Dave Brubeck earned the medal as well. His song “Take Five”
was chosen by NPR listeners as the quintessential jazz tune of all time.
Brubeck’s mother tried to teach him piano, but he refused to follow
instructions. He was born cross-eyed, and his childhood reluctance was
related to his inability to see the musical notation. His mother gave up, but
he listened when she taught others and tried to imitate. Brubeck still could
not read music when he dropped out of veterinary premed at the College of
the Pacific and walked across the lawn to the music department, but he was
a masterful faker. He put off studying piano for instruments that would
more easily allow him to improvise his way through exercises. Senior year,
he could hide no longer. “I got a wonderful piano teacher,” he recalled,
“who figured out I couldn’t read in about five minutes.” The dean informed
Brubeck that he could not graduate and furthermore was a disgrace to the
conservatory. Another teacher who had noticed his creativity stuck up for
him, and the dean cut a deal. Brubeck was allowed to graduate on the
condition that he promise never to embarrass the institution by teaching.

Twenty years later, the college apparently felt it had sufficiently escaped
embarrassment, and awarded him an honorary doctorate.
Perhaps the greatest improv master of all could not read, period—words
or music. Django Reinhardt was born in Belgium in 1910, in a Romani
caravan. His early childhood talents were chicken stealing and trout tickling
—feeling along a riverbank for fish and rubbing their bellies until they
relaxed and could be tossed ashore. Django grew up outside Paris in an area
called la Zone, where the city’s cesspool cleaners unloaded waste each
night. His mother, Négros, was too busy supporting the family making
bracelets out of spent artillery shell casings she gathered from a World War
I battlefield to lord over anyone’s music practice. Django went to school if
he felt like it, but he mostly didn’t. He crashed movie theaters and shot
billiards, and was surrounded by music. Wherever Romani gathered, there
were banjos, harps, pianos, and especially violins.
The violin’s portability made it the classic Romani instrument, and
Django started there, but he didn’t love it. He learned in the call-and-
response style. An adult would play a section of music and he would try to
copy it. When he was twelve, an acquaintance gave him a hybrid banjo-
guitar. He had found his thing, and became obsessed. He experimented with
different objects as picks when his fingers needed a break: spoons, sewing
thimbles, coins, a piece of whalebone. He teamed up with a banjo-playing
hunchback named Lagardère, and they wandered the Paris streets, busking
and improvising duets.
In his mid teens, Django was at a restaurant in Paris where the city’s
accordionists had gathered. He and his banjo-guitar were asked to the stage
to play for the other musicians. Django launched into a polka that was
known as a skill-proving piece for accordionists because it was so hard to
play. When he finished the traditional form, rather than stopping he
careened into a series of lightning improvisations, bending and twisting the
song into creations none of the veteran musicians had ever heard. Django
was playing “with a drawn knife,” as the lingo went. He was looking for a
fight by warping a sacred dancehall tune, but he was so original that he got
away with it. His creativity was unbound. “I wonder if, in his younger
days,” one of his music partners said, “he even knew that printed music
existed.” Django would soon need all the versatility he had learned.
He was eighteen when a candle in his wagon ignited a batch of celluloid
flowers that his wife, Bella, had fashioned for a funeral. The wagon

exploded into an inferno. Django was burned over half his body and ended
up bedridden for a year and a half. For the rest of his life the pinkie and ring
finger of his left hand, his fret hand, were dangling flesh, useless on the
strings. Django was used to improvising. Like Pelegrina of the figlie del
coro when she lost her teeth, he pivoted. He taught himself how to play
chords with a thumb and two fingers. His left hand had to sprint up and
down the neck of his guitar, the index and middle finger flitting waterbug-
like over the strings. He re-emerged with a new way of handling the
instrument, and his creativity erupted.
With a French violinist, Django fused dancehall musette with jazz and
invented a new form of improvisational music that defied easy
characterization, so it was just called “Gypsy jazz.” Some of his
spontaneous compositions became “standards,” pieces that enter the canon
from which other musicians improvise. He revolutionized the now-familiar
virtuosic guitar solo that pervaded the next generation’s music, from Jimi
Hendrix, who kept an album of Django’s recordings and named one of his
groups Band of Gypsys, to Prince ( self-taught, played more than a half-
dozen different genres of instruments on his debut album). Long before
Hendrix melted “The Star-Spangled Banner” into his own wondrous
creation, Django did it with the French national anthem, “La Marseillaise.”
Even though he never learned to read music (or words—a fellow
musician had to teach him to sign his autograph for fans), Django composed
a symphony, playing on his guitar what he wanted each instrument in the
ensemble to do while another musician struggled to transcribe it.
He died of a brain hemorrhage at forty-three, but music he made nearly a
century ago continues to show up in pop culture, including Hollywood
blockbusters like The Matrix and The Aviator, and in the hit BioShock video
games. The author of The Making of Jazz anointed the man who could
neither read music nor study it with the traditional fingerings “without
question, the single most important guitarist in the history of jazz.”
Cecchini has bushy eyebrows and a beard that parts and closes quickly like
ruffled shrubbery when he talks excitedly. Like now: he’s talking Django,
and he’s a huge fan. He used to have a black poodle named Django. He
opens a sepia-toned YouTube clip and whispers conspiratorially, “Watch
this.”

There is Django, bow tie, pencil mustache, and slicked-back hair. The
two useless fingers on his left hand are tucked into a claw. Suddenly, the
hand shoots all the way up the guitar neck, and then all the way back down,
firing a rapid succession of notes. “That’s amazing!” Cecchini says. “The
synchronization between the left and right hand is phenomenal.”
The strict deliberate practice school describes useful training as focused
consciously on error correction. But the most comprehensive examination
of development in improvisational forms, by Duke University professor
Paul Berliner, described the childhoods of professionals as “one of
osmosis,” not formal instruction. “Most explored the band room’s diverse
options as a prelude to selecting an instrument of specialization,” he wrote.
“It was not uncommon for youngsters to develop skills on a variety of
instruments.” Berliner added that aspiring improvisational musicians
“whose educational background has fostered a fundamental dependence on
[formal] teachers must adopt new approaches to learning.” A number of
musicians recounted
Brubeck-like scenarios to Berliner, the time a teacher found out that they
could not read music but had become adept enough at imitation and
improvisation that “they had simply pretended to follow the notation.”
Berliner relayed the advice of professional musicians to a young
improvisational learner as “not to think about playing—just play. ”
While I was sitting with Cecchini, he reeled off an impressive
improvisation. I asked him to repeat it so I could record it. “I couldn’t play
that again if you put a gun to my head,” he said. Charles Limb, a musician,
hearing specialist, and auditory surgeon at the University of California, San
Francisco, designed an iron-free keyboard so that jazz musicians could
improvise while inside an MRI scanner. Limb saw that brain areas
associated with focused attention, inhibition, and self-censoring turned
down when the musicians were creating. “It’s almost as if the brain turned
off its own ability to criticize itself,” he told National Geographic. While
improvising, musicians do pretty much the opposite of consciously
identifying errors and stopping to correct them.
Improv masters learn like babies: dive in and imitate and improvise first,
learn the formal rules later. “At the beginning, your mom didn’t give you a
book and say, ‘This is a noun, this is a pronoun, this is a dangling
participle,’” Cecchini told me. “You acquired the sound first. And then you
acquire the grammar later.”

Django Reinhardt was once in a taxi with Les Paul, inventor of the solid-
body electric guitar. Paul was a self-taught musician, and the only person in
both the Rock and Roll and National Inventors halls of fame. Reinhardt
tapped Paul on the shoulder and asked if he could read music. “I said no, I
didn’t,” Paul recounted, “and he laughed till he was crying and said, ‘Well, I
can’t read either. I don’t even know what a C is; I just play them.’”
Cecchini told me that he was regularly stunned when he would ask an
exceptional jazz performer onstage to play a certain note, and find the
musician could not understand him. “It’s an old joke among jazz
musicians,” Cecchini said. “You ask, ‘Can you read music?’ And the guy
says, ‘Not enough to hurt my playing.’” There is truth in the joke. Cecchini
has taught musicians who played professionally for the Chicago Symphony,
which in 2015 was rated as the top orchestra in the country and fifth in the
world by a panel of critics.======================================================== proxy for population effects, particularly over a
single decade. The variable that both men were certain would vindicate
their worldviews actually had little to do with them. Commodity prices
waxed and waned with macroeconomic cycles, and a recession during the
bet brought the prices down. Ehrlich and Simon might as well have flipped
a coin and both declared victory.
Both men dug in. Each declared his faith in science and the undisputed
primacy of facts. And each continued to miss the value of the other’s ideas.
Ehrlich was wrong about population (and the apocalypse), but right on
aspects of environmental degradation. Simon was right about the influence
of human ingenuity on the food and energy supply, but wrong in claiming
that improvements in air and water quality also vindicated his predictions.
Ironically, those improvements failed to arise naturally from technological
initiative and markets, and rather were bolstered through regulations
pressed by Ehrlich and others.
Ideally, intellectual sparring partners “hone each other’s arguments so
that they are sharper and better,” Yale historian Paul Sabin wrote. “The
opposite happened with Paul Ehrlich and Julian Simon.” As each man

amassed more information for his own view, each became more dogmatic,
and the inadequacies in their models of the world more stark.
There is a particular kind of thinker, one who becomes more entrenched
in their single big idea about how the world works even in the face of
contrary facts, whose predictions become worse, not better, as they amass
information for their mental representation of the world. They are on
television and in the news every day, making worse and worse predictions
while claiming victory, and they have been rigorously studied.
It started at the 1984 meeting of the National Research Council’s committee
on American-Soviet relations. Newly tenured psychologist and political
scientist Philip Tetlock was thirty years old, by far the most junior
committee member. He listened intently as members discussed Soviet
intentions and American policies. Renowned experts confidently delivered
authoritative predictions, and Tetlock was struck by the fact that they were
often perfectly contradictory to one another, and impervious to
counterarguments.
Tetlock decided to put expert predictions to the test. With the Cold War in
full swing, he began a study to collect short-and long-term forecasts from
284 highly educated experts (most had doctorates) who averaged more than
twelve years of experience in their specialties. The questions covered
international politics and economics, and in order to make sure the
predictions were concrete, the experts had to give specific probabilities of
future events. Tetlock had to collect enough predictions over enough time
that he could separate lucky and unlucky streaks from true skill. The project
lasted twenty years, and comprised 82,361 probability estimates about the
future. The results limned a very wicked world.
The average expert was a horrific forecaster. Their areas of specialty,
years of experience, academic degrees, and even (for some) access to
classified information made no difference. They were bad at short-term
forecasting, bad at long-term forecasting, and bad at forecasting in every
domain. When experts declared that some future event was impossible or
nearly impossible, it nonetheless occurred 15 percent of the time. When
they declared a sure thing, it failed to transpire more than one-quarter of the
time. The Danish proverb that warns “It is difficult to make predictions,
especially about the future,” was right. Dilettantes who were pitted against

the experts were no more clairvoyant, but at least they were less likely to
call future events either impossible or sure things, leaving them with fewer
laugh-out-loud errors to atone for—if, that was, the experts had believed in
atonement.
Many experts never admitted systematic flaws in their judgment, even in
the face of their results. When they succeeded, it was completely on their
own merits—their expertise clearly enabled them to figure out the world.
When they missed wildly, it was always a near miss; they had certainly
understood the situation, they insisted, and if just one little thing had gone
differently, they would have nailed it. Or, like Ehrlich, their understanding
was correct; the timeline was just a bit off. Victories were total victories,
and defeats were always just a touch of bad luck away from having been
victories too. Experts remained undefeated while losing constantly. “There
is often a curiously inverse relationship,” Tetlock concluded, “between how
well forecasters thought they were doing and how well they did.”
There was also a “perverse inverse relationship” between fame and
accuracy. The more likely an expert was to have his or her predictions
featured on op-ed pages and television, the more likely they were always
wrong. Or, not always wrong. Rather, as Tetlock and his coauthor succinctly
put it in their book Superforecasting, “roughly as accurate as a dart-
throwing chimpanzee.”
Early predictions in Tetlock’s research pertained to the future of the
Soviet Union. There were experts (usually liberal) who saw Mikhail
Gorbachev as an earnest reformer who would be able to change the Soviet
Union and keep it intact for a while, and experts (usually conservative) who
felt that the Soviet Union was immune to reform, ruinous by its very nature,
and losing legitimacy. Both sides were partly right and partly wrong.
Gorbachev did bring real reform, opening the Soviet Union to the world and
empowering citizens. But those reforms uncorked bottled-up forces in the
republics outside of Russia, where the system had lost legitimacy. Starting
with Estonia declaring its sovereignty, the forces blew the Soviet Union
apart. Both camps of experts were completely taken by surprise at the swift
end of the USSR, and their predictions about the course of events were
terrible. There was, however, one subgroup within the experts that managed
to see more of what was coming.
Unlike Ehrlich and Simon, they were not vested in a single approach.
They were able to take from each argument and integrate apparently

contradictory worldviews. They agreed that Gorbachev was a real reformer,
and that the Soviet Union had lost legitimacy outside of Russia. Some of
those integrators actually foresaw that the end of the Soviet Union was
close at hand, and that real reforms would be the catalyst.
The integrators outperformed their colleagues on pretty much everything,
but they especially trounced them on long-term predictions. Eventually,
Tetlock conferred nicknames (borrowed from philosopher Isaiah Berlin)
that became famous throughout the psychology and intelligence-gathering
communities: the narrow-view hedgehogs, who “know one big thing,” and
the integrator foxes, who “know many little things.”
Hedgehog experts were deep but narrow. Some had spent their careers
studying a single problem. Like Ehrlich and Simon, they fashioned tidy
theories of how the world works through the single lens of their specialty,
and then bent every event to fit them. The hedgehogs, according to Tetlock,
“toil devotedly” within one tradition of their specialty, “and reach for
formulaic solutions to ill-defined problems.” Outcomes did not matter; they
were proven right by both successes and failures, and burrowed further into
their ideas. It made them outstanding at predicting the past, but dart-
throwing chimps at predicting the future. The foxes, meanwhile, “draw
from an eclectic array of traditions, and accept ambiguity and
contradiction,” Tetlock wrote. Where hedgehogs represented narrowness,
foxes ranged outside a single discipline or theory and embodied breadth.
Incredibly, the hedgehogs performed especially poorly on long-term
predictions within their domain of expertise. They actually got worse as
they accumulated credentials and experience in their field. The more
information they had to work with, the more they could fit any story to their
worldview. This did give hedgehogs one conspicuous advantage. Viewing
every world event through their preferred keyhole made it easy to fashion
compelling stories about anything that occurred, and to tell the stories with
adamant authority. In other words, they make great TV .
Tetlock is clearly a fox. He is a professor at Penn, and when I visited his
home in Philadelphia I was enveloped in a casual conversation about
politics he was having with colleagues, including his wife and collaborator,
Barbara Mellers, also a psychologist and eminent scholar of decision
making. Tetlock would start in one direction, then interrogate himself and

make an about-face. He drew on economics, political science, and history to
make one quick point about a current debate in psychology, and then
stopped on a dime and noted, “But if your assumptions about human nature
and how a good society needs to be structured are different, you would see
this completely differently.” When a new idea entered the conversation, he
was quick with “Let’s say for the sake of argument,” which led to him
playing out viewpoints from different disciplines or political or emotional
perspectives. He tried on ideas like Instagram filters until it was hard to tell
which he actually believed.
In 2005, he published the results of his long study of expert judgment,
and they caught the attention of the Intelligence Advanced Research
Projects Activity (IARPA), a government organization that supports
research on the U.S. intelligence community’s most difficult challenges. In
2011, IARPA launched a four-year prediction tournament in which five
researcher-led teams competed. Each team could recruit, train, and
experiment however it saw fit. Every day for four years, predictions were
due at 9 a.m. Eastern time. The questions were hard. What is the chance that
a member will withdraw from the European Union by a target date? Will
the Nikkei close above 9,500? What is the likelihood======================================================== engine fails on national TV, the team will

lose the oil sponsorship, kiss Goodstone goodbye, and go back to square
one, or perhaps out of business. So: race, or don’t race?
The group begins with a vote. Three students vote to race, four to sit it
out. Now the debate begins.
Even with the engine failures, Jake says, the team has a 50 percent
chance of its biggest triumph. The upside of the Goodstone sponsorship is
much more money than the team stands to lose if the engine fails and the
existing sponsors walk. If Carter Racing withdraws, an excellent season
ends with debt, “which, as we all know, is not a sustainable business
model.”
“I just don’t think they can afford not to race,” Justin says.
Alexander agrees, and addresses the dissenters: “What’s going to change
going forward to convince you that now you’re ready?” he asks.
Mei, wearing a Harvard hoodie and sitting across the circle, has a
calculation to share. “To me, the risk of not racing is about one-third of the
downside of [another engine failure],” she says. She adds that she’s
focusing on loss mitigation, and does not want to race.
The case study says that at the last minute, the team owner, BJ Carter,
called his mechanics. Pat, the engine mechanic, dropped out of high school
and has no sophisticated engineering training, but he has a decade of race
experience. Temperature could be the issue, he suggested. When the
turbocharger warms up on a cool day, engine components might expand at
different rates and set up failure of the head gasket, a metal seal in the
engine. Pat admitted that each engine failure looked different, but all seven
had breaks in the head gasket. (Two of the engine failures had multiple
breaks in the gasket.) He didn’t know what was going on, but couldn’t think
of anything else on short notice. He was still hyped to race, and jubilant
about the new Goodstone uniforms. At 40 degrees, it is the coldest race day
of the season. Robin, the chief mechanic, endorsed Pat’s idea to look at the
temperature data. He plotted it on a graph, but saw no correlation:

Dmitry, his black hair flopped to one side, is firmly against racing. He
agrees that there is no apparent linear relationship between gasket failure
and temperature; three gasket breaks occurred on the coolest race day (53
degrees), and two on one of the hottest days (75 degrees). But what if there
is an optimal range for the engine, not too cold and not too hot? “If the
failures are random, the probability that you both finish and get in the top
five is 50 percent,” Dmitry says. “But if it’s not random, the probability is
lower. This day is a very, very low temperature that they haven’t
experienced before. We don’t know if there’s a correlation with
temperature, but if there is, it’s like a sure thing that it fails.”
Julia thinks mechanic Pat’s temperature idea is “nonsense,” but like
Dmitry views the engine problem as a black box that does not give the team
any information to calculate probability for today’s race. She acknowledges
that she’s being risk averse, and would personally never get involved in car
racing at all.
Except for Dmitry, the group agrees that there is “zero correlation at all,”
as Alexander puts it, between temperature and engine failure. “Am I the
only one?” Dmitry asks, to a few giggles.
Jake is particularly unimpressed with engine mechanic Pat’s reasoning. “I
think Pat’s a really good mechanic,” he says. “I don’t think he’s a really
good root cause analysis engineer, and those are two very different things.”
Jake thinks Pat is falling prey to a well-known cognitive bias,
overemphasizing the importance of a single, dramatic memory—the three
gasket breaks on a cool day. “We don’t even have the information to

understand this graph,” Jake says. “There’s twenty-four races, right? How
many of those were around 53 degrees and didn’t break? I don’t mean to
attack your point,” he says to Dmitry, smiling and giving him a friendly tap
on the hand.
Everyone agrees it would be nice to have temperature data from the races
with no engine problems, but that they’re stuck with what they have. Justin
speaks for the entire pro-race side when he says, “I just think you’ve gotta
race, because that’s what you’re in this business to do.”
It seems that the group will finish where they started, voting not to race,
until Mei takes another look at her calculations. “I’ve actually changed my
mind,” she announces. “I’m voting for yes, race.” Comparing the potential
financial upside and downside, Mei calculated that Carter Racing needs just
a 26 percent chance of finishing in the top five—half their current rate—to
make racing a smart bet. Even if the cool temperature changes the odds, “it
won’t decrease it to 26 percent, so we are still safe.” She thinks Dmitry’s
read of the data is biased; Carter Racing has competed at temperatures from
53 to 82 degrees, with four engine failures below 65 and three above.
Dmitry is giving too much credence, Mei says, to the 53-degree data point
because it involved three gasket breaks. It’s still just one engine failure.
Jake jumps in and says that group members are seeing whatever they
want in the temperature chart, so “maybe we table that debate.” He likes
Mei’s expected value argument. “I think that’s one concrete thing we can go
with, in terms of it’s always good to base things on math. . . . If you told me
to flip a coin, and if I lose the flip I lose $100 but if I win I get $200, I flip
that coin every time.” He reminds the group that Carter Racing used a new
engine-prep procedure for the last two races, with no problems. “That’s a
small data point,” he says, “but at least it’s in the right direction for my
argument.”
Mei turns to Dmitry. “What is the temperature you feel comfortable to
race?” she asks. “We have two engine failures at 70, one at 63, and one at
53. There’s no temperature that’s safe for us.”
Dmitry wants to set limits at exactly the temperatures they have already
experienced. Something is not functioning as expected, so anything outside
that temperature range is unknown territory. He knows his recommendation
comes off as extremely arbitrary.
The group moves to a final tally. With Mei’s conversion, it’s four to
three, they’re racing. The students continue to chat as they stuff the case

study papers into their backpacks and messenger bags.
Martina quickly reads aloud a part of the case study where team owner
BJ Carter asked his chief mechanic, Robin, for his opinion. “The drivers
have their lives on the line, I have a career that hangs on every race, and
you have every dime tied up in the business,” Robin told him. Nobody ever
won a race sitting in the pits, he reminded his boss.
Martina has one last question. “This is just about money, right? We’re not
going to kill anyone if we race, are we? ”
A few of the group members look around and laugh, and then they go
their separate ways.
When the students arrive in class the next day, they learn that most student
groups around the world who have ever been assigned the Carter Racing
case chose to race. The professor goes around the room, interrogating their
logic for racing or withdrawing.
Teams that decided to race discuss their probability estimates and
decision trees. Students are split on whether mid-race engine failure will
endanger the driver. A majority of students think the temperature data is a
red herring. Heads nod when one woman says, “If we want to make
something of ourselves in the business of racing, this is the kind of risk we
need to take.” Her team was unanimous, 7–0, for race.
Dmitry objects, and the professor grills him ruthlessly. Dmitry contends
that every probability decision tree that every group posits is irrelevant if
you drop the assumption that engine failures are randomly distributed. He
adds that the data are particularly ambiguous because for some reason the
chief mechanic didn’t plot the race temperatures when the engine didn’t
fail.
“Okay, so, Dmitry, here comes a quantitative question,” the professor
says. “How many times did I say yesterday if you want additional
information let me know?” Muffled gasps spread across the room. “Four
times,” the professor answers himself. “Four times I said if you want
additional information let me know.” Not one student asked for the missing
data. The professor puts up a new graph, with every race plotted. It looks
something like this:

Every single race below 65 degrees had an engine failure. The professor
then labels every race either a fail or not fail, and with that binary division
runs a simple statistical analysis, familiar to the students, known as a
logistic regression. He informs the students that there is a 99.4 percent
probability of engine failure at 40 degrees. “Do we have any remaining fans
of racing?” he asks. And now he has another surprise.
The temperature and engine failure data are taken exactly from NASA’s
tragic decision to launch the space shuttle Challenger, with the details
placed in the context of racing rather than space exploration. Jake’s face
goes blank. Rather than a broken gasket, Challenger had failed O-rings—
the rubber strips that sealed joints along the outer wall of the missile-like
rocket boosters that propelled the shuttle. Cool temperatures caused O-ring
rubber to harden, making them less effective seals.
The characters in the case study are loosely based on managers and
engineers at NASA and its rocket-booster contractor, Morton Thiokol, on an
emergency conference call the night before the Challenger launch. Weather
reports on January 27, 1986, predicted unusually cool Florida weather for
launch. After the conference call, NASA and Thiokol gave the okay to
proceed. On January 28, O-rings failed to properly seal a joint in the wall of
a rocket booster. Burning gas shot right through the joint to the outside, and
Challenger exploded seventy-three seconds into its mission. All seven crew
members were killed.
The Carter Racing case study worked exquisitely. It was eerie how
precisely======================================================== tactical prowess were
combined with human big-picture, strategic thinking?
In 1998, he helped organize the first “advanced chess” tournament, in
which each human player, including Kasparov himself, paired with a
computer. Years of pattern study were obviated. The machine partner could
handle tactics so the human could focus on strategy. It was like Tiger
Woods facing off in a golf video game against the best gamers. His years of
repetition would be neutralized, and the contest would shift to one of
strategy rather than tactical execution. In chess, it changed the pecking
order instantly. “Human creativity was even more paramount under these
conditions, not less,” according to Kasparov. Kasparov settled for a 3–3
draw with a player he had trounced four games to zero just a month earlier
in a traditional match. “My advantage in calculating tactics had been
nullified by the machine.” The primary benefit of years of experience with
specialized training was outsourced, and in a contest where humans focused
on strategy, he suddenly had peers.
A few years later, the first “freestyle chess” tournament was held. Teams
could be made up of multiple humans and computers. The lifetime-of-
specialized-practice advantage that had been diluted in advanced chess was
obliterated in freestyle. A duo of amateur players with three normal
computers not only destroyed Hydra, the best chess supercomputer, they
also crushed teams of grandmasters using computers. Kasparov concluded
that the humans on the winning team were the best at “coaching” multiple
computers on what to examine, and then synthesizing that information for
an overall strategy. Human/Computer combo teams—known as
“centaurs”—were playing the highest level of chess ever seen. If Deep

Blue’s victory over Kasparov signaled the transfer of chess power from
humans to computers, the victory of centaurs over Hydra symbolized
something more interesting still: humans empowered to do what they do
best without the prerequisite of years of specialized pattern recognition.
In 2014, an Abu Dhabi–based chess site put up $20,000 in prize money
for freestyle players to compete in a tournament that also included games in
which chess programs played without human intervention. The winning
team comprised four people and several computers. The captain and
primary decision maker was Anson Williams, a British engineer with no
official chess rating. His teammate, Nelson Hernandez, told me, “What
people don’t understand is that freestyle involves an integrated set of skills
that in some cases have nothing to do with playing chess.” In traditional
chess, Williams was probably at the level of a decent amateur. But he was
well versed in computers and adept at integrating streaming information for
strategy decisions. As a teenager, he had been outstanding at the video game
Command & Conquer, known as a “real time strategy” game because
players move simultaneously. In freestyle chess, he had to consider advice
from teammates and various chess programs and then very quickly direct
the computers to examine particular possibilities in more depth. He was like
an executive with a team of mega-grandmaster tactical advisers, deciding
whose advice to probe more deeply and ultimately whose to heed. He
played each game cautiously, expecting a draw, but trying to set up
situations that could lull an opponent into a mistake.
In the end, Kasparov did figure out a way to beat the computer: by
outsourcing tactics, the part of human expertise that is most easily replaced,
the part that he and the Polgar prodigies spent years honing.
In 2007, National Geographic TV gave Susan Polgar a test. They sat her at
a sidewalk table in the middle of a leafy block of Manhattan’s Greenwich
Village, in front of a cleared chessboard. New Yorkers in jeans and fall
jackets went about their jaywalking business as a white truck bearing a
large diagram of a chessboard with twenty-eight pieces in midgame play
took a left turn onto Thompson Street, past the deli, and past Susan Polgar.
She glanced at the diagram as the truck drove by, and then perfectly re-
created it on the board in front of her. The show was reprising a series of

famous chess experiments that pulled back the curtain on kind-learning-
environment skills.
The first took place in the 1940s, when Dutch chess master and
psychologist Adriaan de Groot flashed midgame chessboards in front of
players of different ability levels, and then asked them to re-create the
boards as well as they could. A grandmaster repeatedly re-created the entire
board after seeing it for only three seconds. A master-level player managed
that half as often as the grandmaster. A lesser, city champion player and an
average club player were never able to re-create the board accurately. Just
like Susan Polgar, grandmasters seemed to have photographic memories.
After Susan succeeded in her first test, National Geographic TV turned
the truck around to show the other side, which had a diagram with pieces
placed at random. When Susan saw that side, even though there were fewer
pieces, she could barely re-create anything at all.
That test reenacted an experiment from 1973, in which two Carnegie
Mellon University psychologists, William G. Chase and soon-to-be Nobel
laureate Herbert A. Simon, repeated the De Groot exercise, but added a
wrinkle. This time, the chess players were also given boards with the pieces
in an arrangement that would never actually occur in a game. Suddenly, the
experts performed just like the lesser players. The grandmasters never had
photographic memories after all. Through repetitive study of game patterns,
they had learned to do what Chase and Simon called “chunking.” Rather
than struggling to remember the location of every individual pawn, bishop,
and rook, the brains of elite players grouped pieces into a smaller number of
meaningful chunks based on familiar patterns. Those patterns allow expert
players to immediately assess the situation based on experience, which is
why Garry Kasparov told me that grandmasters usually know their move
within seconds. For Susan Polgar, when the van drove by the first time, the
diagram was not twenty-eight items, but five different meaningful chunks
that indicated how the game was progressing.
Chunking helps explain instances of apparently miraculous, domain-
specific memory, from musicians playing long pieces by heart to
quarterbacks recognizing patterns of players in a split second and making a
decision to throw. The reason that elite athletes seem to have superhuman
reflexes is that they recognize patterns of ball or body movements that tell
them what’s coming before it happens. When tested outside of their sport
context, their superhuman reactions disappear.

We all rely on chunking every day in skills in which we are expert. Take
ten seconds and try to memorize as many of these twenty words as you can:
Because groups twenty patterns
meaningful are words easier into chunk remember
really sentence familiar can to you much in a.
Okay, now try again:
Twenty words are really much easier to
remember in a meaningful sentence because
you can chunk familiar patterns into groups.
Those are the same twenty pieces of information, but over the course of
your life, you’ve learned patterns of words that allow you to instantly make
sense of the second arrangement, and to remember it much more easily.
Your restaurant server doesn’t just happen to have a miraculous memory;
like musicians and quarterbacks, they’ve learned to group recurring
information into chunks.
Studying an enormous number of repetitive patterns is so important in
chess that early specialization in technical practice is critical. Psychologists
Fernand Gobet (an international master) and Guillermo Campitelli (coach to
future grandmasters) found that the chances of a competitive chess player
reaching international master status (a level down from grandmaster)
dropped from one in four to one in fifty-five if rigorous training had not
begun by age twelve. Chunking can seem like magic, but it comes from
extensive, repetitive practice. Laszlo Polgar was right to believe in it. His
daughters don’t even constitute the most extreme evidence.
For more than fifty years, psychiatrist Darold Treffert studied savants,
individuals with an insatiable drive to practice in one domain, and ability in
that area that far outstrips their abilities in other areas. “Islands of genius,”
Treffert calls it. 
*
 Treffert documented the almost unbelievable feats of
savants like pianist Leslie Lemke, who can play thousands of songs from
memory. Because Lemke and other savants have seemingly limitless
retrieval capacity, Treffert initially attributed their abilities to perfect
memories; they are human tape recorders. Except, when they are tested
after hearing a piece of music for the first time, musical savants reproduce
“tonal” music—the genre of nearly all pop and most classical music—more
easily than “atonal” music, in which successive notes do not follow familiar
harmonic structures. If savants were human tape recorders playing notes

back, it would make no difference whether they were asked to re-create
music that follows popular rules of composition or not. But in practice, it
makes an enormous difference. In one study of a savant pianist, the
researcher, who had heard the man play hundreds of songs flawlessly, was
dumbstruck when the savant could not re-create an atonal piece even after a
practice session with it. “What I heard seemed so unlikely that I felt obliged
to check that the keyboard had not somehow slipped into transposing
mode,” the researcher recorded. “But he really had made a mistake, and the
errors continued.” Patterns and familiar structures were critical to the
savant’s extraordinary recall ability. Similarly, when artistic savants are
briefly shown pictures and asked to reproduce them, they do much better
with images of real-life objects than with more abstract depictions.
It took Treffert======================================================== discovery in his aptly titled Nobel
Lecture, “Random Walk to Graphene” (December 8, 2010). Among the cleverly titled lecture
sections: “Zombie Management,” “Better to Be Wrong Than Boring,” and “Legend of Scotch Tape.”
stronger than steel: C. Lee et al., “Measurement of the Elastic Properties and Intrinsic Strength of
Monolayer Graphene,” Science 321 (2008): 385–8.
Spiders fed graphene: E. Lepore et al., “Spider Silk Reinforced by Graphene or Carbon
Nanotubes,” 2D Materials 4, no. 3 (2017): 031013.
“sufficient scientific advance”: J. Colapinto, “Material Question,” The New Yorker, December 2014,
online ed.
“deliberate amateur”; “paradox of innovation”: Sarah Lewis’s fascinating book on creativity: The
Rise: Creativity, the Gift of Failure, and the Search for Mastery (New York: Simon & Schuster,
2014).
“It is rather unusual”: “U. Manchester’s Andre Geim: Sticking with Graphene—For Now,”
ScienceWatch newsletter interview, August 2008.
“never bother to ask”: Lewis, The Rise .
“principle of limited sloppiness”: Max Delbrück interviews with Carolyn Harding in 1978,
California Institute of Technology Oral History Project, 1979.
“seems to be wasting his life,”; “this flexibility”: E. Pain, “Sharing a Nobel Prize at 36,” Science,
online ed. career profiles, February 25, 2011.
“If this continues unabated”: A. Casadevall, “Crisis in Biomedical Sciences: Time for Reform?,”
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health Dean’s Lecture Series, February 21, 2017,
www.youtube.com/watch?v=05Sk-3u90Jo . See also: F. C. Fang et al., “Misconduct Accounts for the
Majority of Retracted Scientific Publications,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the USA 109, no. 42 (2012): 17028–33.
retraction-prone journal: “Why High-Profile Journals Have More Retractions,” Nature, online ed.,
September 17, 2014.
If a test to detect a disease: A. K. Manrai et al., “Medicine’s Uncomfortable Relationship with
Math,” JAMA Internal Medicine 174, no. 6 (2014): 991–93. The test is assumed to have perfect
sensitivity.
“The guild system in Europe arose”; growth industry of conferences: A. Casadevall and F. C.
Fang, “Specialized Science,” Infection and Immunity 82, no. 4 (2014): 1355–60.
biomedical research funding rose exponentially: A. Bowen and A. Casadevall, “Increasing
Disparities Between Resource Inputs and Outcome, as Measured by Certain Health Deliverables, in
Biomedical Research,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 112, no. 36
(2015): 11335–40.
Life expectancy . . . recently declined : J. Y. Ho and A. S. Hendi, “Recent Trends in Life
Expectancy Across High Income Countries,” BMJ (2018), 362:k2562.
researchers analyzed the networks: R. Guimerà et al., “Team Assembly Mechanisms Determine
Collaboration Network Structure and Team Performance,” Science 308 (2005): 697–702.
“The entire network looks different”: “Dream Teams Thrive on Mix of Old and New Blood,”
Northwestern Now, May 3, 2005.
The commercial fate of Broadway: B. Uzzi and J. Spiro, “Collaboration and Creativity,” American
Journal of Sociology 111, no. 2 (2005): 447–504.

“import/ export business of ideas”: “Teaming Up to Drive Scientific Discovery,” Brian Uzzi at
TEDxNorthwesternU, June 2012.
migrants’ “arbitrage” opportunities: C. Franzoni et al., “The Mover’s Advantage: The Superior
Performance of Migrant Scientists,” Economic Letters 122, no. 1 (2014): 89–93; see also: A. M.
Petersen, “Multiscale Impact of Researcher Mobility,” Journal of the Royal Society Interface 15, no.
146 (2018): 20180580.
Uzzi and a team analyzed: B. Uzzi et al., “Atypical Combinations and Scientific Impact,” Science
342 (2013): 468–72.
classified a paper as “novel”: J. Wang et al., “Bias Against Novelty in Science,” Research Policy
46, no. 8 (2017): 1416–36.
history of innovation in Japan: D. K. Simonton, “Foreign Influence and National Achievement:
The Impact of Open Milieus on Japanese Civilization,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
72, no. 1 (1997): 86–94.
work that builds bridges: K. J. Boudreau et al., “Looking Across and Looking Beyond the
Knowledge Frontier: Intellectual Distance, Novelty, and Resource Allocation in Science,”
Management Science 62, no. 10 (2016): 2765–83.
nourishing itself with radiation: E. Dadachova et al., “Ionizing Radiation Changes the Electronic
Properties of Melanin and Enhances the Growth of Melanized Fungi,” PLoS ONE 2, no. 5 (2007):
e457.
I sat in on funding policy hearings: For example: D. Epstein, “Senatorial Peer Review,” Inside
Higher Ed, May 3, 2006; and: D. Epstein, “Science Bill Advances,” Inside Higher Ed , May 19,
2006. Interestingly, in those hearings, New Hampshire senator (and engineering PhD) John Sununu,
normally a strident budget hawk, stood precisely opposite Hutchison and advocated funding research
with no clear application. “If you can identify an economic benefit you shouldn’t be funding it,” he
said. “That’s what we have a venture capital community for.”
A curious phenomenon: Clauset et al., “ Data-Driven Predictions in the Science of Science.”
“these players performed”: M. Hornig et al., “Practice and Play in the Development of German
Top-Level Professional Football Players,” European Journal of Sport Science 16, no. 1 (2016): 96–
105.
“dabble time”: J. Gifford, 100 Great Business Leaders (Singapore: Marshall Cavendish Business,
2013).
CONCLUSION: EXPANDING YOUR RANGE
the more work eminent creators produced: There is an excellent discussion of this research
(including Edison’s patents) in chapter 10 of S. B. Kaufman and C. Gregoire, Wired to Create (New
York: Perigee, 2015). An interesting analysis of Shakespeare’s plays based on “popularity” scores is
D. K. Simonton, “Popularity, Content, and Context in 37 Shakespeare Plays,” Poetics 15 (1986):
493–510.
Rachel Whiteread achieved a feat: W. Osgerby, “Young British Artists,” in ART: The Whole Story,
ed. S. Farthing (London: Thames & Hudson, 2010).
“Baseball has a truncated outcome distribution”: M. Simmons, “Forget the 10, 000-Hour Rule,”
Medium, October 26, 2017.
started formal lessons at twenty-two: W. Moskalew et al., Svetik: A Family Memoir of Sviatoslav
Richter (London: Toccata Press, 2015).
did not get a basketball until he was thirteen years old: “My Amazing Journey—Steve Nash,”
NBA.com , 2007–08 Season Preview.

Julius Caesar: C. Pelling, Plutarch and History (Swansea: Classical Press of Wales, 2002).
“It is an experiment”: Abrams v. United States, 250 U.S. 616 (1919) (Holmes dissenting opinion).
AFTERWORD TO THE PAPERBACK EDITION
“Johannes factotum ” : B. van Es, “‘Johannes fac Totum’?: Shakespeare’s First Contact with the
Acting Companies,” Shakespeare Quarterly 61, no. (Winter 2010): 551–77.
“a bit of a shock” : Colarusso et al., “Starting Strong: Talent-Based Branching of Newly
Commissioned U.S. Army Officers,” Officer Corps Strategy Monograph Series, vol. 9 (Carlisle
Barracks, PA: U.S. Army War College Press, 2016).
report found that : A. Schleicher et al., Envisioning the Future of Education and Jobs: Trends, Data
and Drawings (Paris: OECD Publishing, 2019).
“We must fight” : S. Coughlan, “Career ambitions ‘already limited by age of seven,’” BBC News,
Oct. 15, 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/education-50042459.
an apt tweet : R. B. Morrey (@RBrennanMorrey ), “Listening to @DavidEpstein “Range” in the car
with year old daughter. . . .” Twitter, August 2, 2019,
https://twitter.com/RBrennanMorrey/status/1157413410499436544.
“managing oneself” : P.F. Drucker, “Managing Oneself,” Harvard Business Review: Best of HBR
1999 (January, 2005).
“My recommendation for those of you” : G. Berger et al., “How to Become an Executive,” LinkedIn,
Sep. 9, 2016, https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/how-become-executive-guy-berger-ph-d- .
Executives with more varied careers : C. Crossland et al., “CEO Career Variety: Effects on Firm-
Level Strategic and Social Novelty,” Academy of Management Journal 57, no. (June 2014): 652–74.
“more likely to have” and “Research has established”: G. Dokko, “Career Baggage: What We Carry
as We Make Career Moves,” TEDxUCDavisSF, April 29, 2018, https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=5EfrRVr0JRk .
LinkedIn research found : Data provided by LinkedIn.
Duckworth’s “Tip of the Week” : A. Duckworth, “Summer Is for Sampling,” May 26, 2019,
characterlab.org/tips-of-the-week/summer-is-for-sampling .
A 2017 study published by four economists : EA Hanushek et al., “General Education, Vocational
Education, and Labor-Market Outcomes over the Lifecycle,” Journal of Human Resources 52, no.
(Winter 2017): 49–88.
“today’s rapidly changing economy” : D. Trump, “Presidential Executive Order Expanding
Apprenticeships in America,” whitehouse.gov, June 15, 2017,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/3245.
“This comparison is consistent” and “The advantages of vocational training” : E.A. Hanushek and L.
Woessman, “Apprenticeship Programs in a Changing Economic World,” Brookings Institution, June
28, 2017, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/brown-center-chalkboard/2017/06/28/apprenticeship-
programs-in-a-changing-economic-world .
like the building trades : E. Hanushek, “Emulating Germany’s Apprenticeship System Won’t Make
America Great Again,” Huffington Post , June 23, 2017, https://www.huffpost.com/entry/germany-
apprenticeship-america-trump_b_594be9ebe4b0a3a837be16b5 .
“To this day” : B. Verdi, “The Grillroom: Tiger Woods,” Golf Digest 51, no. (January 1, 2000): 132.
“refused him this foolish request” : O.E. Deutsch, Mozart: A Documentary Biography , trans. E.
Blom et al. (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1965).

“it’s all about trying new things” : A. Grant, “Christopher Nolan Wants You to Silence Your Phones,”
Esquire , July 19, 2017, https://classic.esquire.com/article/2017/8/1/christopher-nolan-wants-you-to-
silence-your-phones .
OceanofPDF.com

INDEX
abstract thinking
and classification schemes, ref1
and Flynn effect, ref1
and language, ref1
in math-skills acquisition, ref1
and modern vs. premodern people, ref1 , ref2
and Raven’s Progressive======================================================== New York Times, March
26, 2016.
“necessarily limited”: Duckworth et al., “Grit: Perseverance and Passion for Long-Term Goals.”
32 of 1,308: M. Randall, “New Cadets March Back from ‘Beast Barracks’ at West Point,” Times
Herald-Record , August 8, 2016.
“young and foolish”: R. A. Miller, “Job Matching and Occupational Choice,” Journal of Political
Economy 92, no. 6 (1984): 1086–1120.
“tasks we don’t have the guts to quit”: S. Godin, The Dip: A Little Book That Teaches You When to
Quit (and When to Stick) (New York: Portfolio, 2007 [Kindle ebook]).
twenty-year mark: G. Cheadle (Brig. Gen. USAF [Ret.]), “Retention of USMA Graduates on Active
Duty,” white paper for the USMA Association of Graduates, 2004.
A 2010 monograph; “institution that taught its cadets”: This monograph is one in a six-part series
about officer development and retention: C. Wardynski et al., “Towards a U.S. Army Officer Corps
Strategy for Success: Retaining Talent,” Strategic Studies Institute, 2010.
Ash Carter visited West Point: A. Tilghman, “At West Point, Millennial Cadets Say Rigid Military
Career Tracks Are Outdated,” Military Times, March 26, 2016.
talent-based branching: D. Vergun, “Army Helping Cadets Match Talent to Branch Selection,”
Army News Service , March 21, 2017.
American adults at large: You can compare your grit score to other adults at
https://angeladuckworth.com/grit-scale/ .
“Olympic athletes need to understand”: S. Cohen, “Sasha Cohen: An Olympian’s Guide to
Retiring at 25,” New York Times, February 24, 2018.
A recent international Gallup survey: Gallup’s State of the Global Workplace report, 2017. 137–
CHAPTER 7:FLIRTING WITH YOUR POSSIBLE SELVES
Frances Hesselbein grew up: Information about Hesselbein’s life comes from multiple interviews
with her, as well as her books, and corroboration from others who know her. Her book, My Life in
Leadership (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2011), was a particularly useful source and contains the “a
doctor, a lawyer, an aviatrix” quote.
“any company in America”: E. Edersheim, “The Woman Drucker Said Was the Best CEO in
America,” Management Matters Network , April 27, 2017.

“I would pick Frances”: J. A. Byrne, “Profiting from the Nonprofits,” Business Week, March 26,
1990.
Presidential Medal of Freedom: When President Bill Clinton presented the medal to Hesselbein, he
made a humorous point of asking her to come “forward” to receive the award, as she did not like the
use of hierarchical words like “up” and “down.”
Phil Knight: Good Morning America , April 26, 2016.
“wasn’t much for setting goals”: Phil Knight, Shoe Dog (New York: Scribner, 2016).
“Nor did I ever attend again”: These and other details of Darwin’s life can be found in The
Autobiography of Charles Darwin . A free version with annotation can be found at Darwin-
online.org.uk .
recommended him for an unpaid position: There is a wealth of information, like the invitation
from professor J. S. Henslow (in a letter on August 24, 1831), publicly available at the University of
Cambridge’s Darwin Correspondence Project (www.darwinproject.ac.uk ).
“died a natural death”; “It seems ludicrous”; “If his father had given him any choice”: The
Autobiography of Charles Darwin.
“I would never have to wonder”: Bio at www.michaelcrichton.com .
“end of history illusion”: J. Quoidbach, D. T. Gilbert, and T. D. Wilson, “The End of History
Illusion,” Science 339, no. 6115 (2013): 96–98.
the results of ninety-two studies: B.W. Roberts et al., “Patterns of Mean-Level Change in
Personality Traits Across the Life Course,” Psychological Bulletin 132, no. 1 (2006): 1-25. See also:
B. W. Roberts and D. Mroczek, “Personality Trait Change in Adulthood,” Current Directions in
Psychological Science 17, no. 1 (2009): 31–35. For a nice (and free) review of personality research
intended for a broad audience, see M. B. Donnellan, “Personality Stability and Change,” in Noba
Textbook Series: Psychology, ed. R. Biswas-Diener and E. Diener (Champaign, IL: DEF Publishers,
2018), nobaproject.com .
Psychologist Walter Mischel and his research team: W. Mischel, The Marshmallow Test (New
York: Little, Brown, 2014 [Kindle ebook]).
Shoda has repeatedly made a point: Shoda used the occasion of winning a research award to make
the point again. A June 2, 2015, press release from the University of Washington announcing the
award noted, “While pleased by the honor, Shoda expressed concern about media coverage of the
study over the years, and the incorrect notion that parents could predict their children’s fate by doing
the study themselves.” He added that “the relationships we are finding are far from perfect. And there
is a lot of room for change.”
“if-then signatures”; “The gist of such findings”: Y. Shoda et al., eds., Persons in Context :
Building a Science of the Individual (New York: Guilford Press, 2007 [Kindle ebook]).
“If you are conscientious”: T. Rose, The End of Average : How We Succeed in a World That Values
Sameness (New York: HarperOne, 2016 [Kindle ebook]).
a replication of the marshmallow test: T. W. Watts et al., “Revisiting the Marshmallow Test,”
Psychological Science 29, no. 7 (2018): 1159–77.
Ibarra began; “We discover the possibilities”: H. Ibarra, Working Identity (Boston: Harvard
Business Review Press, 2003).
“painless path to a new career”: P. Capell, “Taking the Painless Path to a New Career,” Wall Street
Journal Europe , January 2, 2002.
Paul Graham . . . high school graduation speech: “What You’ll Wish You’d Known,”
www.paulgraham.com/hs.html .

William Wallace showed: W. Wallace, “Michelangelo: Separating Theory and Practice,” in
Imitation, Representation and Printing in the Italian Renaissance, ed. R. Eriksen and M. Malmanger
(Pisa and Rome: Fabrizio Serra Editore, 2009).
grew to dislike painting; half . . . left unfinished: The Complete Poems of Michelangelo, trans. J. F.
Nims (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998): poem 5 (painting); p. 8 (half unfinished).
“I couldn’t play the instruments”: “Haruki Murakami, The Art of Fiction No. 182.” The Paris
Review , 170 (2004).
“ringing double”: H. Murakami, “The Moment I Became a Novelist,” Literary Hub, June 25, 2015.
“led to a revelation”: Bio at patrickrothfuss.com .
“I was just not interested in thinking about it”: Interview with Maryam Mirzakhani, Guardian,
August 12, 2014, republished with permission of the Clay Mathematics Institute.
“It is like being lost in a jungle”: A. Myers and B. Carey, “Maryam Mirzakhani, Stanford
Mathematician and Fields Medal Winner, Dies,” Stanford News, July 15, 2007.
“My passion for the sport”: “A new beginning,” Chrissiewellington.org , March 12, 2012.
“A warm feelin’ come over my body”: H. Finster, as told to T. Patterson, Howard Finster: Stranger
from Another World (New York: Abbeville Press, 1989).
CHAPTER 8:THE OUTSIDER ADVANTAGE
more than one-third: K. R. Lakhani, “InnoCentive.com (A),” HBS No. 9-608-170, Harvard
Business School Publishing, 2009. See also: S. Page, The Difference (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2008). 160–
“more savage”: T. Standage, An Edible History of Humanity (New York: Bloomsbury, 2009).
offered a reward: “Selected Innovation Prizes and Rewards Programs,” Knowledge Ecology
International, KEI Research Note, 2008: 1.
a whole sheep: J. H. Collins, The Story of Canned Foods (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1924).
fed the English troops at Waterloo: Standage, An Edible History of Humanity . 175 “I think it
helped me”: Cragin’s presentation at Collaborative Innovation: Public Sector Prizes, June 12, 2012,
Washington, D.C., The Case Foundation and The Joyce Foundation.
“three evenings”: J. Travis, “Science by the Masses,” Science 319, no. 5871 (2008): 1750–52.
“the further the problem was”: C. Dean, “If You Have a Problem, Ask Everyone,” New York Times,
July 22, 2008. See also: L. Moise interview with K. Lakhani, “5 Questions with Dr. Karim Lakhani,”
InnoCentive Innovation Blog , Jul 25, 2008.
“exploration [of new solutions]”: K. R. Lakhani et al., “Open Innovation and Organizational
Boundaries,” in A. Grandori, ed., Handbook of Economic Organization (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar,
2013).
“our research shows”: S. Joni, “Stop Relying on Experts for Innovation: A Conversation with
Karim Lakhani,” Forbes, October 23, 2013, online ed.
“need more creative solutions”: Kaggle Team, “Profiling Top Kagglers: Bestfitting, Currently #1 in
the World,” No Free Hunch (official Kaggle blog), May 7, 2018.
“Swanson is the first physical scientist”: Copy of University of Chicago Office of Public Relations
memo (No. 62-583) for December 17, 1962.
“The disparity between the total quantity”: D. R. Swanson, “On the Fragmentation of Knowledge,
the Connection Explosion, and Assembling Other People’s Ideas,” Bulletin of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology 27, no. 3 (2005): 12–14.

In 1960, the U.S. National Library of Medicine: K. J. Boudreau et al., “Looking Across and
Looking Beyond the Knowledge Frontier,” Management Science 62, no. 10 (2016): 2765–83.
“eleven neglected connections”: D. R. Swanson, “Migraine and Magnesium: Eleven Neglected
Connections,” Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 31, no. 4 (1988): 526–57.
“‘home field’” : L. Moise interview with K. Lakhani, “5 Questions with Dr. Karim Lakhani.”
She came upon a paper: the paper was F. Deymeer et al., “ Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy
with Unusual Features,” Muscle and Nerve 16 (1993): 1359–65.
In 1999, she got an email from Italy: The Italian research team soon published their results (and
thanked Jill): G. Bonne et al., “Mutations in the Gene Encoding 179–Lamin A/ C Cause Autosomal
Dominant Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy,” Nature Genetics 21, no. 3 (1999): 285–88.
CHAPTER 9:LATERAL THINKING WITH WITHERED TECHNOLOGY
During two centuries of closed-borders isolation: Several sources on the history of Nintendo were
of particular importance: F. Gorges with I. Yamazaki, The History of Nintendo, vol. 1, 1889–1980 (
Triel-sur-Seine: Pix’N Love, 2010). F. Gorges with I. Yamazaki, The======================================================== suddenly seen as
invention,” said sociologist Brian Uzzi, Amaral’s collaborator. Human
creativity, he said, is basically an “import/ export business of ideas.”
Uzzi documented an import/ export trend that began in both the physical
and social sciences in the 1970s, pre-internet: more successful teams tended
to have more far-flung members. Teams that included members from
different institutions were more likely to be successful than those that did
not, and teams that included members based in different countries had an
advantage as well.
Consistent with the import/ export model, scientists who have worked
abroad—whether or not they returned—are more likely to make a greater
scientific impact than those who have not. The economists who documented

that trend suggested one reason could be migrants’ “arbitrage”
opportunities, the chance to take an idea from one market and bring it to
another where it is more rare and valued. 
*
 It echoes Oliver Smithies’s
advice to bring new skills to an old problem, or a new problem to old skills.
The atypical combination of typical forms—say, hip-hop, a Broadway
musical, and American historical biography—is not a strategy fluke of
showbiz.
Uzzi and a team analyzed eighteen million papers from a variety of
scientific domains to see whether atypical knowledge combinations
mattered. If a particular paper cited other areas of research that rarely, if
ever, appeared together, then it was classified as having used an atypical
combination of knowledge. Most papers relied purely on conventional
combinations of previous knowledge. That is, they cited work from other
journals that often appeared together in other studies’ lists of references.
The “hit” papers, those that over the next decade were used by a huge
number of other scientists, featured ample conventional combinations, but
also added an injection of unusual knowledge combinations.
A separate, international team analyzed more than a half million research
articles, and classified a paper as “novel” if it cited two other journals that
had never before appeared together. Just one in ten papers made a new
combination, and only one in twenty made multiple new combinations. The
group tracked the impact of research papers over time. They saw that papers
with new knowledge combinations were more likely to be published in less
prestigious journals, and also much more likely to be ignored upon
publication. They got off to a slow start in the world, but after three years,
the papers with new knowledge combos surpassed the conventional papers,
and began accumulating more citations from other scientists. Fifteen years
after publication, studies that made multiple new knowledge combinations
were way more likely to be in the top 1 percent of most-cited papers.
To recap: work that builds bridges between disparate pieces of
knowledge is less likely to be funded, less likely to appear in famous
journals, more likely to be ignored upon publication, and then more likely
in the long run to be a smash hit in the library of human knowledge.
Casadevall leads by example. A single conversation with him is liable to
include Anna Karenina, the Federalist Papers, the fact that Isaac Newton

and Gottfried Leibniz were philosophers as well as scientists, why the
Roman Empire wasn’t more innovative, and a point about mentoring in the
form of a description of the character Mentor from Homer’s Odyssey. “I
work at it,” he said, smirking. “I always advise my people to read outside
your field, everyday something. And most people say, ‘Well, I don’t have
time to read outside my field.’ I say, ‘No, you do have time, it’s far more
important.’ Your world becomes a bigger world, and maybe there’s a
moment in which you make connections.”
One of Casadevall’s projects was born from a news article he read about
a robot sent into the Chernobyl nuclear accident site, still highly
contaminated thirty years post-disaster. The article happened to mention
that the robot returned with some black mold, a kind that resembled a grotty
shower curtain and that had colonized the abandoned reactor. “So, why
black mold?” Casadevall asked rhetorically. “And then one thing led to
another.” He and colleagues made a remarkable find—that the mold was
nourishing itself with radiation. Not with radioactive substances—with
radiation itself.
Casadevall makes sure to highlight experiences outside the lab and how
they contributed to who he is today. His family fled Cuba and arrived in
Queens when he was eleven. At sixteen, he got his first job, at McDonald’s,
and worked there until he was twenty. It’s still on his résumé, and he made
sure to discuss it in his Johns Hopkins interview. “It was a great, great
experience,” he told me. “I learned a lot working there.” Like handling
pressure. His younger brother worked there, too, and was briefly taken
hostage during a holdup. “He spent two days on the witness stand where the
lawyers made fun of his accent,” Casadevall recalled. “He came out ready
for law school. Now he’s a successful trial lawyer.” After McDonald’s,
Casadevall worked as a bank teller. (“That was held up too!”) His father
wanted him to have something practical to fall back on, so a community
college degree in pest control operations hangs on his office wall, near a
certificate of his election into the prestigious National Academy of
Medicine.
Casadevall is renowned in his area of expertise. He has no trouble getting
research grants, and is frequently one of the scientists who helps determine
who else gets grants. He is a winner if the specialization status quo
continues. And yet he considers his attempt to shatter it the most important
work of his life. The further basic science moves from meandering

exploration toward efficiency, he believes, the less chance it will have of
solving humanity’s greatest challenges.
Laszlo Polgar, in the midst of his chess experiment with his daughters,
proclaimed that “the problems of cancer and AIDS” would more likely be
solved if his system of narrow specialization and efficient education were
used beyond chess, to educate a thousand kids. Casadevall is a student of
innovation history. He grew up as a doctor and scientist when HIV/ AIDS
exploded into an epidemic, and he could hardly disagree more passionately.
“When I went to medical school, I was taught that there were no human
diseases caused by retroviruses, that retroviruses were a curiosity that
occurred in some animal tumors. In 1981, a new disease emerges that
nobody knows anything about. In 1984, it’s found to be a retrovirus, HIV. In
1987, you have the first therapy. In 1996, you have such effective therapy
that people don’t have to die of it anymore. How did that happen? Was it
because companies all of a sudden rushed to make drugs? No. If you really
look back and analyze it, before that time society had spent some of its very
hard-earned money to study a curiosity called retroviruses. Just a curiosity
in animals. So by the time HIV was found to be a retrovirus, you already
knew that if you interfered with the protease [a type of enzyme] that you
could deactivate it. So when HIV arrived, society had right off the shelf a
huge amount of knowledge from investments made in a curiosity that at the
time had no use. It may very well be that if you were to take all the research
funding in the country and you put it in Alzheimer’s disease, you would
never get to the solution. But the answer to Alzheimer’s disease may come
from a misfolding protein in a cucumber. But how are you going to write a
grant on a cucumber? And who are you going to send it to? If somebody
gets interested in a folding protein in a cucumber and it’s a good scientific
question, leave them alone. Let them torture the cucumber.”
Casadevall’s overarching point is that the innovation ecosystem should
intentionally preserve range and inefficiency. He is fighting an uphill battle.
In 2006, when I was starting in journalism, I sat in on funding policy
hearings of a U.S. Senate subcommittee on science and space, chaired by
Texas senator Kay Bailey Hutchison. Hutchison would thumb through a
stack of scientists’ research proposals and read the titles aloud. If a title did
not directly pertain to the creation of a new commercial technology, she

whisked it from the stack and asked the room how exactly that sort of thing
would help the country get ahead of India and China. Among the disciplines
Hutchison classified as distracting from technological innovation were
biology, geology, economics, and archaeology. One can only guess how she
would have assessed the work of Louis Pasteur (who started as an artist) on
chickens with cholera, which led him to lab-created vaccines. Or Einstein’s
fanciful idea to investigate if time passes differently in high versus low
gravity, part of a theory essential to some rather useful technology, like cell
phones, which use global positioning satellites with gravitationally adjusted
clocks that sync with clocks on Earth.
In 1945, former MIT dean Vannevar Bush, who oversaw U.S. military
science during World War II—including the mass production of penicillin
and the Manhattan Project—authored a report at the request of President
Franklin Roosevelt in which he explained successful innovation culture. It
was titled “Science, the Endless Frontier,” and led to the creation of the
National Science Foundation that funded three generations of wildly
successful scientific discovery, from Doppler radar and fiber optics to web
browsers and MRIs. “Scientific progress on a broad front results from the
free play of free intellects, working on subjects of their own choice,” Bush
wrote, “in the manner dictated by their curiosity for exploration of the
unknown.”
A curious phenomenon has appeared in recent years on a near-annual
basis when the Nobel Prizes are awarded. Someone who receives one
explains that their breakthrough could not have occurred today. In 2016,
Japanese biologist Yoshinori Ohsumi closed his Nobel lecture======================================================== look flat, he experimented to find out
why. It turned out he could get the effect by painting on a canvas that had a
particular weave, and then scraping the paint back with a palette knife so
that the weave itself broke up the brushstroke. “That right there is how I
learned to paint, by looking a lot.” He spent hours in the studio, forgetting
to eat because he was so engaged with the work. He considered himself an
extreme extrovert, but for the first time was finding fulfilment in an activity
that he did quietly, in a corner, by himself. And he got better, a lot better.
He got so much better that a professor told him he should apply to the
master of fine arts program at Yale. “What’s Yale?” he asked. The professor
chuckled and showed him a pamphlet. Kaphar applied, and got rejected.
The next year, he applied to Yale and a bunch of other grad schools. He got
rejected from all of them. He resolved to apply to Yale every year. By that
point, whether he got in or not was a secondary consideration. He had found
his work identity. “I’m an artist,” he said. “I’m a maker, so I’m going to
make.”
The resulting body of work eventually got him into Yale, where he was
one of the oldest students in his class. Yale was not a place to learn
technique, but by then he was used to self-teaching. At Yale he learned that
some art critics had pronounced painting dead as an important medium. “I
don’t understand how something that’s dead can make me feel so alive,”
Kaphar said. So he kept making, churning out paintings, sculptures, and
painting/sculpture combinations.
In 2011, Kaphar was researching his father’s prison history, and was
surprised to find ninety-seven men with the same name who had been
incarcerated. That spawned his “Jerome Project,” in which he used
mugshots to paint portraits of the men on wood panels with gold leaf
backgrounds, (evocative of Byzantine portraits of St. Jerome), and with tar
covering a portion of each face to represent a life scarred by prison. His

work has now been featured in venues from the Museum of Modern Art and
the National Portrait Gallery to the pages of Time magazine.
Today, Kaphar lives in New Haven, Connecticut, with his two kids and
his wife—a.k.a. the older woman he wanted to impress by taking junior
college classes. In 2015, Kaphar and a colleague founded NXTHVN
(pronounced “Next Haven”), an art space created in a former manufacturing
plant, and where early-career artists can apply for a stipend and studio
space. Those artists in turn mentor local high school students who are paid
to serve as their studio assistants. For most of the high school students, it is
their first job of any kind. Kaphar wants to diversify the entry points into
the art pipeline, because imagine who we miss if we force every Titus
Kaphar to find his vocation by chance alone.
In 2018, Kaphar won a MacArthur Foundation fellowship, colloquially
known as a “genius grant.” He doesn’t love that moniker, however. He
doesn’t really like the word “genius” at all. It makes it seem as if someone
was plopped on Earth magically knowing what to do and how to do it. It
doesn’t seem like it could encompass someone who took a junior college
class hoping for a date, and accidentally found his path.
“In that class,” Kaphar told me, “I realized that I had a visual intelligence
that no one had ever asked me to use.”
Diversifying the entry points into a given path, I think, is a productive
strategy. That includes allowing for early specialization, when it makes
sense, as one of many possibilities.
In late 2019, I had a chance to talk with Serena Williams. I hadn’t
researched her childhood at all, but I had heard that it was a Tiger story. I
was only slightly surprised when she complicated that notion. Her father
was ahead of his time, she told me. She participated in ballet, gymnastics,
taekwondo and track and field. She and Venus threw a football to develop
the motion for a powerful serve, a habit they continued as professionals.
I certainly don’t share that to suggest that pure Tiger stories do not exist.
After all, the literal Tiger story opened this book. But we may be telling
even that one slightly wrong. As Woods said in 2000: “To this day, my dad
has never asked me to go play golf. I ask him. It’s the child’s desire to play
that matters, not the parent’s desire to have the child play.”

Mozart’s childhood might be the second most influential story of
development. In researching Mozart’s childhood, I came across a letter to
Mozart’s sister from a musician and Mozart family friend; it recounted
Mozart’s father, Leopold, shooing little Wolfgang away when he asked to
play violin with the adults. “Papa [Leopold] refused him this foolish
request, because he had not yet had the least instruction in the violin, and
Papa thought that he could not possibly play anything,” the letter read.
Little Wolfgang cried, and then proceeded to play the violin in front of his
awestruck father.
There is no evidence that parents can simply manufacture what
psychologist Ellen Winner calls the “rage to master” evident in prodigies
like Woods and Mozart. For both Tiger and Mozart, it seems that their
famous fathers were initially responding to the son’s very unusual display
of both interest and prowess in a highly structured activity. Even if the goal
were to create as many Tigers and Mozarts as possible, I expect that the best
strategy would be exposing children to an array of activities and seeing if
one happens to light their fire.
On the other hand, you have people like me, who aren’t quite sure what
they’re going to be when they grow up, only—as the twelve-year-old
recommended—a list of things they’d like to learn about this year. I
recently came across a quote from Christopher Nolan—writer and director
of films like Inception , Interstellar , and The Dark Knight —on finding a
next project. “For me, it’s all about trying new things,” he said. “If you’re
going to write, you want to read a lot before you write, without any
purpose.” Of course, the purpose is to find something that stimulates you
but that you couldn’t have known to look for—an interest you didn’t know
you had. I think I’ll take that advice.
OceanofPDF.com

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I VIEW BOOK WRITING as kind of like running the 800—torture in the middle,
but if you PR or give a supreme effort, pretty soon you look back and say,
“Well, that wasn’t so bad.” It was, but still you should do it again.
All sorts of cool things transpired while I worked on this book. For
example: I learned a ton. Also, one day while my brain was overheating, a
cardinal, a blue jay, and an oriole appeared near my windowsill—that’s all
the eponymous birds of Major League Baseball teams. That never happens.
Thank you, first, to the entire team at Riverhead, especially my editor,
Courtney Young. Courtney spooked me a little when we first agreed to go
about this book project together by saying something like, “I’d be worried if
I weren’t familiar with you.” [Gulp]. She then proceeded to respond like a
great coach developing an athlete; she let me engage in broad, self-directed
activity, and when I resurfaced two years later with a manuscript that was
too long, she switched gears and responded to my desire for fast and
frequent feedback as I cut it down to size and shape. When the time came,
she gave feedback that made a wicked learning environment a bit more kind
(“Yes, I like it; now he sounds like less of a magical gnome.” —Courtney’s
feedback on what may have been an overwritten description.).
Appropriately, she has range; she almost became an engineer.
Thank you to my agent, Chris Parris-Lamb, who finished 235th in the
New York City Marathon, which is important, but not so important as his
animating mission, which, as far as I can tell, is to help writers earn their
freedom. To use a sports analogy, my strategy for working with an agent
was to draft the best athlete available and get out of the way.
Thank you to everyone who took part in my tortuous fact-checking
process, but especially Emily Krieger and Drew Bailey, and the
interviewees who gave their time (again . . . and sometimes again) so that I
could pester them about things they had already told me. Thanks to
Masaharu Kawamata and Tyler Walker for help with Japanese translation.

Thanks to Malcolm Gladwell. The first time we met was for a debate at
the MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference, framed as “10, 000-hours vs.
The Sports Gene.” (It’s on YouTube.) It turned into a great discussion, and I
think we both took new thoughts home. He invited me for an interval
workout the next day, and then again, and we got to talking (only during
warmup) about that whole “Roger vs. Tiger” idea. The discussion was filed
away somewhere in my head and surfaced when I interacted with Tillman
Scholars. I’m not sure I would have explored the topic without it. As
psychologist Howard Gruber wrote, “Ideas are not really lost, they are
reactivated when useful.”
This book was the greatest organizational challenge I’ve faced; figuring
out how to gather information, what to include, and then where to put it
overwhelmed me many times. A quote kept coming to mind: “It’s a little
like wrestling a gorilla. You don’t quit when you’re tired, you quit when the
gorilla’s tired.” Whatever the reception, I’m proud I kept coming back for
more. And I thank the friends and family who supported me and accepted
my answer of “hopefully next year” to so many questions. Believe me, it’s
not that I didn’t want tickets to that thing I like. It’s just that, as any
Westerosi knows, my house words are: “When my book is done.” Those
supporters: My brother, Daniel (whose enthusiastic response to my
rambling about ideas in chapter 4 convinced me to write about them); sister,
Charna (she may have purchased all the copies of my last book); my
parents, Mark and Eve, who always waited until after I did something
ridiculous to weigh in, rather than prohibiting it beforehand. It makes for a
vibrant sampling period.======================================================== Scientific Discovery: The Case of Johannes Kepler,” in
Model-Based Reasoning: Science, Technology, Values, ed. L. Magnani and N. J. Nersessian (New
York: Kluwer Academic/ Plenum Publishers, 2002), 21–39; D. Gentner et al., “Analogy and
Creativity in the Works of Johannes Kepler,” in Creative Thought: An Investigation of Conceptual
Structures and Processes, ed. T. B. Ward et al. (Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association, 1997).
maybe the planets were like magnets: D. Gentner and A. B. Markman, “Structure Mapping in
Analogy and Similarity,” American Psychologist 52, no. 1 (1997): 45–56. Also, Kepler read a new
publication on magnetism: A. Caswell, “Lectures on Astronomy,” Smithsonian Lectures on
Astronomy, 1858 (British Museum collection).
“the moon’s dominion over the waters”: J. Gleick, Isaac Newton (New York: Vintage, 2007).
no concept of gravity as a force; “Ye physicists” : A. Koestler, The Sleepwalkers: A History of
Man’s Changing Vision of the Universe (New York: Penguin Classics, 2017).
“I especially love analogies”: B. Vickers, “Analogy Versus Identity,” in: Occult and Scientific
Mentalities in the Renaissance, ed. B. Vickers (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984).
“action at a distance”: Gentner et al., “Analogy and Creativity in the Works of Johannes Kepler.”;
E. McMullin, “The Origins of the Field Concept in Physics,” Physics in Perspective 4, no. 1 (2002):
13–39.
Suppose you are a doctor: M. L. Gick and K. J. Holyoak, “Analogical Problem Solving,” Cognitive
Psychology 12 (1980): 306–55.
There once was a general; small-town fire chief; “might well have supposed”; “ ill-defined”
problems: M. L. Gick and K. J. Holyoak, “Schema Induction and Analogical Transfer,” Cognitive
Psychology 15 (1983): 1–38.

An experiment on Stanford international relations students; college football coaches: T.
Gilovich, “Seeing the Past in the Present: The Effect of Associations to Familiar Events on
Judgments and Decisions,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 40, no. 5 (1981): 797–808.
Kahneman had a personal experience: Kahneman’s story is in his Thinking, Fast and Slow (New
York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2011). With background on the inside and outside views, it is also in
D. Kahneman and D. Lovallo, “Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts,” Management Science 39, no. 1
(1993): 17–31.
investors from large private equity firms: D. Lovallo, C. Clarke, and C. Camerer, “Robust
Analogizing and the Outside View,” Strategic Management Journal 33, no. 5 (2012): 496–512.
qualities of the specific horse: M. J. Mauboussin, Think Twice: Harnessing the Power of
Counterintuition (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2009).
the more internal details: L. Van Boven and N. Epley, “The Unpacking Effect in Evaluative
Judgments: When the Whole Is Less Than the Sum of Its Parts,” Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 39 (2003): 263–69.
“natural causes”: A. Tversky and D. J. Koehler, “Support Theory,” Psychological Review 101, no. 4
(1994): 547–67.
90 percent of major infrastructure projects: B. Flyvbjerg et al., “What Causes Cost Overrun in
Transport Infrastructure Projects?” Transport Reviews 24, no. 1 (2004): 3–18.
a massive underestimate: B. Flyvbjerg, “Curbing Optimism Bias and Strategic Misrepresentation in
Planning,” European Planning Studies 16, no. 1 (2008): 3–21. The £1 billion price tag: S.
Brocklehurst, “Going off the Rails,” BBC Scotland , May 30, 2014, online ed.
the movie business: Lovallo, Clarke, and Camerer, “Robust Analogizing and the Outside View.”
Netflix came to a similar conclusion: T. Vanderbilt, “The Science Behind the Netflix Algorithms
That Decide What You’ll Watch Next,” Wired.com , August 7, 2013; and C. Burger, “Personalized
Recommendations at Netflix,” Tastehit.com , February 23, 2016.
Lovallo and Dubin gave some students: F. Dubin and D. Lovallo, “The Use and Misuse of
Analogies in Business,” Working Paper (Sydney: University of Sydney, 2008).
In 2001, the Boston Consulting Group: A short discussion about the impetus for BCG’s exhibits is:
D. Gray, “A Gallery of Metaphors,” Harvard Business Review, September 2003.
Gentner and colleagues gave the Ambiguous Sorting Task: B. M. Rottman et al., “Causal Systems
Categories: Differences in Novice and Expert Categorization of Causal Phenomena,” Cognitive
Science 36 (2012): 919–32.
In one of the most cited studies: M. T. H. Chi et al., “Categorization and Representation of Physics
Problems by Experts and Novices,” Cognitive Science 5, no. 2 (1981): 121–52.
“What matters to me”: Koestler, The Sleepwalkers .
1 percent of the national budget: N. Morvillo, Science and Religion: Understanding the Issues
(Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010).
“If I had believed we could ignore these eight minutes”: Koestler, The Sleepwalkers .
When Dunbar started: An excellent background source on Dunbar’s work is: K. Dunbar, “What
Scientific Thinking Reveals About the Nature of Cognition,” in Designing for Science, ed. K.
Crowley et al. (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2001).
“When all the members”: K. Dunbar, “How Scientists Really Reason,” in The Nature of Insight, ed.
R. J. Sternberg and J. E. Davidson (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995), 365–95.
CHAPTER 6:THE TROUBLE WITH TOO MUCH GRIT

The boy’s mother appreciated: Details of Van Gogh’s life come from several main sources,
including translated letters written by and to Van Gogh. More than nine hundred letters (that is, every
surviving one) are available at the incredible Vincent van Gogh: The Letters website
(vangoghletters.org ), courtesy of the Van Gogh Museum and the Huygens Institute for the History of
the Netherlands. Without another incredible source, I would not have known which letters to read:
Steven Naifeh and Gregory White Smith, Van Gogh: The Life (New York: Random House, 2011).
Naifeh and Smith took the extraordinary step of creating a searchable database of sources at
vangoghbiography.com/notes.php . It was extremely helpful. Two other written sources that were
helpful: N. Denekamp et al., The Vincent van Gogh Atlas (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press and
the Van Gogh Museum, 2016); and J. Hulsker, The Complete Van Gogh (New York: Harrison House/
H. N. Abrams, 1984). Finally, two exhibitions: “Van Gogh’s Bedrooms” at the Art Institute of
Chicago (2016), and the impressionism and post-impressionism collections at the Hermitage
Museum in St. Petersburg, Russia.
“None of it registered”: Naifeh and Smith, Van Gogh: The Life.
“absolutely nothing of them”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, June 1884.
“own desires”; “happier and calmer”; “push on”: Naifeh and Smith, Van Gogh: The Life .
“must sit up”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, September 1877.
“up in Hell”: Émile Zola, Germinal, trans. R. N. MacKenzie (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing,
2011).
“the bars of his cage”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, June 1880.
“I’m writing to you while drawing”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, August 1880.
Guide to the ABCs of Drawing : Naifeh and Smith, Van Gogh: The Life .
“you are no artist”; “you started too late”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, March 1882 (trans.
Johanna van Gogh-Bonger).
“[He] made an astonishing discovery”: Naifeh and Smith, Van Gogh: The Life .
“Painting has proved less difficult”: Van Gogh letter to brother Theo, August 1882. The painting
that Van Gogh made that day is Beach at Scheveningen in Stormy Weather. The painting was stolen
from the Van Gogh Museum in 2002, but recovered more than a decade later.
An ecstatic review: The review, by G.-Albert Aurier, was titled “Les isolés: Vincent van Gogh.”
life expectancy in the Netherlands: The exact figure is 39.84 and comes from the online publication
Our World in Data (ourworldindata.org ).
Gauguin . . . at the age of thirty-five: The Great Masters (London: Quantum Publishing, 2003).
“failed on an epic scale”: J. K. Rowling, text of speech, “The Fringe Benefits of Failure, and the
Importance of Imagination,” Harvard Gazette, June 5, 2008, online ed.
Nobel laureate economist Theodore Schultz: T. W. Schultz, “Resources for Higher Education,”
Journal of Political Economy 76, no. 3 (1968): 327–47.
found a natural experiment: O. Malamud, “Discovering One’s Talent: Learning from Academic
Specialization,” Industrial and Labor Relations 64, no. 2 (2011): 375–405.
Scots quickly caught up: O. Malamud, “Breadth Versus Depth: The Timing of Specialization in
Higher Education,” Labour 24, no. 4 (2010): 359–90.
more mistakes: D. Lederman, “When to Specialize?,” Inside Higher Ed, November 25, 2009.
“The benefits to increased match quality”: Malamud, “Discovering One’s Talent.”
Steven Levitt . . . leveraged his readership: S. D. Levitt, “Heads or Tails: The Impact of a Coin
Toss on Major Life Decisions and Subsequent Happiness,” NBER Working Paper No. 22487 (2016).

“the willingness to jettison”: Levitt, in the September 30, 2011, Freakonomics Radio program, “The
Upside of Quitting.”
“Teachers tend to leave schools”: C. K. Jackson, “Match Quality, Worker Productivity, and Worker
Mobility: Direct Evidence from Teachers,” Review of Economics and Statistics 95, no. 4 (2013):
1096–1116.
Psychologist Angela Duckworth conducted the most famous study: A. L. Duckworth et al., “Grit:
Perseverance and Passion for Long-Term Goals,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 92,
no. 6 (2007): 1087–1101. (The entire incoming class comprised 1,223 freshman cadets, so
Duckworth surveyed nearly every one.) Table 3 gives a nice summary of the amount of variance
accounted for by grit in results from West Point, the Scripps National Spelling Bee, Ivy League
students’ grades, and adult educational attainment. Additionally, Duckworth made her work very
accessible in her book, Grit: The Power of Passion and Perseverance (New York: Scribner, 2016).
Duckworth learned that: An incisive piece on grit and the Whole Candidate Score is: D. Engber, “Is
‘Grit’ Really the Key to Success?,” Slate, May 8, 2016.
“I worry I’ve contributed”: A. Duckworth, “Don’t Grade Schools on Grit,”======================================================== first-year students who were randomized into introductory course
sections in management, economics, or law, and then the courses that
followed them in a prescribed sequence over four years. It showed precisely
the same pattern. Teachers who guided students to overachievement in their
own course were rated highly, and undermined student performance in the
long run.
Psychologist Robert Bjork first used the phrase “desirable difficulties” in
1994. Twenty years later, he and a coauthor concluded a book chapter on
applying the science of learning like this: “Above all, the most basic
message is that teachers and students must avoid interpreting current
performance as learning. Good performance on a test during the learning

process can indicate mastery, but learners and teachers need to be aware
that such performance will often index, instead, fast but fleeting progress.”
Here is the bright side: over the past forty years, Americans have
increasingly said in national surveys that current students are getting a
worse education than they themselves did, and they have been wrong.
Scores from the National Assessment of Educational Progress, “the nation’s
report card,” have risen steadily since the 1970s. Unquestionably, students
today have mastery of basic skills that is superior to students of the past.
School has not gotten worse. The goals of education have just become
loftier.
Education economist Greg Duncan, one of the most influential education
professors in the world, has documented this trend. Focusing on “using
procedures” problems worked well forty years ago when the world was
flush with jobs that paid middle-class salaries for procedural tasks, like
typing, filing, and working on an assembly line. “Increasingly,” according
to Duncan, “jobs that pay well require employees to be able to solve
unexpected problems, often while working in groups. . . . These shifts in
labor force demands have in turn put new and increasingly stringent
demands on schools.”
Here is a math question from the early 1980s basic skills test of all public
school sixth graders in Massachusetts:
Carol can ride her bike 10 miles per hour. If Carol rides her bike to the store, how long will it
take?
To solve this problem, you would need to know:
A) How far it is to the store.
B) What kind of bike Carol has.
C) What time Carol will leave.
D) How much Carol has to spend.
And here is a question Massachusetts sixth graders got in 2011:
Paige, Rosie, and Cheryl each spent exactly $9.00 at the same snack bar.
• Paige bought 3 bags of peanuts.
• Rosie bought 2 bags of peanuts and 2 pretzels.
• Cheryl bought 1 bag of peanuts, 1 pretzel, and 1 milk shake.

A. What is the cost, in dollars, of 1 bag of peanuts? Show or explain how you got your
answer.
B. What is the cost, in dollars, of 1 pretzel? Show or explain how you got your answer .
C. What is the total number of pretzels that can be bought for the cost of 1 milk shake?
Show or explain how you got your answer.
For every problem like the first one, the simple formula “distance = rate
× time” could be memorized and applied. The second problem requires the
connection of multiple concepts that are then applied to a new situation.
The teaching strategies that current teachers experienced when they were
students are no longer good enough. Knowledge increasingly needs not
merely to be durable, but also flexible—both sticky and capable of broad
application.
Toward the end of the eighth-grade math class that I watched with
Lindsey Richland, the students settled into a worksheet for what
psychologists call “blocked” practice. That is, practicing the same thing
repeatedly, each problem employing the same procedure. It leads to
excellent immediate performance, but for knowledge to be flexible, it
should be learned under varied conditions, an approach called varied or
mixed practice, or, to researchers, “interleaving.”
Interleaving has been shown to improve inductive reasoning. When
presented with different examples mixed together, students learn to create
abstract generalizations that allow them to apply what they learned to
material they have never encountered before. For example, say you plan to
visit a museum and want to be able to identify the artist (Cézanne, Picasso,
or Renoir) of paintings there that you have never seen. Before you go,
instead of studying a stack of Cézanne flash cards, and then a stack of
Picasso flash cards, and then a stack of Renoir, you should put the cards
together and shuffle, so they will be interleaved. You will struggle more
(and probably feel less confident) during practice, but be better equipped on
museum day to discern each painter’s style, even for paintings that weren’t
in the flash cards.
In a study using college math problems, students who learned in blocks
—all examples of a particular type of problem at once—performed a lot
worse come test time than students who studied the exact same problems
but all mixed up. The blocked-practice students learned procedures for each
type of problem through repetition. The mixed-practice students learned
how to differentiate types of problems.

The same effect has appeared among learners studying everything from
butterfly species identification to psychological-disorder diagnosis. In
research on naval air defense simulations, individuals who engaged in
highly mixed practice performed worse than blocked practicers during
training, when they had to respond to potential threat scenarios that became
familiar over the course of the training. At test time, everyone faced
completely new scenarios, and the mixed-practice group destroyed the
blocked-practice group.
And yet interleaving tends to fool learners about their own progress. In
one of Kornell and Bjork’s interleaving studies, 80 percent of students were
sure they had learned better with blocked than mixed practice, whereas 80
percent performed in a manner that proved the opposite. The feeling of
learning, it turns out, is based on before-your-eyes progress, while deep
learning is not. “When your intuition says block,” Kornell told me, “you
should probably interleave.”
Interleaving is a desirable difficulty that frequently holds for both
physical and mental skills. A simple motor-skill example is an experiment
in which piano students were asked to learn to execute, in one-fifth of a
second, a particular left-hand jump across fifteen keys. They were allowed
190 practice attempts. Some used all of those practicing the fifteen-key
jump, while others switched between eight-, twelve-,fifteen-, and twenty-
two-key jumps. When the piano students were invited back for a test, those
who underwent the mixed practice were faster and more accurate at the
fifteen-key jump than the students who had only practiced that exact jump.
The “desirable difficulty” coiner himself, Robert Bjork, once commented
on Shaquille O’Neal’s perpetual free-throw woes to say that instead of
continuing to practice from the free-throw line, O’Neal should practice
from a foot in front of and behind it to learn the motor modulation he
needed.
Whether the task is mental or physical, interleaving improves the ability
to match the right strategy to a problem. That happens to be a hallmark of
expert problem solving. Whether chemists, physicists, or political scientists,
the most successful problem solvers spend mental energy figuring out what
type of problem they are facing before matching a strategy to it, rather than
jumping in with memorized procedures. In that way, they are just about the
precise opposite of experts who develop in kind learning environments, like
chess masters, who rely heavily on intuition. Kind learning environment

experts choose a strategy and then evaluate; experts in less repetitive
environments evaluate and then choose.
Desirable difficulties like testing and spacing make knowledge stick. It
becomes durable. Desirable difficulties like making connections and
interleaving make knowledge flexible, useful for problems that never
appeared in training. All slow down learning and make performance suffer,
in the short term. That can be a problem, because like the Air Force cadets,
we all reflexively assess our progress by how we are doing right now . And
like the Air Force cadets, we are often wrong.
In 2017, Greg Duncan, the education economist, along with psychologist
Drew Bailey and colleagues, reviewed sixty-seven early childhood
education programs meant to boost academic achievement. Programs like
Head Start did give a head start, but academically that was about it. The
researchers found a pervasive “fadeout” effect, where a temporary academic
advantage quickly diminished and often completely vanished. On a graph, it
looks eerily like the kind that show future elite athletes catching up to their
peers who got a head start in deliberate practice.
A reason for this, the researchers concluded, is that early childhood
education programs teach “closed” skills that can be acquired quickly with
repetition of procedures, but that everyone will pick up at some point
anyway. The fadeout was not a disappearance of skill so much as the rest of
the world catching up. The motor-skill equivalent would be teaching a kid
to walk a little early. Everyone is going to learn it anyway, and while it
might be temporarily impressive, there is no evidence that rushing it
matters.
The research team recommended that if programs want to impart lasting
academic benefits they should focus instead on “open” skills that scaffold
later knowledge. Teaching kids to read a little early is not a lasting
advantage. Teaching them how to hunt for and connect contextual clues to
understand what they read can be. As with all desirable difficulties, the
trouble is that a head start comes fast, but deep learning is slow. “The
slowest growth,” the researchers wrote, occurs “for the most complex
skills.”
Duncan landed on the Today show discussing his team’s findings. The
counteropinion was supplied by parents and an early childhood teacher======================================================== cutting
edge of artificial intelligence: “neural networks” that learn how to identify
images from examples (when you search cat pictures, for instance) were
conceived as akin to the neurons of the brain, and “genetic algorithms” are
conceptually based on evolution by natural selection—solutions are tried,
evaluated, and the more successful solutions pass on properties to the next
round of solutions, ad infinitum. It is the furthest extension of the type of
thinking that was foreign to Luria’s premodern villagers, whose problem
solving depended on direct experience.
Kepler was facing a problem not just new to himself, but to all humanity.
There was no experience database to draw on. To investigate whether he
should be the first ever to propose “action at a distance” in the heavens (a

mysterious power invisibly traversing space and then appearing at its
target), he turned to analogy (odor, heat, light) to consider whether it was
conceptually possible. He followed that up with a litany of distant analogies
(magnets, boats) to think through the problem.
Most problems, of course, are not new, so we can rely on what Gentner
calls “surface” analogies from our own experience. “Most of the time, if
you’re reminded of things that are similar on the surface, they’re going to
be relationally similar as well,” she explained. Remember how you fixed
the clogged bathtub drain in the old apartment? That will probably come to
mind when the kitchen sink is clogged in the new one.
But the idea that surface analogies that pop to mind work for novel
problems is a “kind world” hypothesis, Gentner told me. Like kind learning
environments, a kind world is based on repeating patterns. “It’s perfectly
fine,” she said, “if you stay in the same village or the same savannah all
your life.” The current world is not so kind; it requires thinking that cannot
fall back on previous experience. Like math students, we need to be able to
pick a strategy for problems we have never seen before. “In the life we lead
today,” Gentner told me, “we need to be reminded of things that are only
abstractly or relationally similar. And the more creative you want to be, the
more important that is.”
In the course of studying problem solving in the 1930s, Karl Duncker posed
one of the most famous hypothetical problems in all of cognitive
psychology. It goes like this:
Suppose you are a doctor faced with a patient who has a malignant stomach tumor. It is
impossible to operate on this patient, but unless the tumor is destroyed the patient will die.
There is a kind of ray that can be used to destroy the tumor. If the rays reach the tumor all at
once at a sufficiently high intensity, the tumor will be destroyed. Unfortunately, at this
intensity the healthy tissue that the rays pass through on the way to the tumor will also be
destroyed. At lower intensities the rays are harmless to healthy tissue, but they will not affect
the tumor either. What type of procedure might be used to destroy the tumor with the rays, and
at the same time avoid destroying the healthy tissue?
It’s on you to excise the tumor and save the patient, but the rays are either
too powerful or too weak. How can you solve this? While you’re thinking, a
little story to pass the time: There once was a general who needed to capture
a fortress in the middle of a country from a brutal dictator. If the general
could get all of his troops to the fortress at the same time, they would have

no problem taking it. Plenty of roads that the troops could travel radiated
out from the fort like wheel spokes, but they were strewn with mines, so
only small groups of soldiers could safely traverse any one road. The
general came up with a plan. He divided the army into small groups, and
each group traveled a different road leading to the fortress. They
synchronized their watches, and made sure to converge on the fortress at the
same time via their separate roads. The plan worked. The general captured
the fortress and overthrew the dictator.
Have you saved the patient yet? Just one last story while you’re still
thinking: Years ago, a small-town fire chief arrived at a woodshed fire,
concerned that it would spread to a nearby house if it was not extinguished
quickly. There was no hydrant nearby, but the shed was next to a lake, so
there was plenty of water. Dozens of neighbors were already taking turns
with buckets throwing water on the shed, but they weren’t making any
progress. The neighbors were surprised when the fire chief yelled at them to
stop, and to all go fill their buckets in the lake. When they returned, the
chief arranged them in a circle around the shed, and on the count of three
had them all throw their water at once. The fire was immediately dampened,
and soon thereafter extinguished. The town gave the fire chief a pay raise as
a reward for quick thinking.
Are you done saving your patient? Don’t feel bad, almost no one solves
it. At least not at first, and then nearly everyone solves it. Only about 10
percent of people solve “Duncker’s radiation problem” initially. Presented
with both the radiation problem and the fortress story, about 30 percent
solve it and save the patient. Given both of those plus the fire chief story,
half solve it. Given the fortress and the fire chief stories and then told to use
them to help solve the radiation problem, 80 percent save the patient.
The answer is that you (the doctor) could direct multiple low-intensity
rays at the tumor from different directions, leaving healthy tissue intact, but
converging at the tumor site with enough collective intensity to destroy it.
Just like how the general divided up troops and directed them to converge at
the fortress, and how the fire chief arranged neighbors with their buckets
around the burning shed so that their water would converge on the fire
simultaneously.
Those results are from a series of 1980s analogical thinking studies.
Really, don’t feel bad if you didn’t get it. In a real experiment you would
have taken more time, and whether you got it or not is unimportant. The

important part is what it shows about problem solving. A gift of a single
analogy from a different domain tripled the proportion of solvers who got
the radiation problem. Two analogies from disparate domains gave an even
bigger boost. The impact of the fortress story alone was as large as if
solvers were just straight out told this guiding principle: “If you need a
large force to accomplish some purpose, but are prevented from applying
such a force directly, many smaller forces applied simultaneously from
different directions may work just as well.”
The scientists who did that work expected that analogies would be fuel
for problem solving, but they were surprised that most solvers working on
the radiation problem did not find clues in the fortress story until they were
directed to do so. “One might well have supposed,” the scientists wrote, that
“being in a psychology experiment would have led virtually all subjects to
consider how the first part [of the study] might be related to the second.”
Human intuition, it appears, is not very well engineered to make use of
the best tools when faced with what the researchers called “ ill-defined”
problems. Our experience-based instincts are set up well for Tiger domains,
the kind world Gentner described, where problems and solutions repeat.
An experiment on Stanford international relations students during the
Cold War provided a cautionary tale about relying on kind-world reasoning
—that is, drawing only on the first analogy that feels familiar. The students
were told that a small, fictional democratic country was under threat from a
totalitarian neighbor, and they had to decide how the United States should
respond. Some students were given descriptions that likened the situation to
World War II (refugees in boxcars; a president “from New York, the same
state as FDR”; a meeting in “Winston Churchill Hall”). For others, it was
likened to Vietnam, (a president “from Texas, the same state as LBJ,” and
refugees in boats). The international relations students who were reminded
of World War II were far more likely to choose to go to war; the students
reminded of Vietnam opted for nonmilitary diplomacy. That phenomenon
has been documented all over the place. College football coaches rated the
same player’s potential very differently depending on what former player he
was likened to in an introductory description, even with all other
information kept exactly the same.
With the difficult radiation problem, the most successful strategy
employed multiple situations that were not at all alike on the surface, but
held deep structural similarities. Most problem solvers are not like Kepler.

They will stay inside of the problem at hand, focused on the internal details,
and perhaps summon other medical knowledge, since it is on the surface a
medical problem. They will not intuitively turn to distant analogies to probe
solutions. They should, though, and they should make sure some of those
analogies are, on the surface, far removed from the current problem. In a
wicked world, relying upon experience from a single domain is not only
limiting, it can be disastrous .
The trouble with using no more than a single analogy, particularly one from
a very similar situation, is that it does not help battle the natural impulse to
employ the “inside view,” a term coined by psychologists Daniel Kahneman
and Amos Tversky. We take the inside view when we make judgments
based narrowly on the details of a particular project that are right in front of
us.
Kahneman had a personal experience with the dangers of the inside view
when he assembled a team to write a high school curriculum on the science
of decision making. After a full year of weekly meetings, he surveyed the
entire team to find out how long everyone thought the project would take.
The lowest estimate was one and a half years, the highest two and a half
years. Kahneman then asked a team member======================================================== in cartoons when a robot’s belly opens
up and a boxing glove fires out. He stuck a gripping tool on the outer end
that closed when he squeezed handles to extend the arm. Now he could
lazily retrieve distant objects .
The company president saw the new hire goofing around with his
contraption and called him into his office. “I thought I would be scolded,”
Yokoi recalled. Instead, the desperate executive told Yokoi to turn his
device into a game. Yokoi added a group of colored balls that could be
grabbed, and the “Ultra Hand” went to market immediately. It was
Nintendo’s first toy, and it sold 1.2 million units. The company paid off a
chunk of its debt. That was the end of Yokoi’s maintenance career. The
president assigned him to start Nintendo’s first research and development
department. The facility that briefly made instant rice was converted into a
toy factory.
More toy success followed, but it was an abject failure that first year that
profoundly influenced Yokoi. He helped create Drive Game, a tabletop unit
where a player used a steering wheel to guide a plastic car along a
racetrack, which scrolled beneath the car via electric motor. It was the first
Nintendo toy that required electricity, and a complete flop. The internal
mechanism was advanced for the time and ended up so complex and fragile
that it was expensive and hard to produce, and units were riddled with

defects. But the debacle was the seed of a creative philosophy Yokoi would
hone for the next thirty years.
Yokoi was well aware of his engineering limitations. As one aficionado
of game history put it, “He studied electronics at a time where the
technology was evolving faster than the snow melts in sunlight.” Yokoi had
no desire (or capability) to compete with electronics companies that were
racing one another to invent some entirely new sliver of dazzling
technology. Nor could Nintendo compete with Japan’s titans of traditional
toys—Bandai, Epoch, and Takara—on their familiar turf. With that, and
Drive Game, in mind, Yokoi embarked on an approach he called “lateral
thinking with withered technology.” Lateral thinking is a term coined in the
1960s for the reimagining of information in new contexts, including the
drawing together of seemingly disparate concepts or domains that can give
old ideas new uses. By “withered technology,” Yokoi meant tech that was
old enough to be extremely well understood and easily available, so it
didn’t require a specialist’s knowledge. The heart of his philosophy was
putting cheap, simple technology to use in ways no one else considered. If
he could not think more deeply about new technologies, he decided, he
would think more broadly about old ones. He intentionally retreated from
the cutting edge, and set to monozukuri .
He connected a transistor to a cheap, store-bought galvanometer, and
noticed he could measure the current flowing through his coworkers. Yokoi
imagined a toy that would make it fun for boys and girls to hold hands,
risqué at the time in Japan. 
*
 The Love Tester was nothing more than two
conductive handles and a gauge. Players grasped a handle and joined hands,
thereby completing the circuit. The gauge reported electrical current as if it
were a measure of the love between participants. The sweatier their palms,
the better a couple’s conductance. It was a hit among teenagers, and a party
prop for adults. Yokoi was encouraged. He committed to using technology
that had already become cheap, even obsolete, in new ways.
By the early 1970s, radio-controlled toy cars were popular, but good RC
technology could cost a month’s salary, so it was a hobby reserved for
adults. As he often did, Yokoi pondered a way to democratize RC toys. So
he took the tech backward. Expense came from the need for multiple radio
control channels. Cars started with two channels, one to control the engine
output and one the steering wheel. The more functions a toy had, the more
channels it required. Yokoi stripped the technology down to the absolute

bare minimum, a single-channel RC car that could only turn left. Product
name: Lefty RX. It was less than a tenth the cost of typical RC toys, and
just fine for counterclockwise races. Even when it did have to navigate
obstacles, kids easily learned how to left-turn their way out of trouble.
One day in 1977, while riding the bullet train back from a business trip in
Tokyo, Yokoi awoke from a nap to see a salaryman playing with a
calculator to relieve the boredom of his commute. The trend at the time was
to make toys as impressively big as possible. What if, Yokoi wondered,
there was a game small enough that an adult could play it discreetly while
commuting? He sat on the idea for a while, until one day when he was
drafted to be the company president’s chauffeur. The normal driver had the
flu, and thanks to Yokoi’s interest in foreign vehicles, he was the only one
of Nintendo’s hundred employees who had driven a car with the steering
wheel on the left, like the president’s Cadillac. He floated his miniature
game idea from the front seat. “He was nodding along,” Yokoi recalled,
“but he didn’t seem all that interested.”
A week later, Yokoi received a surprise visit from executives at Sharp, a
calculator manufacturer. At the meeting Yokoi had driven him to, the
Nintendo president sat next to the head of Sharp, and relayed his
chauffeur’s idea. For several years, Sharp had been engaged in calculator
wars with Casio. In the early 1970s a calculator cost a few hundred dollars,
but as components got cheaper and companies raced for market share, cost
plummeted and the market saturated. Sharp was eager to find a new use for
its LCD screens.
When Sharp executives heard Yokoi’s idea for a video game the size of a
business card holder, and that could be held in the lap and played with
thumbs, they were intrigued, and skeptical. Was it worth mobilizing a new
partnership just to reuse technology that had become dirt cheap? They
weren’t convinced it was even possible to make a display smooth enough
for the game Yokoi proposed, which involved a juggler whose arms move
left and right, trying not to drop balls as they speed up. Nonetheless, the
Sharp engineers made Yokoi an LCD screen in the appropriate size. Then he
hit a severe problem. The electronics in the tiny game were packed in such
a thin space that the liquid crystal display element touched a plate in the
screen, which created a visual distortion of light and dark bands, known as
Newton’s rings. Yokoi needed a sliver of space between the LCD and the
plate. He took an idea from the credit card industry. With a slight tweak of

the old hanafuda printing machines, he delicately embossed the screen with
hundreds of dots to keep the plate and the display element narrowly
separated. As a final flourish, with just a few hours of work, a colleague
helped him program a clock into the display. LCD screens were already in
wristwatches, and they figured it would give adults an excuse to buy their
“Game & Watch.”
In 1980, Nintendo released its first three Game & Watch models, with
high hopes for one hundred thousand sales. Six hundred thousand copies
sold in the first year. Nintendo could not keep up with international
demand. The Donkey Kong Game & Watch was released in 1982 and alone
sold eight million units. Game & Watch remained in production for eleven
years and sold 43.4 million units. It also happened to include another Yokoi
invention that would be used laterally: the directional pad, or “D-pad,”
which allowed a player to move their character in any direction using just a
thumb. After the success of the Game & Watch, Nintendo put the D-pad in
controllers on its new Nintendo Entertainment System. That home console
brought arcade games into millions of homes around the world, and
launched a new era of gaming. The combination of successes—the Game &
Watch and the NES—also led to Yokoi’s lateral-thinking magnum opus, a
handheld console that played any game a developer could put on a
cartridge: the Game Boy.
From a technological standpoint, even in 1989, the Game Boy was
laughable. Yokoi’s team cut every corner. The Game Boy’s processor had
been cutting edge—in the 1970s. By the mid-1980s, home consoles were in
fierce competition over graphics quality. The Game Boy was an eyesore. It
featured a total of four grayscale shades, displayed on a tiny screen that was
tinted a greenish hue somewhere between mucus and old alfalfa. Graphics
in fast lateral motion smeared across the screen. To top it off, the Game Boy
had to compete with handheld consoles from Sega and Atari that were
technologically superior in every way. And it destroyed them .
What its withered technology lacked, the Game Boy made up in user
experience. It was cheap. It could fit in a large pocket. It was all but
indestructible. If a drop cracked the screen—and it had to be a horrific drop
—it kept on ticking. If it were left in a backpack that went in the washing
machine, once it dried out it was ready to roll a few days later. Unlike its
power-guzzling color competitors, it played for days (or weeks) on AA
batteries. Old hardware was extremely familiar to developers inside and

outside Nintendo, and with their creativity and speed unencumbered by
learning new technology, they pumped out games as if they were early
ancestors of iPhone app designers— Tetris, Super Mario Land , The Final
Fantasy Legend, and a slew of sports games released in the first year were
all smash hits. With simple technology, Yokoi’s team sidestepped the
hardware arms race and drew the game programming community onto its
team.
The Game Boy became the Sony Walkman of video gaming, forgoing
top-of-the-line tech for portability and affordability. It sold 118.7 million
units, far and away the bestselling console of the twentieth century. Not bad
for the little company that was allowed to sell hanafuda .
Even though he was revered by then, Yokoi had to push and shove
internally for his “lateral thinking with withered======================================================== and anyone in one circle had numerous entry points to
communicate with the next circle, rather than just a single superior who
acted as a gate. When she explained it to me, it seemed a lot like the kind of
incongruence Geveden worked to engender, and the kind that Captain
Lesmes wielded: a differentiated chain of command and chain of
communication that produced incongruence, and thus a healthy tension. An
occasionally confusing but effective mix of strong formal and informal
culture. A trio of psychology and management professors who analyzed a
century of Himalayan mountain climbers—5,104 expedition groups in all—
found that teams from countries that strongly valued hierarchical culture got
more climbers to the summit, but also had more climbers die along the way.
The trend did not hold for solo climbers, only teams, and the researchers
argued that hierarchical teams benefitted from a clear chain of command,
but suffered from a one-way chain of communication that obscured
problems. The teams needed elements of both hierarchy and individualism
to both excel and survive.
It is a difficult balancing act, cultivating aspects of a culture that seem on
their face to push against one another. There are no rules for the qualitative
hunches of space shuttle engineers or pararescue jumpers lacking intel.
Incongruence, as the experimental research testified, helps people to
discover useful cues, and to drop the traditional tools when it makes sense.

Karl Weick’s tools insight reminded me of an experience I had as a
graduate student, working aboard the Research Vessel Maurice Ewing in the
Pacific Ocean. The ship was bouncing sound waves off the ocean floor to
image underwater volcanoes. I got to know a few volcano experts who truly
saw the world through volcano-colored glasses. Despite ample evidence
that an asteroid impact was either the primary cause of the dinosaur
extinction, or at least very important, they insisted that volcanic eruptions
were clearly the real culprit. If anything, one told me, the asteroid was
really just a lucky knockout punch; volcanoes had already delivered the
body blows. He seemed to attribute a whole slew of mass extinctions to
volcanoes, some with compelling evidence, others with pretty much none.
When all you have is a volcanologist, I learned, every extinction looks like
a volcano. That is not necessarily bad for the world. They should challenge
accepted wisdom, and it drives those narrowly focused experts to find
volcano knowledge where no one else is looking. But when entire
specialties grow up around devotion to a particular tool, the result can be
disastrous myopia .
Interventional cardiologists, for example, specialize in treating chest pain
by placing stents—a metal tube that pries open blood vessels. It makes a ton
of sense: a patient comes in with chest pain, imaging shows a narrowed
artery, a stent is placed to open it and preclude a heart attack. The logic is so
compelling that a prominent cardiologist coined the term “oculostenotic
reflex,” from the Latin for “eye,” and stenotic, from the Greek for “narrow,”
meaning: if you see a blockage, you’ll reflexively fix a blockage. Except,
repeatedly, randomized clinical trials that compared stents with more
conservative forms of treatment show that stents for patients with stable
chest pain prevent zero heart attacks and extend the lives of patients a grand
total of not at all.
The interventional cardiologists are seeing and treating one tiny part of a
complicated system; the cardiovascular system isn’t a kitchen sink, and it
turns out that treating one blocked pipe often doesn’t help. Plus, about one
in fifty patients who get a stent will suffer a serious complication or die as a
result of the implantation procedure. Despite the bird’s-eye evidence,
cardiologists who specialize in using that tool reported that they simply
cannot believe that stenting doesn’t work, even when their compensation
was not tied to performing the procedure. Being told to stop using stents
was like being told to forget you are an interventional cardiologist. The

instinct, often well-meaning, to use interventions that seem logical but that
have not been shown to help may explain the finding of a 2015 study:
patients with heart failure or cardiac arrest were less likely to die if they
were admitted during a national cardiology conference, when thousands of
top cardiologists were away. “At large cardiology conventions, my
colleagues and I have often joked that the convention center would be the
safest place in the world to have a heart attack,” cardiologist Rita F.
Redberg wrote. “[The conference study] turned that analysis around.”
Similarly harrowing findings are now appearing all over medicine,
wherever specialties have arisen for the use of a particular tool. One of the
most common orthopedic surgeries in the world involves shaving a torn
meniscus—a piece of cartilage in the knee—back to its original crescent
shape. A patient reports knee pain; an MRI shows a torn meniscus;
naturally, a surgeon wants to fix it. When five orthopedic clinics in Finland
compared the surgery with “sham surgery”—that is, surgeons took patients
with knee pain and a torn meniscus to operating rooms, made incisions,
faked surgeries, and sewed them back up and sent them to physical therapy
—they found that sham surgery worked just as well. Most people with a
torn meniscus, it turns out, don’t have any symptoms at all and will never
even know. And for those who do have a torn meniscus and knee pain, the
tear may have nothing to do with the pain.
Seeing small pieces of a larger jigsaw puzzle in isolation, no matter how
hi-def the picture, is insufficient to grapple with humanity’s greatest
challenges. We have long known the laws of thermodynamics, but struggle
to predict the spread of a forest fire. We know how cells work, but can’t
predict the poetry that will be written by a human made up of them. The
frog’s-eye view of individual parts is not enough. A healthy ecosystem
needs biodiversity.
Even now, even in endeavors that engender specialization unprecedented
in history, there are beacons of breadth. Individuals who live by historian
Arnold Toynbee’s words that “no tool is omnicompetent. There is no such
thing as a master-key that will unlock all doors.” Rather than wielding a
single tool, they have managed to collect and protect an entire toolshed, and
they show the power of range in a hyperspecialized world.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 12
Deliberate Amateurs
JANUARY 23, 1954 , was a Saturday, and Oliver Smithies was in the lab in
Toronto, as usual. “Saturday morning experiments,” he called them.
Nobody was around, and he felt free from the strictures of normal work. On
Saturday, he didn’t have to weigh things carefully. He could take a pinch of
this, a dash of that for an experiment that during the week would be
considered a waste of time and equipment. He could try something that
intrigued him, but that had little to do with his primary project. One needs
to let the brain think about something different from its daily work, he
would say. “On Saturday,” as Smithies put it, “you don’t have to be
completely rational.”
Smithies worked in a lab studying insulin, and his job was to find an
insulin precursor. The work was stuck, literally. The method of separating
molecules so they could be studied involved running an electric current
through a special type of moist paper. The molecules moved apart as they
crossed the paper. But insulin just stuck to it. Smithies had heard that the
local children’s hospital had tried moist starch grains instead of paper.
Starch solved the stickiness problem, but would require him to cut the
grains into fifty slices and analyze each one individually to find out where
the molecules ended up. That would take forever, so it was a nonstarter.
Then he remembered something, from when he was twelve.
Smithies grew up in the town of Halifax in England, and would watch his
mother starch his father’s work shirts to make the collars firm. She dipped
each shirt in gooey hot starch, and then ironed it. To help her tidy up,

Smithies disposed of the starch. He noticed that when it cooled, the starch
congealed into a jelly.
Smithies had a skeleton key for the building, and went around raiding
supply closets for starch grains. He cooked the grains, let them cool into a
gel, and tried it in place of the paper. When he applied electrical current, the
insulin molecules separated according to size in the gel. “Very promising!”
his notebook page from that day reads. In subsequent years, “gel
electrophoresis” was refined, and revolutionized biology and chemistry.
Individual fragments of DNA and components of human blood serum could
be separated and studied.
When I spoke with Smithies in 2016, he was ninety years old and in his
lab. He was thinking about how the kidney separates large and small
molecules. “At the moment, it’s a Saturday morning theoretical
experiment,” he said.
What struck me as Smithies spoke was his joy in experimentation. Not
just in his lab, but in his life. He embodied a number of tenets I set out to
explore in this book. From the outside, he looked like the consummate
hyperspecialist. He was a molecular biochemist, after all. Except, molecular
biochemist wasn’t really a thing when Smithies was in training. First he
studied medicine, until he attended a talk by a professor who was
combining chemistry and biology. “He lectured about this new subject
which hadn’t yet been invented, in a sense,” Smithies told me. “It was
marvelous, and I thought, ‘I’d like to do that. I’d better learn some
chemistry.’” He turned on a dime and switched to studying chemistry. He
never even thought to feel behind. On the contrary, “that was really very
valuable, because at the end I had a good background in biology and wasn’t
frightened of biology, and then I wasn’t frightened of chemistry. That gave
me a great deal of power in the early days of molecular biology.” What
sounds======================================================== those
features was associated with differences in student achievement across
countries. There were similarities too. In every classroom in every country,
teachers relied on two main types of questions.
The more common were “using procedures” questions: basically, practice
at something that was just learned. For instance, take the formula for the
sum of the interior angles of a polygon (180 × (number of polygon sides −

2)), and apply it to polygons on a worksheet. The other common variety
was “making connections” questions, which connected students to a
broader concept, rather than just a procedure. That was more like when the
teacher asked students why the formula works, or made them try to figure
out if it works for absolutely any polygon from a triangle to an octagon.
Both types of questions are useful and both were posed by teachers in every
classroom in every country studied. But an important difference emerged in
what teachers did after they asked a making-connections problem.
Rather than letting students grapple with some confusion, teachers often
responded to their solicitations with hint-giving that morphed a making-
connections problem into a using-procedures one. That is exactly what the
charismatic teacher in the American classroom was doing. Lindsey
Richland, a University of Chicago professor who studies learning, watched
that video with me, and told me that when the students were playing
multiple choice with the teacher, “what they’re actually doing is seeking
rules.” They were trying to turn a conceptual problem they didn’t
understand into a procedural one they could just execute. “We’re very good,
humans are, at trying to do the least amount of work that we have to in
order to accomplish a task,” Richland told me. Soliciting hints toward a
solution is both clever and expedient. The problem is that when it comes to
learning concepts that can be broadly wielded, expedience can backfire.
In the United States, about one-fifth of questions posed to students began
as making-connections problems. But by the time the students were done
soliciting hints from the teacher and solving the problems, a grand total of
zero percent remained making-connections problems. Making-connections
problems did not survive the teacher-student interactions.
Teachers in every country fell into the same trap at times, but in the
higher-performing countries plenty of making-connections problems
remained that way as the class struggled to figure them out. In Japan, a little
more than half of all problems were making-connections problems, and half
of those stayed that way through the solving. An entire class period could
be just one problem with many parts. When a student offered an idea for
how to approach a problem, rather than engaging in multiple choice, the
teacher had them come to the board and put a magnet with their name on it
next to the idea. By the end of class, one problem on a blackboard the size
of an entire wall served as a captain’s log of the class’s collective
intellectual voyage, dead ends and all. Richland originally tried to label the

videotaped lessons with a single topic of the day, “but we couldn’t do it
with Japan,” she said, “because you could engage with these problems
using so much different content.” (There is a specific Japanese word to
describe chalkboard writing that tracks conceptual connections over the
course of collective problem solving: bansho .)
Just as it is in golf, procedure practice is important in math. But when it
comprises the entire math training strategy, it’s a problem. “Students do not
view mathematics as a system ,” Richland and her colleagues wrote. They
view it as just a set of procedures. Like when Patrick was asked how
variable expressions connected to the world, and answered that they were
good for answering questions in math class.
In their research, Richland and her collaborators highlighted the stunning
degree of reliance community college students—41 percent of all
undergraduate students in the United States—have on memorized
algorithms. Asked whether a / 5 or a / 8 is greater, 53 percent of students
answered correctly, barely better than guessing. Asked to explain their
answers, students frequently pointed to some algorithm. Students
remembered that they should focus on the bottom number, but a lot of them
recalled that a larger denominator meant a / 8 was bigger than a / 5. Others
remembered that they should try to get a common denominator, but weren’t
sure why. There were students who reflexively cross-multiplied, because
they knew that’s what you do when you see fractions, even though it had no
relevance to the problem at hand. Only 15 percent of the students began
with broad, conceptual reasoning that if you divide something into five
parts, each piece will be larger than if you divide the same thing into eight
parts. Every single one of those students got the correct answer.
Some of the college students seemed to have unlearned number sense
that most children have, like that adding two numbers gives you a third
comprised of the first two. A student who was asked to verify that 462 +
253 = 715, subtracted 253 from 715, and got 462. When he was asked for
another strategy, he could not come up with subtracting 462 from 715 to see
that it equals 253, because the rule he learned was to subtract the number to
the right of the plus sign to check the answer.
When younger students bring home problems that force them to make
connections, Richland told me, “parents are like, ‘Lemme show you, there’s
a faster, easier way.’” If the teacher didn’t already turn the work into using-
procedures practice, well-meaning parents will. They aren’t comfortable

with bewildered kids, and they want understanding to come quickly and
easily. But for learning that is both durable (it sticks) and flexible (it can be
applied broadly), fast and easy is precisely the problem.
“Some people argue that part of the reason U.S. students don’t do as well on
international measures of high school knowledge is that they’re doing too
well in class,” Nate Kornell, a cognitive psychologist at Williams College,
told me. “What you want is to make it easy to make it hard.”
Kornell was explaining the concept of “desirable difficulties,” obstacles
that make learning more challenging, slower, and more frustrating in the
short term, but better in the long term. Excessive hint-giving, like in the
eighth-grade math classroom, does the opposite; it bolsters immediate
performance, but undermines progress in the long run. Several desirable
difficulties that can be used in the classroom are among the most rigorously
supported methods of enhancing learning, and the engaging eighth-grade
math teacher accidentally subverted all of them in the well-intended interest
of before-your-eyes progress.
One of those desirable difficulties is known as the “generation effect.”
Struggling to generate an answer on your own, even a wrong one, enhances
subsequent learning. Socrates was apparently on to something when he
forced pupils to generate answers rather than bestowing them. It requires
the learner to intentionally sacrifice current performance for future benefit.
Kornell and psychologist Janet Metcalfe tested sixth graders in the South
Bronx on vocabulary learning, and varied how they studied in order to
explore the generation effect. Students were given some of the words and
definitions together. For example, To discuss something in order to come to
an agreement: Negotiate . For others, they were shown only the definition
and given a little time to think of the right word, even if they had no clue,
before it was revealed. When they were tested later, students did way better
on the definition-first words. The experiment was repeated on students at
Columbia University, with more obscure words (Characterized by haughty
scorn: Supercilious ). The results were the same. Being forced to generate
answers improves subsequent learning even if the generated answer is
wrong. It can even help to be wildly wrong. Metcalfe and colleagues have
repeatedly demonstrated a “hypercorrection effect.” The more confident a
learner is of their wrong answer, the better the information sticks when they

subsequently learn the right answer. Tolerating big mistakes can create the
best learning opportunities. 
*
Kornell helped show that the long-run benefits of facilitated screw-ups
extend to primates only slightly less studious than Columbia students.
Specifically, to Oberon and Macduff, two rhesus macaques trained to learn
lists by trial and error. In a fascinating experiment, Kornell worked with an
animal cognition expert to give Oberon and Macduff lists of random
pictures to memorize, in a particular order. (Example: a tulip, a school of
fish, a cardinal, Halle Berry, and a raven.) The pictures were all displayed
simultaneously on a screen. By pressing them in trial-and-error fashion, the
monkeys had to learn the desired order and then practice it repeatedly. But
all practice was not designed equal.
In some practice sessions, Oberon (who was generally brighter) and
Macduff were automatically given hints on every trial, showing them the
next picture in the list. For other lists, they could voluntarily touch a hint
box on the screen whenever they were stuck and wanted to be shown the
next item. For still other lists, they could ask for a hint on half of their
practice attempts. And for a final group of lists, no hints at all.
In the practice sessions with hints upon request, the monkeys behaved a
lot like humans. They almost always requested hints when they were
available, and thus got a lot of the lists right. Overall, they had about 250
trials to learn each list.
After three days of practice, the scientists took off the training wheels.
Starting on day four, the memorizing monkeys had to repeat all the lists
from every training condition without any hints whatsoever. It was a
performance disaster. Oberon only got about one-third of the lists======================================================== Matrices, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
shift from utilitarian thinking to, ref1
airline crews, ref1 , ref2
Alexander the Great, ref1
AlphaZero chess program, ref1
Altman, Doug, ref1
Amaral, Luís A. Nunes, ref1
“Ambiguous Sorting Task” of Gentner, ref1
analogical thinking, ref1
about, ref1
in discovery process, ref1
and Duncker’s hypothetical problems, ref1
and Gentner’s “Ambiguous Sorting Task,” ref1
of Kepler, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
with multiple/diverse analogies, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
outside view used in, ref1
and predictive expertise, ref1
with single analogies, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
and surface analogies, ref1 , ref2
Anna Maria della Pietà, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Appert, Nicolas, ref1 , ref2
apprenticeships, ref1
arbitrage opportunities, ref1
Argyris, Chris, ref1
Arnold, Denis, ref1
Arrowsmith, ref1
art and artists, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
artificial intelligence
analogical thinking regarding, ref1
and chess, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
and complex video games, ref1
and flu predictions, ref1
and Kaggle competitions, ref1
and open-ended problem solving, ref1
Atari, ref1 , ref2n

athletes and sports
and coach/athlete interactions, ref1n
and correcting motor-skills learning, ref1n
deliberate practice of, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
late starts/specialization in, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
sampling period of, ref1
split-second reactions of, ref1
authors, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
availability heuristic, ref1
Bach, Johann Sebastian, ref1
Bailey, Drew, ref1
banking industry, specialization in, ref1 , ref2
Baron, Jonathan, ref1 , ref2
Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother (Chua), ref1
“Beast Barracks” of U.S. Military Academy, ref1 , ref2
Berliner, Paul, ref1
Bingham, Alph, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Bjork, Robert, ref1 , ref2
“blocked” practice, ref1
Bohr, Niels, ref1
Boisjoly, Roger, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Boole, George, ref1
Boolean logic system, ref1
Bosch, Gundula, ref1
Boston Consulting Group, ref1
Bounce (Syed), ref1
Brady, Tom, ref1
Brennan Morrey, Ruth, ref1
Brexit vote, ref1
Broadway, ref1
Browne, Janet, ref1
Brubeck, Dave, ref1
Burney, Charles, ref1
Bush, Vannevar, ref1
business consultants, ref1
BWX Technologies, ref1
Caesar, Julius, ref1
“Calling Bullshit” course at University of Washington, ref1 , ref2
The Cambridge Handbook of Expertise and Expert Performance , ref1
Campitelli, Guillermo, ref1
Caplan, Bryan, ref1
cardiologists, ref1 , ref2
Carter, Ash, ref1
Carter Racing case study, ref1 , ref2 . See also Challenger disaster
Casadevall, Arturo, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Cecchini, Jack, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Challenger disaster, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
The Challenger Launch Decision (Vaughan), ref1
Chase, William G., ref1

Chernobyl nuclear accident site, ref1
chess
and artificial intelligence, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
and early specialization, ref1 , ref2
elite players’ ability to re-create game boards, ref1
experience-expertise link in, ref1
freestyle, ref1
human/computer teams in, ref1
pattern recognition in, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
and Polgar sisters, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
tactical/strategic thinking in, ref1
Chiara della Pietà, ref1
Chicago Symphony, ref1
Christensen, Clayton, ref1
Chua, Amy, ref1 , ref2
chunking, ref1
Churchill, Winston, ref1
classification schemes, ref1
“closed” skills, ref1
coach/athlete interactions, ref1n
cognitive entrenchment, ref1 , ref2
cognitive flexibility, ref1
Cohen, Sasha, ref1
Columbia disaster, ref1
comic books, ref1
communication, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
communication technologies, ref1
compensation in careers, ref1
The Confidence Game (Konnikova), ref1
confidence of learners, ref1
congruence/incongruence, cultural, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
conmen, strategies of, ref1
Connolly, Christopher, ref1
context principle, ref1
contexts of learning, variety in, ref1
Copernicus, Nicolaus, ref1
corporate HR policies, ref1
Cousins, Ellen, ref1
Cragin, Bruce, ref1 , ref2
creativity
in comic book industry, ref1
effect of generalizing on, ref1
and parenting styles, ref1 , ref2
and Yokoi’s “lateral thinking with withered technology,” ref1 , ref2
See also innovation and innovators
Crichton, Michael, ref1
critical thinking skills, ref1 , ref2
culture, organizational
and chain of communication, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
congruence/incongruence in, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4

of NASA, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
curiosity, ref1 , ref2
Dai, Shubin, ref1
Dane, Erik, ref1
Dark Horse Project, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Darwin, Charles, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Davis, John, ref1
Deep Blue vs. Kasparov, ref1 , ref2
“deep learning,” ref1 , ref2 , ref3
de Groot, Adriaan, ref1
Delbrück, Max, ref1
deliberate amateurs, ref1
deliberate practice
about, ref1
and distributed practice, ref1
of elite athletes, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
head starts in, ref1
and “kind” learning environments, ref1
in music training, ref1 , ref2
“desirable difficulties,” ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Dewey, John, ref1
discovery process, Dunbar’s documentation of, ref1
distributed practice/“spacing,” ref1 , ref2
Dodge, Wagner, ref1
Dokko, Gina, ref1
Domingos, Pedro, ref1
Dregni, Michael, ref1
Drucker, Peter ref1 , ref2
Dubin, Ferdinand, ref1
Duckworth, Angela, ref1 , ref2
Dunbar, Kevin, ref1
Duncan, Greg, ref1 , ref2
Duncker, Karl, ref1
Dyson, Freeman, ref1
early childhood education programs, ref1 , ref2n
early specialization
in athletics, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
in chess, ref1 , ref2
and deliberate practice, ref1 , ref2
and earnings, ref1 , ref2
and “kind” learning environments, ref1 , ref2
and “match quality” in vocations, ref1 , ref2
in music-skills acquisition, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
and pattern recognition, ref1
and personal changes, ref1
and savants, ref1
and Tiger families, ref1
Eastman, Scott, ref1
Ebbinghaus illusion, ref1 , ref2

Edison, Thomas, ref1
education
and choosing a field, ref1
and critical thinking abilities, ref1
of early and late specializers, ref1 , ref2
early childhood programs, ref1 , ref2n
and hint-giving practices, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
interdisciplinary, ref1
and “making connections” vs. “using procedures,” ref1 , ref2 , ref3
“making connections” vs. “using procedures” question types, ref1 , ref2
See also learning fast and slow
“eduction,” ref1
Ehrlich, Paul, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Einstein, Albert, ref1
Einstellung effect, ref1
Eli Lilly, ref1
Ellington, Duke, ref1 , ref2
employment and careers
changing, ref1 , ref2n , ref3 , ref4n , ref5
compensation in, ref1
and corporate HR policies, ref1
high-risk opportunities, ref1 , ref2
“match quality” in, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
and personal changes, ref1
sampling opportunity in, ref1
and winding paths of dark horses, ref1 , ref2
error correction, ref1 , ref2
experience-expertise link, ref1 , ref2
experimentation, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Exxon Valdez oil tanker disaster, ref1
fame, ref1
Federer, Roger, ref1 , ref2
Fermi, Enrico, ref1 , ref2n
Fermi problems, ref1
Feynman, Richard, ref1
figlie del coro of Venice, ref1
and composers, ref1
multi-instrument approach of, ref1 , ref2
music program of, ref1
and names of children, ref1 , ref2
financial crisis of 2008, ref1 , ref2
Finster, Howard, ref1
firefighting
in novel circumstances, ref1 , ref2
pattern recognition in, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
wilderness firefighting, ref1 , ref2
Fischer, Bobby, ref1
Fleisher, Leon, ref1
flu predictions, ref1

Flynn, James, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
Flynn effect, ref1 , ref2
Flyvbjerg, Bent, ref1
Foles, Nick, ref1
food preservation, ref1
Frances Hesselbein Leadership Institute, ref1
Freakonomics (Levitt), ref1
Gaiman, Neil, ref1
Game Boy by Nintendo, ref1
Garg, Abhimanyu, ref1
Gauguin, Paul, ref1
Gawande, Atul, ref1
Geim, Andre, ref1
generation effect, ref1
Gentner, Dedre, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Geveden, Rex, ref1 , ref2
Gigerenzer, Gerd, ref1
Gilbert, Dan, ref1
Girl Scouts, ref1 , ref2
Gleason, Paul, ref1
global financial crisis of 2008, ref1 , ref2
Gobet, Fernand, ref1 , ref2
Godin, Seth, ref1 , ref2
golf, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
Good Judgment Project, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Google Flu Trends, ref1
Gorbachev, Mikhail, ref1
Gore, Bill, ref1
Graham, Paul, ref1
Grant, Adam, ref1
graphene, ref1
Gravity Probe B project, ref1
Great Britain, ref1 , ref2
Greve, Henrich, ref1
Griffin, Abbie, ref1 , ref2
grit, ref1
in athletics, ref1 , ref2
and changing course, ref1
and context principle, ref1
Duckworth’s concept of, ref1 , ref2
and marshmallow test, ref1 , ref2n
and match quality, ref1 , ref2
and officer training, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
and spelling bee competitors, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
of Van Gogh, ref1 , ref2
and youthful ambition, ref1
Gruber, Howard, ref1
Hamilton (musical), ref1
happiness, ref1 , ref2n , ref3

Haydn, Joseph, ref1
Head Start early childhood education programs, ref1 , ref2n
head starts
and changing course, ref1
cult of, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
in music training, ref1
of the Polgar sisters, ref1
hedgehog/foxes model of expertise, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Hendrix, Jimi, ref1
Henslow, John Stevens, ref1
Hernandez, Nelson, ref1
Hesselbein, Frances, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
high-risk opportunities, ref1 , ref2
Hinds, Ciarán, ref1
hint-giving practices, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
hiring practices, ref1
HIV/AIDS, ref1
Hogarth, Robin, ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Holley, Lonnie, ref1
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, ref1
household rules, ref1
Hutchison, Kay Bailey, ref1
hypercorrection effect, ref1
Ibarra, Herminia, ref1 , ref2
Ibn Khaldun, ref1
“if-then signatures,” ref1
Ig Nobel Prizes, ref1
immigration, ref1n
impressionism, ref1
improvisational skills, ref1
influenza predictions, ref1
infrastructure projects, ref1
InnoCentive, ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
innovation and innovators
in art world, ref1
comic book creators, ref1
and corporate hiring practices, ref1
disorderly path of, ref1
and immigration, ref1n
and medieval guilds, ref1
and Nintendo’s Wii, ref1
outsider advantage in, ref1
and R&D spending, ref1
routines as an impediment to, ref1
and savants, ref1
serial, ref1
of specialists, ref1
in teams and individual creators, ref1
traits of, ref1

“inside view”======================================================== Thanks to “Prince Andrei,” you’ll know who you
are when you read this; and to my niece Sigalit Koufax (yes, that Koufax)
Epstein-Pawar, and her dad Ameya; and to Andrea and John for moral and
caloric support, and the whole Weiss and Green families. Special thanks to
Liz O’Herrin and Mike Christman for getting me involved with the Tillman
Foundation; to Steve Mesler for getting me involved with Classroom
Champions; to my late friend Kevin Richards, without whom I probably
would not have become a science writer; and to my friend Harry Mbang,
who is never not up for a midnight run to a certain bookstore. Thanks to the
entire Chalkbeat family—keep swimming.
Special thanks to Toru Okada, Alice, Natasha Rostova, Katurian K.
Katurian, Petter and Mona Kummel, Nate River, Gbessa, Benno von
Archimboldi, Tony Webster, Sonny’s brother, Tony Loneman, the trio of

Tommy, Doc, and Maurice, Braiden Chaney, Stephen Florida, and many
other characters who insist on teaching me about writing. I hope those of
you I’m forgetting will forgive me.
I feel a little like Inigo Montoya after he finally got revenge: What now??
But I’m about a million times more excited and less fearful about “What
now?” than I would have been before I did the research that went into this
book. I closed the acknowledgments of my last book with a note about
Elizabeth: “If I ever write another book, I’m sure that one will be dedicated
to her too.” (Even though she was waffling between me and John Dewey
for her book dedication.) At the close of my second book, I think it’s safe to
say that if I ever write another book, I’m sure that one will be dedicated to
her too.
OceanofPDF.com

Footnotes
*
 A common solution was for several team members to hold the pole at an angle as others took turns
crawling up it and jumping over the wall. The pole could eventually be passed over the wall, held at
an angle, and the remaining team members could jump and grab on to it and shimmy along it until
they could jump over the wall.
*
 About half of savants are autistic, and many others have a disability, but not all do.
*
 Twenty-five bulbs were mounted behind a translucent board, and the puzzle started with the upper
left bulb lit and a scoreboard at zero. Subjects were told that accumulating points would earn them
money, but they were not told how to score. By experimenting, they could figure out that pressing
buttons in a sequence that resulted in the bottom right bulb being lit was the way to score points and
earn money. Essentially, they had to move the light from upper left to bottom right.
*
 Psychologists still hotly debate the contributions to and implications of the Flynn effect. Harvard
psychologist Steven Pinker characterized the gains as more than just a shift of thinking: “No historian
who takes in the sweep of human history on the scale of centuries could miss the fact that we are now
living in a period of extraordinary brainpower.”
*
 Flynn also told me that he gave the test to pupils at a British secondary school that sends a lot of
students to the London School of Economics, as well as to juniors and seniors at LSE. His
conclusion: “They were no better at thinking critically when they came out of university than when
they went in.”
*
 As psychologist Robin Hogarth noted of economists, “What strikes me about their discourse . . . is
how the terminology and reasoning processes of economics work their way into almost all topics.
Whether the topic is sports, economic phenomena, politics, or even academic curricula.”
*
 Fermi was present at the first atomic bomb test and dropped pieces of paper “before, during, and
after the passage of the blast wave,” he wrote in documents that were classified at the time. He used
the distance the paper traveled to estimate the explosion strength.
*
 This is another instance where extrapolating from sports to the rest of the world can mislead. With
motor-skill learning, some bad habits once formed can be laborious to undo. Elite coaches expend a
lot of energy undoing motor habits that athletes who were overcoached as children formed years
earlier. In the nonsports world, repeated wrong answers can set up learning, so long as the right
answer is provided eventually.

*
 Five years must be active duty.
*
 Two of the most famously intensive early childhood education programs showed the fadeout
pattern on several cognitive measures they targeted for improvement, but also demonstrated some
important long-term social benefits, like decreased rates of incarceration. Even when the intended
academic effects disappear, it seems that an extended program of positive interactions between adults
and children can leave a lasting mark. In my opinion, youth sports programs should take note: coach/
athlete interactions may have a longer life than the fleeting advantage of a head start in closed skills.
*
 He put the phrase in French in a letter to his brother: “ce qui ne passe pas dans ce qui passe ”—that
which endures in that which fades.
*
 This made job changing the single most popular question.
*
 In a detailed analysis, Levitt showed that the result of the coin flip actually influenced the decisions
people made. Someone pondering a job change who flipped heads was more likely to change jobs
than someone in the same situation who flipped tails, even though, of course, everyone could do
whatever they wanted with their life no matter the result of the flip. Among people who chose to
follow the coin’s advice, flipping heads (and changing jobs) was causally related to their subsequent
increased happiness.
*
 In some years, a scientist who studied basketball would find an inverse relationship between player
height and scoring if the scientist looked only at players in the NBA. If the scientist did not
acknowledge that the rest of humanity outside the NBA had been filtered out, he or she might give
parents the advice to have short kids for them to score more points in the NBA.
*
 The Army also started a process called “ talent-based branching” in which it works with cadets and
young officers to help them assess their own talents and interests as they progress in training. The
idea is to improve their occupational match quality. As Colonel Joanne Moore noted in a presentation
in 2017, the jobs that cadets enter the military dreaming of often prove not to be a great fit. They only
realize that after trying, so the ability to switch is critical for optimizing match quality.
*
 Bureau of Labor Statistics data shows that the trope of the professionally itinerant Millennial is
really just the natural continuation of a knowledge-economy trend. Fifty percent of Late Baby
Boomers (born between 1957 and 1964) held at least eleven different jobs between ages eighteen and
fifty, and that was pretty similar for women and men of different education levels.
*
 For the statistically inclined, the correlation for a particular personality trait between an individual’s
teen years and that individual’s older age is typically around 0.2–0.3, which is on the moderate side.
(Assuming no random measurement error, a correlation of 1.0 would mean the personality trait did
not change at all relative to one’s age-matched peers.) “We are clearly not the same people at
seventy-five as fifteen,” Roberts told me, but “there are traces that should be recognizable.”
*
 A replication of the marshmallow test, published in 2018, found that the predictive power for later
behaviors was less than in the original study.
*
 Grey’s Anatomy and Scandal creator Shonda Rhimes flirted in the extreme via what she called her
“Year of Yes.” Rhimes is introverted and was inclined to turn down every unexpected invitation that
came her way. She decided to about-face and say yes to everything for an entire year. She finished
the year with a deep understanding of what she wanted to focus on.

*
 Yokoi’s ideas and quotes are from his own writings and interviews, including his coauthored book  
              (Yokoi Gunpei Gēmu-kan), which translates to Gunpei Yokoi Game House . Yokoi’s works
do not appear in English, so portions were translated for use here.
*
 Twister was a failure in Japan in the late 1960s due to a mismatch with prevailing social norms. It
earned the nickname “the eroticism box.”
*
 “Performance” included measures of sales growth, profit from innovation, shareholder return, and
market capitalization.
*
 Names of students have been changed except for those who gave explicit permission to use a real
name.
*
 Scientists publish more now than in the past so the comparison isn’t entirely fair, but still puts
Casadevall in very rare company.
*
 When bacteria enter a cut, the B cell releases antibodies that attach to bacteria and usher them to a
macrophage, which destroys them.
*
 In fact, interdisciplinary research is sometimes looked down upon precisely because it does not
signal hyperspecialization. Scientists Diana Rhoten and Stephanie Pfirman wrote in Inside Higher Ed
that women appear to be more likely to engage in interdisciplinary research, but that they were told to
refrain from encouraging junior women to conduct interdisciplinary research “or they’ll never be
taken seriously.”
*
 When creativity researcher Dean Keith Simonton studied the history of innovation in Japan, which
vacillated between being very closed and very open to the rest of the world, he saw that creative
explosions in domains from fiction writing and poetry to ceramics and medicine followed bursts of
immigration.
*
 E.T. the game was such a legendary flop that it birthed the “Great Video Game Burial of 1983”
legend, that Atari buried millions of copies in a landfill in New Mexico. In 2014, the site was
excavated as part of a documentary. It actually did contain buried copies of E.T., but definitely not
millions.
OceanofPDF.com

NOTES
For space considerations, here I present copious but not comprehensive
citations. I intend these notes as both a trail of reporting that went into this
book as well as a detailed entry