======================================================== o	every	classroom?	Will	they	be	allowed	to
explore	independently	during	group	discussions?	If	so,	how	much	freedom
should	they	have?	Should	they	be	able	to	look	up	a	word	they	don't
understand?	Should	they	have	access	to	information	that	their	parents	find
objectionable	on	moral,	social,	or	political	grounds?	Be	allowed	to	do
homework	for	an	unrelated	class?	Be	permitted	to	send	notes	to	each	other
during	class?	Should	the	teacher	be	able	to	monitor	what	is	on	every	student's
screen	or	to	record	it	for	later	spot-checking?
Whatever	problems	direct	access	to	unlimited	information	may	cause,	the
benefits	it	will	bring	will	more	than	compensate.	I	enjoyed	school	but	I
pursued	my	strongest	interests	outside	the	classroom.	I	can	only	imagine	how
access	to	this	much	information	would	have	changed	my	own	school
experience.	The	highway	will	alter	the	focus	of	education	from	the	institution
to	the	individual.	The	ultimate	goal	will	be	changed	from	getting	a	diploma	to
enjoying	lifelong	learning.

10
PLUGGED	IN
AT	HOME
One	of	the	many	fears	expressed	about	the	information	highway	is	that	it	will
reduce	the	time	people	spend	socializing.	Some	worry	that	homes	will
become	such	cozy	entertainment	providers	that	we'll	never	leave	them,	and
that,	safe	in	our	private	sanctuaries,	we'll	become	isolated.	I	don't	think	that's
going	to	happen,	and	later	in	this	chapter,	when	I	describe	the	house	I'm
building,	I	think	I	make	my	case.
The	house,	which	has	been	under	construction	for	what	seems	like	most	of
my	life	(and	it	seems	I've	been	reading	about	the	construction	even	longer),	is
full	of	advanced	entertainment	equipment,	such	as	a	small	movie	theater	and	a
video-on-demand	system.	It	should	be	an	interesting	place	to	live,	but	I
certainly	don't	plan	to	stay	home	all	the	time.	Other	people,	when	they	have
entertainment	flowing	into	their	homes,	will	also	continue	to	go	to	theaters,
just	as	they'll	visit	parks,	museums,	and	shops.	As	behaviorists	keep
reminding	us,	we're	social	animals.	We	will	have	the	option	of	staying	home
more	because	the	highway	will	create	so	many	new	options	for	home-based
entertainment,	for	communications—both	personal	and	professional—and	for
employment.	Although	the	mix	of	activities	will	change,	I	think	people	will
decide	to	spend	almost	as	much	time	out	of	their	homes.
In	chapter	1,	I	mentioned	dire	anticultural	predictions	from	the	past	that	didn't
come	about.	More	recently,	in	the	1950s,	there	were	those	who	said	movie
theaters	would	disappear	and	everyone	would	stay	home	watching	the	new
invention,	television.	Pay	TV	and,	later,	movie	video	rentals	provoked	similar
fears.	Why	would	anyone	spend	money	for	parking	and	baby-sitters,	buy	the
most	expensive	soft	drinks	and	candy	bars	in	the	world,	to	sit	in	a	dark	room
with	strangers?	But	popular	movies	continue	to	fill	theaters.	Personally,	I	love
movies	and	enjoy	the	experience	of	going	out	to	see	them.	I	do	it	almost	every
week,	and	I	don't	think	the	information	highway	will	change	that.
The	new	communications	capabilities	will	make	it	far	easier	than	it	is	today	to
stay	in	touch	with	friends	and	relatives	who	are	geographically	distant.	Many
of	us	have	struggled	to	keep	alive	a	friendship	with	someone	far	away.	I	used

to	date	a	woman	who	lived	in	a	different	city.	We	spent	a	lot	of	time	together
on	e-mail.	And	we	figured	out	a	way	we	could	sort	of	go	to	the	movies
together.	We'd	find	a	film	that	was	playing	at	about	the	same	time	in	both	our
cities.	We'd	drive	to	our	respective	theaters,	chatting	on	our	cellular	phones.
We'd	watch	the	movie,	and	on	the	way	home	we'd	use	our	cellular	phones
again	to	discuss	the	show.	In	the	future	this	sort	of	"virtual	dating"	will	be
better	because	the	movie	watching	could	be	combined	with	a
videoconference.
I	already	play	bridge	on	an	on-line	system	that	allows	the	players	to	see	who
else	is	interested	in	joining	a	game	because	it	has	a	waiting	room.	Players
have	a	primitive	ability	to	choose	the	way	they	want	to	appear	to	the	other
players:	their	sex,	hairstyle,	body	build,	etc.	The	first	time	I	connected	to	the
system,	I	was	in	a	rush	to	keep	a	bridge	appointment,	and	I	didn't	spend	any
time	setting	up	my	electronic	appearance.	After	my	friends	and	I	had	started
playing,	they	all	began	to	send	me	messages	about	how	I	was	bald	and	naked
(from	the	waist	up,	the	only	part	of	the	body	it	showed).	Even	though	this
system	didn't	allow	video	or	voice	communication	the	way	future	systems
will,	the	ability	to	send	text	messages	to	each	other	while	we	were	playing
made	it	a	real	blast.
The	highway	will	not	only	make	it	easier	to	keep	up	with	distant	friends,	it
will	also	enable	us	to	find	new	companions.	Friendships	formed	across	the
network	will	lead	naturally	to	getting	together	in	person.	Right	now	our
methods	for	linking	up	with	people	we	might	like	are	pretty	limited,	but	the
network	will	change	that.	We	will	be	meeting	some	of	our	new	friends	in
different	ways	from	the	ones	we	use	today.	This	alone	will	make	life	more
interesting.	Suppose	you	want	to	reach	someone	to	play	bridge	with.	The
information	highway	will	let	you	find	cardplayers	with	the	right	skill	level
and	availability	in	your	neighborhood,	or	in	other	cities	or	nations.	The	idea
of	interactive	games	played	by	far-flung	participants	is	hardly	new.	Chess
players	have	been	carrying	on	games	by	mail,	one	move	at	a	time,	for
generations.	The	difference	will	be	that	applications	running	on	the	network
will	make	it	easy	to	find	others	who	share	similar	interests	and	also	to	play
together	at	the	same	pace	you	would	face-to-face.
Another	difference	will	be	that	while	you	are	playing	a	game—say,	bridge	or
Starfighter—you	will	be	able	to	chat	with	the	other	players.	The	new	DSVD
modems	I	discussed	earlier	will	let	you	use	a	normal	phone	line	to	carry	on	a
voice	conversation	with	the	other	players	while	watching	the	play	unfold	on
your	computer	screen.

The	experience	of	playing	a	friendly	group	game,	as	you	do	at	the	traditional
card	table,	is	pleasurable	as	much	for	the	fellowship	as	for	the	competition.
The	game	is	more	fun	when	you	are	enjoying	the	conversation.	A	number	of
companies	are	taking	this	multiplayer-game	concept	to	a	new	level.	You'll	be
able	to	play	alone,	with	a	few	friends,	or	with	thousands	of	people,	and	it	will
eventually	be	possible	to	see	the	people	you	are	playing	with—if	they	choose
to	permit	you	to.	It	will	be	easy	to	locate	an	expert	and	watch	him	play	or	take
lessons	from	him.	On	the	highway,	you	and	your	friends	will	not	only	be	able
to	gather	around	a	game	table,	you'll	also	be	able	to	"meet"	at	a	real	place,
such	as	Kensington	Gardens,	or	in	an	imaginary	setting.	You'll	be	able	to	play
a	conventional	game	in	a	remarkable	location,	or	play	a	new	kind	of	game	in
which	exploring	the	virtual	setting	is	part	of	the	action.
Warren	Buffett,	who	is	famous	for	his	investment	savvy,	is	a	good	friend	of
mine.	For	years	I	kept	trying	to	think	of	how	to	entice	him	to	use	a	personal
computer.	I	even	offered	to	fly	out	and	get	him	started.	He	wasn't	interested
until	he	found	out	he	could	play	bridge	with	friends	all	over	the	country
through	an	on-line	service.	For	the	first	six	months	he	would	come	home	and
play	for	hours	on	end.	Despite	the	fact	that	he	had	studiously	stayed	away
from	technology	and	technology	investing,	once	he	tried	the	computer,	he	was
hooked.	Now,	many	weeks	Warren	uses	on-line	services	more	than	I	do.	The
present	system	doesn't	require	you	to	enter	your	true	appearance,	or	name,
age,	or	sex.	However,	it	seems	that	most	of	the	users	are	either	kids	or	retirees
—neither	of	which	describes	Warren.	One	feature	that	had	to	be	added	into
the	system	was	a	limit	that	permits	parents	to	restrict	the	amount	of	time	(and
money)	their	kids	spend	on-line.
I	think	on-line	computer-game	playing	will	catch	on	in	a	big	way.	We'll	be
able	to	choose	from	a	rich	set	of	games,	including	all	the	classic	board	and
card	games	as	well	as	action	adventure	and	role-playing	games.	New	styles	of
games	will	be	invented	specifically	for	this	medium.	There	will	be	contests
with	prizes	awarded.	From	time	to	time,	celebrities	and	experts	will	come
onto	the	system	and	everyone	else	will	be	able	to	watch	as	the	celebrities	play,
or	sign	up	to	play	against	them.
TV	game	shows	will	evolve	to	a	new	level	when	viewer	feedback	is	added.
Viewers	will	be	able	to	vote	and	see	the	results	immediately—sort	of	like	the
applause	meter	used	on	the	live	audience	in	old	shows	such	as	Queen	for	a
Day.	This	format	will	also	allow	for	prizes	to	be	given	to	players.	Some
entrepreneurial	companies,	Answer	TV	for	one,	have	already	designed	and
tested	systems	specifically	for	interactive	TV	games,	but	because	the	system
has	only	one	application,	so	far	it	hasn't	caught	on	enough	to	make	money.	On

the	information	highway,	you	won't	have	to	buy	special	hardware	or	software
to	interact	with	a	television	show.	Imagine	the	future	Password	or	Jeopardy!
show	that	will	let	viewers	at	home	participate	and	win	either	cash	or	credits	of
some	sort.	Shows	will	even	be	able	to	keep	track	of	and	reward	their	regular
audience	members	by	giving	them	special	prizes	or	mentioning	them	by	name
if	they	choose	to	join	the	game.
Gambling	is	going	to	be	another	way	to	play	on	the	highway.	It's	a	huge
business	in	Las	Vegas,	Reno,	and	Atlantic	City,	and	it	nearly	supports
Monaco.	The	profits	garnered	by	the	casinos	are	incredible.	Gamblers
continue	to	believe	that	even	though	the	odds	are	against	them,	they're	going
to	win.	When	I	was	in	college	I	enjoyed	playing	poker.	I	think	of	poker	as
mostly	a	game	of	skill.	Although	I	play	blackjack	sometimes	when	I'm	in	Las
Vegas,	the	gambling	games	that	are	mostly	luck	don't	have	a	strong	appeal	for
me.	Perhaps	it's	because	I	am	so	much	more	limited	by	time	than	money.	If
they	had	a	form	of	gambling	that	would	award	the	winners	a	few	more	hours
in	the	day,	I	might	be	drawn	in.
Advances	in	technology	have	already	had	an	impact	on	gambling.	One	of	the
early	uses	of	t======================================================== er.
Conversely,	there	is	a	negative	spiral	companies	can	get	caught	in.	A
company	in	a	positive	spiral	has	an	air	of	destiny,	while	one	in	a	negative

spiral	feels	doomed.	If	a	company	starts	to	lose	market	share	or	delivers	one
bad	product,	the	talk	becomes	"Why	do	you	work	there?"	"Why	would	you
invest	in	that	company?"	"I	don't	think	you	should	buy	from	them."	The	press
and	analysts	smell	blood	and	begin	telling	inside	stories	about	who's
quarreling	and	who's	responsible	for	mismanagement.	Customers	begin	to
question	whether,	in	the	future,	they	should	continue	to	buy	the	company's
products.	Within	a	sick	company	everything	is	questioned,	including	things
that	are	being	done	well.	Even	a	fine	strategy	can	get	dismissed	with	the
argument	"You	are	just	defending	the	old	way"	and	that	can	cause	more
mistakes.	Then	down	the	company	spirals.	Leaders	such	as	Lee	Iacocca	who
have	been	able	to	reverse	a	negative	spiral	deserve	a	lot	of	credit.
Throughout	my	youth	the	hot	computer	firm	was	Digital	Equipment
Corporation,	known	as	DEC.	For	twenty	years	its	positive	spiral	seemed
unstoppable.	Ken	Olsen,	the	company's	founder,	was	a	legendary	hardware
designer	and	a	hero	of	mine,	a	distant	god.	In	1960	he	had	created	the
minicomputer	industry	by	offering	the	first	"small"	computers.	The	earliest
was	the	PDP-1,	the	ancestor	of	my	high	school's	PDP-8.	A	buyer,	instead	of
paying	the	millions	asked	by	IBM	for	its	"Big	Iron,"	could	get	one	of	Olsen's
PDP-1s	for	$120,000.	It	wasn't	nearly	as	powerful	as	the	big	machines,	but	it
could	be	used	for	a	wide	variety	of	applications.	DEC	grew	to	a	$6.7	billion
company	in	eight	years	by	offering	a	wide	range	of	computers	in	different
sizes.
Two	decades	later,	Olsen's	vision	faltered.	He	couldn't	see	the	future	of	small
desktop	computers.	Eventually	he	was	forced	out	of	DEC,	and	part	of	his
legend	now	is	that	he	is	the	man	famous	for	repeatedly,	and	publicly,
dismissing	the	personal	computer	as	a	passing	fad.	I	am	sobered	by	stories
like	Olsen's.	He	was	brilliant	at	seeing	new	ways	of	doing	things,	and	then—
after	years	of	being	an	innovator—he	missed	a	big	bend	in	the	road.
Another	visionary	who	faltered	was	An	Wang,	the	Chinese	immigrant	who
built	Wang	Laboratories	into	the	dominant	supplier	of	electronic	calculators	in
the	1960s.	In	the	1970s	he	ignored	the	advice	of	everyone	around	him	and	left
the	calculator	market	just	before	the	arrival	of	low-cost	competition	that
would	have	ruined	him.	It	was	a	brilliant	move.	Wang	reinvented	his	company
to	be	the	leading	supplier	of	word-processing	machines.	During	the	1970s,	in
offices	around	the	world,	Wang	word-processing	terminals	began	to	replace
typewriters.	The	machines	contained	a	microprocessor	but	weren't	true
personal	computers,	because	they	were	designed	to	do	only	one	thing—
handle	text.

Wang	was	a	visionary	engineer.	The	kind	of	insight	that	had	led	him	to
abandon	calculators	could	have	led	to	success	in	personal-computer	software
in	the	1980s,	but	he	failed	to	spot	the	next	industry	turn.	Even	though	he
developed	great	software,	it	was	tied	proprietarily	to	his	word	processors.	His
software	was	doomed	once	general-purpose	personal	computers	appeared	that
could	run	a	variety	of	word-processing	software	applications	such	as
WordStar,	WordPerfect,	and	MultiMate	(which	imitated	Wang	software).	If
Wang	had	recognized	the	importance	of	compatible	software	applications,
there	might	not	be	a	Microsoft	today.	I	might	be	a	mathematician	or	an
attorney	somewhere,	and	my	adolescent	foray	into	personal	computing	might
be	little	more	than	a	distant	personal	memory.
IBM	was	another	major	company	that	missed	technological	changes	at	the
start	of	the	PC	revolution.	The	company's	leader	had	been	a	hard-driving
former	cash-register	salesman,	Thomas	J.	Watson.	Technically,	Watson	wasn't
the	founder	of	IBM,	but	it	was	thanks	to	his	aggressive	management	style	that
by	the	early	1930s	IBM	dominated	the	market	for	accounting	machines.
IBM	began	working	on	computers	in	the	middle	1950s.	It	was	one	of	many
companies	in	the	business	vying	for	leadership	in	the	field.	Until	1964	each
computer	model,	even	from	the	same	manufacturer,	had	had	a	unique	design
and	required	its	own	operating	system	and	application	software.	An	operating
system	(sometimes	called	a	disk-operating	system,	or	just	DOS)	is	the
fundamental	software	that	coordinates	a	computer	system's	components,	tells
them	how	to	work	together,	and	performs	other	functions.	Without	an
operating	system,	a	computer	is	useless.	The	operating	system	is	a	platform
on	which	all	the	software	programs	for	applications—such	as	accounting	or
payroll	or	word-processing	or	electronic-mail	programs—are	built.
Computers	at	different	price	levels	had	different	designs.	Some	models	were
dedicated	to	scientific	study,	others	to	commerce.	As	I	discovered	when	I
wrote	the	BASIC	for	various	personal	computers,	significant	work	was
required	to	move	software	from	one	computer	model	to	another.	This	was	true
even	if	the	software	was	written	in	a	standard	language	such	as	COBOL	or
FORTRAN.	Under	the	direction	of	young	Tom,	as	Watson's	son	and	successor
was	known,	the	company	gambled	$5	billion	on	the	novel	notion	of	scalable
architecture—all	the	computers	in	the	System/360	family,	no	matter	what
size,	would	respond	to	the	same	set	of	instructions.	Models	built	with
different	technology,	from	the	slowest	to	the	fastest,	from	small	machines	that
could	fit	into	a	normal	office	to	water-cooled	giants	that	sat	in	climate-
controlled	glass	rooms,	could	run	the	same	operating	system.	Customers
could	move	their	applications	and	peripherals,	accessories	such	as	disks,	tape

drives,	and	printers,	freely	from	one	model	to	the	next.	Scalable	architecture
completely	reshaped	the	industry.
System/360	was	a	runaway	success	and	made	IBM	the	powerhouse	in
mainframe	computers	for	the	next	thirty	years.	Customers	made	large
investments	in	the	360,	confident	that	their	commitment	to	software	and
training	would	not	be	wasted.	If	they	needed	to	move	to	a	larger	computer,
they	could	get	an	IBM	that	ran	the	same	system,	and	shared	the	same
architecture.	In	1977,	DEC	introduced	its	own	scalable-architecture	platform,
the	VAX.	The	VAX	family	of	computers	ultimately	ranged	from	desktop
systems	to	mainframe-size	machine	clusters	and	did	for	DEC	what
System/360	did	for	IBM.	DEC	became	overwhelmingly	the	leader	in	the
minicomputer	market.
The	scalable	architecture	of	the	IBM	System/360	and	its	successor,	the
System/370,	drove	many	of	IBM's	competitors	out	of	business	and	scared
away	potential	newcomers.	In	1970,	a	new	competing	company	was	founded
by	Eugene	Amdahl,	who	had	been	a	senior	engineer	at	IBM.	Amdahl	had	a
novel	business	plan.	His	company,	also	called	Amdahl,	would	build
computers	fully	compatible	with	the	IBM	360	software.	Amdahl	delivered
hardware	that	not	only	ran	the	same	operating	systems	and	applications	as
IBM,	but,	because	it	took	advantage	of	new	technology,	also	outperformed
IBM's	comparably	priced	systems.	Soon	Control	Data,	Hitachi,	and	Itel	all
also	offered	mainframes	that	were	"plug-compatible"	to	IBM.	By	the	mid-
1970s,	the	importance	of	360	compatibility	was	becoming	obvious.	The	only
mainframe	companies	doing	well	were	those	whose	hardware	could	run
IBM's	operating	systems.
Before	the	360,	computer	designs	were	intentionally	incompatible	with	those
from	other	companies	because	the	manufacturer's	goal	was	to	make	it
discouragingly	difficult	and	expensive	for	customers	heavily	invested	in	one
company's	computer	to	switch	to	a	different	brand.	Once	a	customer
committed	to	a	machine,	he	or	she	was	stuck	with	offerings	from	the
computer's	manufacturer	because	changing	the	software	could	be	done	but
was	too	difficult.	Amdahl	and	the	others	ended	that.	Market-driven
compatibility	is	an	important	lesson	for	the	future	personal-computer	industry.
It	should	also	be	remembered	by	those	creating	the	highway.	Customers
choose	systems	that	give	them	a	choice	of	hardware	suppliers	and	the	widest
variety	of	software	applications.
While	this	was	going	on,	I	was	busy	enjoying	school	and	experimenting	with
computers.	I	arrived	at	Harvard	in	the	fall	of	1973.	In	college	there	is	a	lot	of

posturing,	and	appearing	to	slack	off	was	considered	a	great	way	to	establish
your	coolness.	Therefore,	during	my	freshman	year	I	instituted	a	deliberate
policy	of	skipping	most	classes	and	then	studying	feverishly	at	the	end	of	the
term.	It	became	a	game—a	not	uncommon	one—to	see	how	high	a	grade	I
could	pull	while	investing	the	least	time	possible.	I	filled	in	my	leisure	hours
with	a	good	deal	of	poker,	which	had	its	own	attraction	for	me.	In	poker,	a
player	collects	different	shards	of	information—who's	betting	boldly,	what
cards	are	showing,	what's	this	guy's	pattern	of	betting	and	bluffing—and	then
crunches	all	that	information	together	to	devise	a	plan	for	his	own	hand.	I	got
pretty	good	at	this	kind	of	information	processing.
The	experience	of	poker	strategizing—and	the	money—were	helpful	when	I
got	into	business,	but	the	other	game	I	was	playing,	the	postponing	one,	didn't
serve	me	well	at	all.	But	I	didn't	know	that	then.	In	fact,	I	was	encouraged	that
my	dilatory	practices	were	shared	by	a	new	friend,	Steve	Ballmer,	a	math
major	whom	I	met	freshman	year,	when	we	lived	in	the	same	student	dorm,
Currier	House.	Steve	and	I	led	very	different	lives,	but	we	were	both	trying	to
pare	down	to	the	minimum	the	course	time	needed	to	get	top	grades.	Steve	is
a	man	of	endless	energy,	effortlessly	social.	His	activities	took	a	lot	of	his
time.	By	his	sophomore	year	he	was	a	manager	of	the	football	team,	the
advertising	manager	for	the	Harvard	Crimson,	the	school	newspaper,	and
president	of	a	literary	magazine.	He	also	belonged	to	a	social	club,	the
Harvard	equivalent	of	a	fraternity.
He	and	I	would	pay	very	little	attention	to	our	classes	and	then	furiously
inhale	the	key	books	just	before	an	exam.	Once	we	took	a	tough	graduate-
level	economics	course	together—E======================================================== able	to	simulate	the	world	as
well	as	explain	it.	Creating	or	using	a	computer	model	can	be	a	great
educational	tool.	Several	years	ago,	a	teacher	at	Sunnyside	High	School	in
Tucson,	Arizona,	organized	a	club	of	students	to	create	computer	simulations
of	real-world	behaviors.	The	students	discovered	the	grim	consequences	of
gang	behavior	by	modeling	it	for	themselves	mathematically.	The	success	of
the	club	led	eventually	to	a	complete	reorganization	of	the	mathematics
curriculum	around	the	idea	that	education	is	not	about	making	kids	give	the
"right"	answer,	but	about	giving	kids	methods	by	which	to	decide	whether	an
answer	is	"right"
The	teaching	of	science	lends	itself	particularly	well	to	using	models.	Kids
now	learn	trigonometry	by	measuring	the	height	of	real	mountains.	They
triangulate	from	two	points	rather	than	just	doing	abstract	exercises.	There	are
already	a	number	of	computer	models	that	teach	biology.	SimLife,	a	popular
software	program,	simulates	evolution,	so	kids	get	to	experience	the	process
instead	of	just	getting	facts	about	it.	You	don't	have	to	be	a	child	to	enjoy	this
program,	which	lets	you	design	plants	and	animals	and	then	watch	how	they
interact	and	evolve	in	an	ecosystem	that	you	also	design.	Maxis	Software,	the
publisher	of	SimLife	also	produces	another	program,	SimCity,	which	lets	you
design	a	city	with	all	of	its	interrelated	systems,	such	as	roads	and	public
transportation.	As	a	player,	you	get	to	be	the	mayor	or	city	planner	of	a	virtual
community	and	to	challenge	yourself	to	meet	your	own	goals	for	the
community,	rather	than	goals	artificially	imposed	by	the	software's	design.
You	build	farms,	factories,	homes,	schools,	universities,	libraries,	museums,
zoos,	hospitals,	prisons,	marinas,	freeways,	bridges,	even	subways.	You	cope
with	urban	growth	or	natural	disasters,	such	as	fires.	You	change	the	terrain
too.	When	you	modify	your	simulated	city	by	building	an	airport	or	raising
taxes,	the	changes	can	have	a	predictable	or	unexpected	effect	on	the
simulated	society.	It	is	a	great,	fast	way	to	find	out	how	the	real	world	works.
Or	use	a	simulation	to	find	out	about	what	goes	on	out	of	this	world.	Kids	can
navigate	the	solar	system	or	galaxy	in	a	simulated	spaceship	by	playing	with	a
space	simulator.	Kids	who	may	think	they	aren't	interested	in	biology	or	urban
design	or	outer	space	can	discover	they	are	by	exploring	and	experimenting
with	computer	simulations.	When	science	is	made	more	interesting	in	these
ways,	it	should	appeal	to	a
broader	set	of	students.

In	the	future,	students	of	all	ages	and	capabilities	will	be	able	to	visualize	and
interact	with	information.	For	example,	a	class	studying	weather	will	be	able
to	view	simulated	satellite	images	based	on	a	model	of	hypothetical
meteorological	conditions.	Students	will	propose	"what	if?"	questions,	such	as
"What	would	happen	to	the	next	day's	weather	if	the	wind	speed	increased	by
15	MPH?"	The	computer	will	model	the	predicted	results,	displaying	the
simulated	weather	system	as	it	would	appear	from	space.	Simulation	games
will	get	much	better,	but	even	now	the	best	of	them	are	fascinating	and	highly
educational.
When	simulations	get	completely	realistic,	we	enter	the	realm	of	virtual
reality.	I'm	sure	that	at	some	point	schools	will	have	virtual-reality	equipment
—or	maybe	even	VR	rooms,	the	way	some	now	have	music	rooms	and
theaters—to	allow	students	to	explore	a	place,	an	object,	or	a	subject	in	this
engrossing,	interactive	way.
Technology	will	not,	however,	isolate	students.	One	of	the	most	important
educational	experiences	is	collaboration.	In	some	of	the	world's	most	creative
classrooms,	computers	and	communications	networks	are	already	beginning
to	change	the	conventional	relationships	among	students	themselves,	and
between	students	and	teachers,	by	facilitating	collaborative	learning.
Teachers	at	the	Ralph	Bunche	school	(P.S.	125)	in	Harlem	created	a
computer-assisted	teaching	unit	to	show	New	York	inner-city	students	how	to
use	the	Internet	for	research,	to	communicate	with	electronic	pen	pals
worldwide,	and	to	collaborate	with	volunteer	tutors	at	nearby	Columbia
University.	Ralph	Bunche	was	one	of	the	first	elementary	schools	in	the
nation	to	put	its	own	home	page	on	the	Internet's	World	Wide	Web.	Its	Web
home	page,	the	work	of	a	student,	includes	links	to	such	things	as	the	school
newspaper,	student	artwork,	and	a	lesson	on	the	Spanish	alphabet	illustrated.
Especially	at	the	college	level,	academic	research	has	been	aided	enormously
by	the	Internet,	which	has	made	it	easier	for	far-flung	institutions	and
individuals	to	collaborate.	Computer	innovation	has	always	taken	place	at
universities.	Several	universities	are	centers	for	advanced	research	into	new
computer	technologies,	and	many	others	maintain	large	computer	labs	that
students	use	for	collaboration	and	homework.	Also,	today	some	of	the	most
interesting	home	pages	on	the	Internet's	World	Wide	Web	are	posted	on	behalf
of	universities	around	the	world.
Some	universities	put	the	network	to	less	global	uses.	At	the	University	of
Washington,	lesson	plans	and	assignments	for	some	classes	are	posted	on	the

World	Wide	Web.	Lecture	notes	are	often	published	on	the	Web	too,	a	free
service	I	would	have	loved	in	my	college	days.	Elsewhere,	an	English	teacher
requires	all	his	students	to	have	e-mail	addresses	and	use	e-mail	to	participate
in	after-hours	electronic	discussions.	Class	members	are	graded	on	their	e-
mail	contributions,	just	as	they	are	on	classroom	contributions	and	homework.
College	students	everywhere	already	understand	the	joys	of	e-mail,	both	for
educational	purposes	and	to	keep	in	touch	inexpensively	with	family	and
friends,	including	high	school	friends	who	have	gone	to	other	universities.	A
growing	number	of	parents	of	college	students	have	become	regular	e-mail
users	because	it	seems	to	be	the	best	way	to	contact	their	kids.	Even	some
elementary	schools	allow	older	students	to	have	Internet	accounts.	At
Lakeside,	my	old	school,	the	school's	network	is	now	connected	to	the
Internet,	which	permits	kids	to	browse	for	on-line	information	and	exchange
national	and	international	e-mail.	Nearly	all	Lakeside	students	requested	e-
mail	accounts,	and	in	one	typical	twelve-week	period	they	received	a	total	of
259,587	messages—an	average	of	about	30	messages	per	student	each	week.
About	49,000	messages	were	from	the	Internet	during	the	twelve-week
period,	and	the	students	sent	about	7,200	messages.
1995:	World	Wide	Web	home	page	from	Arbor	Heights	Elementary	School
Lakeside	doesn't	know	how	many	messages	each	student	sends,	and	it	doesn't
know	what	the	messages	are	about.	Some	e-mail	relates	to	school	studies	and
activities,	but	doubtless	a	lot	of	it,	including	much	of	Lakeside's	traffic	on	the
Internet,	concerns	students'	outside	interests.	Lakeside	doesn't	view	this	as	an
abuse	of	the	electronic	mail	system,	but	as	another	way	to	learn.
A	number	of	secondary	school	students,	like	those	at	New	York's	P.S.	125,	are
discovering	how	the	long-distance	access	afforded	by	computer	networks	can
help	them	learn	from	students	from	other	cultures,	and	participate	in
discussions	all	over	the	world.	Many	classrooms,	in	different	states	and
countries,	are	already	linking	up	in	what	are	sometimes	called	"learning

circles."	The	purpose	of	most	learning	circles	is	to	let	students	study	a	specific
topic,	in	collaboration	with	faraway	counterparts.	In	1989,	as	the	Berlin	Wall
was	falling,	West	German	students	were	able	to	discuss	the	event	with	their
contemporaries	in	other	countries.	One	learning	circle	that	was	studying	the
whaling	industry	included	Alaskan	Inuit	students,	whose	Eskimo	villages	still
depend	on	whales	for	food.	Students	outside	the	village	got	so	interested,	they
invited	an	Inuit	tribal	elder	to	their	class	for	a	learning	circle	discussion.
One	ambitious	plan	for	students	using	computer	networks	is	the	GLOBE
Project,	an	initiative	pushed	by	Vice	President	Al	Gore.	GLOBE	stands	for
Global	Learning	and	Observations	to	Benefit	the	Environment.	The	hope	is
that	it	will	be	funded	by	a	variety	of	governments	as	well	as	by	private
contributions.	It	would	ask	grade-schoolers	to	collaborate	internationally	on
collecting	scientific	information	about	Earth.	Children	would	routinely	collect
statistics,	such	as	temperature	and	rainfall,	and	relay	them	across	the	Internet
and	satellites	to	a	central	database	at	the	National	Oceanic	and	Atmospheric
Administration	in	Maryland,	where	the	information	would	be	used	to	create
composite
pictures	of	the	planet.	The	composites	would	be	relayed	back	to	the	students,
as	well	as	to	scientists	and	the	general	public.	No	one	knows	how	much
scientific	value	the	data	would	have,	especially	the	data	collected	by	the	very
young,	but	gathering	the	facts	and	seeing	the	composite	pictures	would	be	a
fine	way	for	large	numbers	of	children	from	many	nations	to	learn	about
global	cooperation,	communication,	and	environmental	issues.
1995:	World	Wide	Web	home	page	from	the	University	of	Connecticut,
featuring	archeological	resources	drawn	from	many	sources
The	highway's	educational	possibilities	will	also	be	open	to	the	world's
unofficial	students.	People	anywhere	will	be	able	to	take	the	best	courses
taught	by	great	teachers.	The	highway	will	make	adult	education,	including
job	training	and	career-enhancement	courses,	more	readily	available.

A	lot	of	parents,	professionals,	and	community	or	political	leaders	will	have
the	opportunity	to	participate	in	the	teaching	process,	even	if	only	for	an	hour
here	or	there.	It	will	be	practical,	inexpensive,	and,	I	think,	commonplace	for
knowledgeable	guests	to	lead	or	join	discussions,	via	videoconferences,	from
their	homes	or	offices.
Having	students	connected	directly	to	limitless	information	and	to	each	other
will	raise	policy	questions	for	schools	and	for	society	at	large.	I	discussed	the
issue	of	regulation	of	the	Internet.	Will	students	routinely	be	allowed	to	bring
their	portable	PCs	with	them	int======================================================== to	a	large	monitor	and	to	the	corporate	network	in	the	office.
Notebook	computers	will	continue	to	get	thinner	until	they	are	nearly	the	size
of	a	tablet	of	paper.	Notebooks	are	the	smallest	and	most	portable	real
computers	today,	but	soon	there	will	be	pocket-size	computers	with	snapshot-

size	color	screens.	When	you	whip	one	out,	no	one	will	say,	"Wow!	You've
got	a	computer!"
1995:	Multimedia	notebook	computer	by	Digital	Equipment	Corporation
What	do	you	carry	on	your	person	now?	Probably	at	least	keys,	identification,
money,	and	a	watch.	Quite	possibly	you	also	carry	credit	cards,	a	checkbook,
traveler's	checks,	an	address	book,	an	appointment	book,	a	notepad,	reading
material,	a	camera,	a	pocket	tape	recorder,	a	cellular	phone,	a	pager,	concert
tickets,	a	map,	a	compass,	a	calculator,	an	electronic	entry	card,	photographs,
and	perhaps	a	loud	whistle	to	summon	help.
You'll	be	able	to	keep	all	these	and	more	in	another	information	appliance	we
call	the	wallet	PC.	It	will	be	about	the	same	size	as	a	wallet,	which	means
you'll	be	able	to	carry	it	in	your	pocket	or	purse.	It	will	display	messages	and
schedules	and	also	let	you	read	or	send	electronic	mail	and	faxes,	monitor
weather	and	stock	reports,	and	play	both	simple	and	sophisticated	games.	At	a
meeting	you	might	take	notes,	check	your	appointments,	browse	information
if	you're	bored,	or	choose	from	among	thousands	of	easy-to-call-up	photos	of
your	kids.
Rather	than	holding	paper	currency,	the	new	wallet	will	store	unforgeable
digital	money.	Today	when	you	hand	someone	a	dollar	bill,	check,	gift
certificate,	or	other	negotiable	instrument,	the	transfer	of	paper	represents	a
transfer	of	funds.	But	money	does	not	have	to	be	expressed	on	paper.	Credit
card	charges	and	wired	funds	are	exchanges	of	digital	financial	information.
Tomorrow	the	wallet	PC	will	make	it	easy	for	anyone	to	spend	and	accept
digital	funds.	Your	wallet	will	link	into	a	store's	computer	to	allow	money	to
be	transferred	without	any	physical	exchange	at	a	cash	register.	Digital	cash
will	be	used	in	interpersonal	transactions,	too.	If	your	son	needs	money,	you
might	digitally	slip	five	bucks	from	your	wallet	PC	to	his.

Prototype	of	a	wallet	PC
When	wallet	PCs	are	ubiquitous,	we	can	eliminate	the	bottlenecks	that	now
plague	airport	terminals,	theaters,	and	other	locations	where	people	queue	to
show	identification	or	a	ticket.	As	you	pass	through	an	airport	gate,	for
example,	your	wallet	PC	will	connect	to	the	airport's	computers	and	verify
that	you	have	paid	for	a	ticket.	You	won't	need	a	key	or	magnetic	card	key	to
get	through	doors	either.	Your	wallet	PC	will	identify	you	to	the	computer
controlling	the	lock.
As	cash	and	credit	cards	begin	to	disappear,	criminals	may	target	the	wallet
PC,	so	there	will	have	to	be	safeguards	to	prevent	a	wallet	PC	from	being
used	in	the	same	manner	as	a	stolen	charge	card.	The	wallet	PC	will	store	the
"keys"	you'll	use	to	identify	yourself.	You	will	be	able	to	invalidate	your	keys
easily,	and	they	will	be	changed	regularly.	For	some	important	transactions,
just	having	the	key	in	your	wallet	PC	won't	be	enough.	One	solution	is	to
have	you	enter	a	password	at	the	time	of	the	transaction.	Automatic	teller
machines	ask	you	to	provide	a	personal	identification	number,	which	is	just	a
very	short	password.	Another	option,	which	would	eliminate	the	need	for	you
to	remember	a	password,	is	the	use	of	biometric	measurements.	Individual
biometric	measurements	are	more	secure	and	almost	certainly	will	be
included	eventually	in	some	wallet	PCs.
A	biometric	security	system	records	a	physical	trait,	such	as	a	voiceprint	or	a
fingerprint.	For	example,	your	wallet	PC	might	demand	that	you	read	aloud	a
random	word	that	it	flashes	on	its	screen	or	that	you	press	your	thumb	against
the	side	of	the	device	whenever	you	are	about	to	conduct	a	transaction	with
significant	financial	implications.	The	wallet	will	compare	what	it	"heard"	or
"felt"	with	its	digital	record	of	your	voice-	or	thumbprint.
Wallet	PCs	with	the	proper	equipment	will	be	able	to	tell	you	exactly	where
you	are	anyplace	on	the	face	of	Earth.	The	Global	Positioning	System	(GPS)
satellites	in	an	orbit	around	Earth	broadcast	signals	that	permit	jetliners,
oceangoing	boats,	and	cruise	missiles,	or	hikers	with	handheld	GPS	receivers,
to	know	their	exact	location	to	within	a	few	hundred	feet.	Such	devices	are

currently	available	for	a	few	hundred	dollars,	and	they	will	be	built	into	many
wallet	PCs.
The	wallet	PC	will	connect	you	to	the	information	highway	while	you	travel	a
real	highway,	and	tell	you	where	you	are.	Its	built-in	speaker	will	be	able	to
dictate	directions	to	let	you	know	that	a	freeway	exit	is	coming	up	or	that	the
next	intersection	has	frequent	accidents.	It	will	monitor	digital	traffic	reports
and	warn	you	that	you'd	better	leave	for	an	airport	early,	or	suggest	an
alternate	route.	The	wallet	PC's	color	maps	will	overlay	your	location	with
whatever	kinds	of	information	you	desire—road	and	weather	conditions,
campgrounds,	scenic	spots,	even	fast-food	outlets.	You	might	ask,	"Where's
the	nearest	Chinese	restaurant	that	is	still	open?"	and	the	information
requested	will	be	transmitted	to	the	wallet	by	wireless	network.	Off	the	roads,
on	a	hike	in	the	woods,	it	will	be	your	compass	and	as	useful	as	your	Swiss
Army	knife.
In	fact,	I	think	of	the	wallet	PC	as	the	new	Swiss	Army	knife.	I	had	one	of
those	knives	when	I	was	a	kid.	Mine	was	neither	the	most	basic	with	just	two
blades	nor	the	one	with	a	workshop's	worth	of	equipment.	It	had	the	classic
shiny	red	handle	with	the	white	cross	and	lots	of	blades	and	attachments,
including	a	screwdriver,	a	tiny	pair	of	scissors,	and	even	a	corkscrew
(although	at	the	time	I	had	no	use	for	that	particular	accessory).	Some	wallet
PCs	will	be	simple	and	elegant	and	offer	only	the	essentials,	such	as	a	small
screen,	a	microphone,	a	secure	way	to	transact	business	with	digital	money,
and	the	capability	to	read	or	otherwise	use	basic	information.	Others	will
bristle	with	all	kinds	of	gadgets,	including	cameras,	scanners	that	will	be	able
to	read	printed	text	or	handwriting,	and	receivers	with	the	global-positioning
capability.	Most	will	have	a	panic	button	for	you	to	press	if	you	need
emergency	help.	Some	models	will	include	thermometers,	barometers,
altimeters,	and	heart-rate	sensors.
Prices	will	vary	accordingly,	but	generally	wallet	PCs	will	be	priced	about	the
way	cameras	are	today.	Simple,	single-purpose	"smart	cards"	for	digital
currency	will	cost	about	what	a	disposable	camera	does	now,	whereas,	like	an
elaborate	camera,	a	really	sophisticated	wallet	PC	might	cost	$1,000	or	more,
but	it	will	outperform	the	most	exotic	computer	of	just	a	decade	ago.	Smart
cards,	the	most	basic	form	of	the	wallet	PC,	look	like	credit	cards	and	are
popular	now	in	Europe.	Their	microprocessors	are	embedded	within	the
plastic.	The	smart	card	of	the	future	will	identify	its	owner	and	store	digital
money,	tickets,	and	medical	information.	It	won't	have	a	screen,	audio
capabilities,	or	any	of	the	more	elaborate	options	of	the	more	expensive	wallet
PCs.	It	will	be	handy	for	travel	or	as	a	backup,	and	may	be	sufficient	by	itself

for	some	people's	uses.
If	you	aren't	carrying	a	wallet	PC,	you'll	still	have	access	to	the	highway	by
using	kiosks—some	free,	some	requiring	payment	of	a	fee—which	will	be
found	in	office	buildings,	shopping	malls,	and	airports	in	much	the	same	spirit
as	drinking	fountains,	rest	rooms,	and	pay	phones.	In	fact,	they	will	replace
not	only	pay	phones	but	also	banking	machines,	because	they	will	offer	their
capabilities	as	well	as	all	the	other	highway	applications,	from	sending	and
receiving	messages	to	scanning	maps	and	buying	tickets.	Access	to	kiosks
will	be	essential,	and	available	everywhere.	Some	kiosks	will	display
advertising	links	to	specific	services	when	you	first	log	on—a	bit	like	the
phones	in	airports	that	connect	right	to	hotel	and	rental-car	reservations.	Like
the	cash	machines	we	find	in	airports	today,	they	will	look	like	rugged
devices,	but	inside	they	will	also	be	PCs.
No	matter	what	form	the	PC	takes,	users	will	still	have	to	be	able	to	navigate
their	way	through	its	applications.	Think	of	the	way	you	use	your	television
remote	control	today	to	choose	what	you	want	to	watch.	Future	systems	with
more	choices	will	have	to	do	better.	They'll	have	to	avoid	making	you	go
step-by-step	through	all	the	options.	Instead	of	having	to	remember	which
channel	number	to	use	to	find	a	program,	you	will	be	shown	a	graphical	menu
and	be	able	to	select	what	you	want	by	pointing	to	an	easy-to-understand
image.
You	won't	necessarily	have	to	point	to	make	your	point.	Eventually	we'll	also
be	able	to	speak	to	our	televisions,	personal	computers,	or	other	information
appliances.	At	first	we'll	have	to	keep	to	a	limited	vocabulary,	but	eventually
our	exchanges	will	become	quite	conversational.	This	capability	requires
powerful	hardware	and	software,	because	conversation	that	a	human	can
understand	effortlessly	is	very	hard	for	a	computer	to	interpret.	Already,	voice
recognition	works	fine	for	a	small	set	of	predefined	commands,	such	as	"Call
my	sister."	It's	much	more	difficult	for	a	computer	to	decipher	an	arbitrary
sentence,	but	in	the	next	ten	years	this	too	will	become	possible.
Some	users	will	find	it	convenient	to	handwrite	instructions	to	a	computer,
rather	than	speaking	or	typing	them.	Many	companies,	including	Microsoft,
have	spent	some	years	working	on	what	we	call	"pen-based	computers"
capable	of	reading	handwriting.	I	was	overly	optimistic	about	how	quickly	we
would	be	able	to	create	software	that	would	recognize	the	handwriting	of	a
broad	range	of	people.	The	difficulties	turned	out	to	be	quite	subtle.	When	we
tested	the	system	ourselves	it	worked	well,	but	new	users	continued	to	have
trouble	with	it.	We	discovered	we	were	unconsciously	making	our

handwriting	neater	and	more	recognizable	than	usual.	We	were	adapting	to
the	machine	rather	than	the	other	way======================================================== rted	by	posts	of	Douglas	fir.	The	house	has	lots	of	exposed
horizontal	beams	and	vertical	supports.	You'll	have	a	great	view	of	the	lake.
My	hope	is	that	the	view	and	the	Douglas	fir,	rather	than	the	electronic	pin,

will	be	what	interest	you	most	as	you	descend	toward	the	ground	floor.	Most
of	the	wood	came	from	an	eighty-year-old	Weyerhaeuser	lumber	mill	that	was
being	torn	down	out	on	the	Columbia	River.	This	wood,	harvested	nearly	a
hundred	years	ago,	came	from	trees	that	were	as	much	as	350	feet	tall,
between	8	and	15	feet	in	diameter.	Douglas	fir	is	one	of	the	strongest	woods
in	the	world	for	its	weight.	Unfortunately,	new-growth	Douglas	fir	tends	to
split	if	you	try	to	mill	it	into	beams,	because	the	grain	is	not	as	tight	in	a
seventy-year-old	tree	as	it	is	in	a	five-hundred-year-old	one.	Almost	all	of	the
old-growth	Douglas	fir	has	been	harvested	now,	and	any	that	remains	should
be	preserved.	I	was	lucky	to	find	old-growth	timbers	that	could	be	reused.
The	fir	beams	support	the	two	floors	of	private	living	spaces	you'll	be
descending	past.	Privacy	is	important.	I	want	a	house	that	will	still	feel	like
home	even	when	guests	are	enjoying	other	parts	of	it.
At	the	bottom	of	the	stairs,	the	theater	will	be	on	the	right,	and	to	the	left,	on
the	south	side,	will	be	the	reception	hall.	As	you	step	into	the	reception	hall,
on	your	right	will	be	a	series	of	sliding	glass	doors	that	open	onto	a	terrace
leading	to	the	lake.	Recessed	into	the	east	wall	will	be	twenty-four	video
monitors,	each	with	a	40-inch	picture	tube,	stacked	four	high	and	six	across.
These	monitors	will	work	cooperatively	to	display	large	images	for	artistic,
entertainment,	or	business	purposes.	I	had	hoped	that	when	the	monitors
weren't	in	use	they	could	literally	disappear	into	the	woodwork.	I	wanted	the
screens	to	display	woodgrain	patterns	that	matched	their	surroundings.
Unfortunately	I	could	never	achieve	anything	convincing	with	current
technology,	because	a	monitor	emits	light	while	real	wood	reflects	it.	So	I
settled	for	having	the	monitors	disappear	behind	wood	panels	when	they're
not	in	use.
The	electronic	pin	you	wear	will	tell	the	house	who	and	where	you	are,	and
the	house	will	use	this	information	to	try	to	meet	and	even	anticipate	your
needs—all	as	unobtrusively	as	possible.	Someday,	instead	of	needing	the	pin,
it	might	be	possible	to	have	a	camera	system	with	visual-recognition
capabilities,	but	that's	beyond	current	technology.	When	it's	dark	outside,	the
pin	will	cause	a	moving	zone	of	light	to	accompany	you	through	the	house.
Unoccupied	rooms	will	be	unlit.	As	you	walk	down	a	hallway,	you	might	not
notice	the	lights	ahead	of	you	gradually	coming	up	to	full	brightness	and	the
lights	behind	you	fading.	Music	will	move	with	you,	too.	It	will	seem	to	be
everywhere,	although,	in	fact,	other	people	in	the	house	will	be	hearing
entirely	different	music	or	nothing	at	all.	A	movie	or	the	news	will	be	able	to
follow	you	around	the	house,	too.	If	you	get	a	phone	call,	only	the	handset

nearest	you	will	ring.
Computer	rendering	of	the	Gateses'	future	home,	showing	the	staircase	and
formal	dining	room
You	won't	be	confronted	by	the	technology,	but	it	will	be	readily	and	easily
available.	Handheld	remote	controls	will	put	you	in	charge	of	your	immediate
environment	and	of	the	house's	entertainment	system.	The	remote	will	extend
the	capabilities	of	the	pin.	It	will	not	only	let	the	house	identify	and	locate
you,	it	will	also	allow	you	to	give	instructions.	You'll	use	the	controls	to	tell
the	monitors	in	a	room	to	become	visible	and	what	to	display.	You'll	be	able
to	choose	from	among	thousands	of	pictures,	recordings,	movies,	and
television	programs,	and	you'll	have	all	sorts	of	options	available	for	selecting
information.
A	console,	which	will	be	the	equivalent	of	a	keyboard	that	lets	you	give	very
specific	instructions,	will	be	discreetly	visible	in	each	room.	I	want	consoles
that	are	noticeable	to	those	who	need	them,	but	that	don't	invite	attention.	A
characteristic,	easy-to-identify	feature	will	alert	the	user	to	the	identity	and
whereabouts	of	the	consoles.	The	telephone	has	already	made	this	transition.
It	doesn't	attract	particular	attention	to	itself;	most	of	us	are	comfortable
putting	a	nondescript	phone	on	an	end	table.
Every	computerized	system	should	be	made	so	simple	and	natural	to	use	that
people	don't	give	it	a	second	thought.	But	simple	is	difficult.	Still,	computers
get	easier	to	use	every	year,	and	trial-and-error	in	my	house	will	help	us	learn
how	to	create	a	really	simple	system.	You	will	be	able	to	be	indirect	about
your	instructions	and	requests.	For	example,	you	won't	have	to	ask	for	a	song
by	name.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	the	house	to	play	the	latest	hits,	or	songs	by
a	particular	artist,	or	songs	that	were	performed	at	Woodstock,	or	music
composed	in	eighteenth-century	Vienna,	or	songs	with	the	word	"yellow"	in
their	titles.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	for	songs	that	you	have	categorized	with	a
certain	adjective,	or	songs	that	haven't	been	played	before	when	a	particular

person	was	visiting	the	house.	I	might	program	classical	music	as	background
for	contemplating	and	something	more	modern	and	energetic	to	play	while
I'm	exercising.	If	you	want	to	watch	the	movie	that	won	the	1957	Academy
Award	for	best	picture,	you	can	ask	for	it	that	way—and	see	The	Bridge	on
the	River	Kwai.	You	could	find	the	same	movie	by	asking	for	films	starring
Alec	Guinness	or	William	Holden	or	ones	about	prison	camps.
Prototype	of	a	home	control	console
If	you're	planning	to	visit	Hong	Kong	soon,	you	might	ask	the	screen	in	your
room	to	show	you	pictures	of	the	city.	It	will	seem	to	you	as	if	the
photographs	are	displayed	everywhere,	although	actually	the	images	will
materialize	on	the	walls	of	rooms	just	before	you	walk	in	and	vanish	after	you
leave.	If	you	and	I	are	enjoying	different	things	and	one	of	us	walks	into	a
room	where	the	other	is	sitting,	the	house	will	follow	predetermined	rules
about	what	to	do.	For	example,	the	house	might	continue	the	audio	and	visual
imagery	for	the	person	who	was	in	the	room	first,	or	it	might	change
programming	to	something	it	knows	both	of	us	like.
A	house	that	tracks	its	occupants	in	order	to	meet	their	particular	needs
combines	two	traditions.	The	first	is	the	tradition	of	unobtrusive	service,	and
the	other	is	that	an	object	we	carry	entitles	us	to	be	treated	in	a	certain	way.
You're	already	used	to	the	idea	that	an	object	can	authenticate	you.	It	can
inform	people	or	machinery	that	you	have	permission	to	do	something	such	as
open	a	locked	door,	get	on	an	airplane,	or	use	a	specific	line	of	credit—yours
—to	make	a	purchase.	Keys,	electronic	entry	cards,	driver's	licenses,
passports,	name	badges,	credit	cards,	and	tickets	are	all	forms	of
authentication.	If	I	give	you	the	key	to	my	car,	the	car	allows	you	to	get	in,
start	the	engine,	and	drive	away.	You	might	say	that	the	car	trusts	you	because
you	carry	its	keys.	If	I	give	a	parking	attendant	a	key	that	fits	my	automobile's
ignition	but	not	its	trunk,	the	car	lets	him	drive	but	not	open	the	trunk.	It's	no
different	with	my	house,	which	will	make	various	amenities	available	to	you
based	on	the	electronic	key	you	carry.

None	of	this	is	really	so	radical.	Some	visionaries	are	predicting	that	within
the	next	ten	years	there	will	be	lots	of	robots	wandering	around	helping	us	out
with	various	household	chores.	I	am	certainly	not	preparing	for	that,	because	I
think	it	will	be	many	decades	before	robots	are	practical.	The	only	ones	I
expect	to	see	in	widespread	use	soon	are	intelligent	toys.	Kids	will	be	able	to
program	them	to	respond	to	different	situations	and	even	to	speak	in	the
voices	of	favorite	characters.	These	toy	robots	will	be	able	to	be	programmed
in	a	limited	number	of	ways.	They	will	have	limited	vision,	know	the	distance
to	the	wall	in	each	direction,	the	time,	the	lighting	conditions,	and	accept
limited	speech	input.	I	think	it	would	have	been	cool	to	have	had	a	toy-size
car	I	could	have	talked	to	and	programmed	to	respond	to	my	instructions.
Other	than	toys,	the	other	major	uses	for	robotic	devices	I	see	are	for	military
applications.	The	reason	I	doubt	intelligent	robots	will	provide	much	help	in
actual	housework	in	the	foreseeable	future	is	that	it	takes	a	great	deal	of	visual
intelligence	and	dexterity	to	prepare	food	or	change	diapers.	Pool	cleaning,
lawn	mowing,	and	perhaps	even	vacuum	cleaning	can	be	done	with	a
relatively	dumb	system,	but	once	we	get	beyond	tasks	where	you	just	push
something	around,	it	is	very	hard	to	design	a	machine	that	would	be	able	to
recognize	and	respond	to	all	of	the	contingencies	that	come	along.
The	systems	I	am	building	into	the	house	are	designed	to	make	it	easier	to	live
in,	but	I	won't	know	for	sure	if	they	are	worthwhile	until	I	move	in.	I'm
experimenting	and	learning	all	the	time.	The	design	team	used	my	guest
cottage,	which	was	built	before	the	house,	as	a	sort	of	test	laboratory	for	home
instrumentation.	Because	some	people	like	the	temperature	warmer	than
others	do,	the	cottage's	software	sets	its	temperature	in	reaction	to	who	is
inside,	and	the	time	of	day.	The	cottage	knows	to	make	the	temperature	toasty
on	a	cold	morning	before	a	guest	is	out	of	bed.	In	the	evening,	when	it's	dark
outside,	the	cottage's	lights	dim	if	a	television	is	on.	If	someone	is	in	the
cottage	during	the	day,	the	cottage	matches	its	inside	brightness	to	that	of	the
outdoors.	Of	course	the	occupant	can	always	give	explicit	directions	to
overrule	the	settings.
This	sort	of	instrumentation	can	provide	significant	energy	savings.	A	number
of	electric	utilities	are	testing	a	network	to	monitor	the	use	of	energy	in
individual	homes.	This	would	end	the	expensive	practice	of	having	meter
readers	come	to	each	home	every	month	or	two,	but	more	important,
computers	in	the	home	and	at	the	utility	company	will	be	able	to	manage	the
minute-by-minute	demand	for	power	at	various	times	of	the	day.	Energy-
demand	management	can	save	a	lot======================================================== o	ballet
slippers.	Of	course	you	will	still	ask	people	you	know	for	recommendations,
but	efficiently,	by	electronic	mail.
If	you're	thinking	of	doing	business	with	a	company	or	buying	a	product,
you'll	be	able	to	check	what	others	say	about	it.	If	you	want	to	buy	a
refrigerator,	you	will	look	for	the	electronic	bulletin	boards	containing	formal
and	informal	reviews	of	refrigerators	and	their	manufacturers	and	retailers.
You'll	get	into	the	habit	of	checking	these	bulletin	boards	before	you	make
any	significant	purchase.	When	you	have	a	compliment	or	complaint	about	a
record	club,	a	doctor,	or	even	a	computer	chip,	it	will	be	easy	to	find	the	place
on	the	network	where	that	company	or	product	is	discussed	and	add	your
opinion.	Ultimately,	companies	that	don't	serve	their	customers	well	will	see
their	reputations	and	their	sales	decline,	while	those	that	do	a	great	job	will

attract	sizable	followings	through	this	new	form	of	word	of	"mouth."
But	the	various	endorsements	and	especially	the	negative	comments	will	have
to	be	examined	carefully.	They	may	be	motivated	more	by	fanaticism	than	a
genuine	desire	to	share	pertinent	information.
Let's	say	a	company	is	selling	an	air	conditioner	that	99.9	percent	of	its
customers	are	very	happy	with.	One	angry	consumer	in	the	remaining	0.1
percent	can	post	horrible	insults	about	a	brand	of	air	conditioner,	the	company
that	manufactures	it,	and	individuals	in	the	company,	and	keep	sending	the
messages	over	and	over	and	over.	The	effect	could	be	compared	to	sitting	in	a
meeting	where	everyone	has	a	volume	control	that	could	be	set	from	0	to
1,000,	and	the	normal	level	of	conversation	is,	say,	3.	Then	a	few	people
decide	to	crank	their	volume	up	to	1,000	and	start	shouting.	This	means	that	if
I	happen	to	look	in	on	the	bulletin	board	because	I'm	buying	an	air
conditioner,	my	visit	may	be	a	waste	of	time	because	all	I	find	there	is	the
shouting.	It	is	unfair	to	me	and	to	the	company	selling	the	air	conditioners.
Already,	a	network	etiquette,	or	"netiquette,"	is	evolving.	As	the	information
highway	becomes	society's	town	square,	we	will	come	to	expect	it	to	conform
to	our	culture's	mores.	There	are	vast	cultural	differences	around	the	world,	so
the	highway	will	be	divided	into	different	parts,	some	dedicated	to	various
cultures,	and	some	specified	for	global	usage.	So	far,	a	frontier	mentality	has
prevailed,	and	participants	in	electronic	forums	have	been	known	to	lapse	into
behavior	that	is	antisocial	and	even	illegal.	Illegal	copies	of	copyrighted
intellectual	property,	including	articles,	books,	and	software	applications,	are
distributed	freely.	Get-rich-quick	scams	pop	up	here	and	there.	Pornography
flourishes	within	the	easy	reach	of	children.	Single-minded	voices	rant,
sometimes	almost	incessantly,	about	products,	companies,	and	people	they
have	come	to	dislike.	Forum	participants	get	horrible	insults	hurled	at	them
because	of	some	comment	they	have	made.	The	ease	with	which	an
individual,	any	individual,	can	share	his	opinions	with	the	members	of	a	huge
electronic	community	is	unprecedented.	And	the	ones	who	are	yelling	are
able,	because	the	electronic	community	is	so	efficient,	to	take	a	piece	of	hate
mail	and	post	it	on	twenty	bulletin	boards.	I've	seen	bulletin	boards	collapse
into	foolishness	after	people	start	getting	shrill.	Other	participants	in	the
discussion	don't	know	what	to	do.	Some	people	yell	back;	a	few	try	to	say
rational	things.	But	the	shrill	comments	continue,	and	that	destroys	the	sense
of	community.
The	Internet,	true	to	its	roots	as	an	academic	cooperative,	has	relied	on	peer
pressure	for	regulation.	For	example,	if	someone	in	a	discussion	group	posts

an	extraneous	comment	or,	worse,	tries	to	sell	something	in	an	electronic
forum	that	is	seen	by	others	as	a	noncommercial	setting,	the	would-be
diverger	or	merchant	may	get	a	withering	barrage	of	insults.	The	enforcement
so	far	has	been	mostly	by	self-appointed	censors
who	"flame"	those	they	believe	have	crossed	the	line	into	antisocial	behavior.
The	commercial	on-line	services	employ	volunteers	and	professional
moderators	to	monitor	conduct	on	their	bulletin	boards.	Forums	that	have
moderators	can	filter	out	some	antisocial	behavior	by	refusing	to	allow	insults
or	copyrighted	information	to	remain	on	a	system's	servers.	Most	Internet
forums	remain	unmoderated,	however.	Anything	goes,	and	because	people
can	post	messages	and	information	anonymously,	little	accountability	exists.
We	need	a	more	sophisticated	process	to	gather	consensus	opinions	without
depending	on	the	Attorney	General's	Consumer	Complaints	Division	to	act	as
a	filter.	We	will	have	to	find	some	way	to	force	people	to	turn	their	volume
down	so	the	highway	doesn't	become	an	amplifier	for	libel	or	slander	or	an
outlet	for	venting	irritation.
Many	providers	of	Internet	access	are	beginning	to	restrict	entry	to	forums
containing	sexually	explicit	material,	and	there	has	been	a	crackdown	on	the
illegal	traffic	of	copyrighted	materials.	Some	universities	are	getting	students
and	staff	to	remove	objectionable	postings.	This	rubs	some	the	wrong	way,
because	they	see	cyberspace	as	a	place	where	anything	goes.	The	commercial
services	have	had	similar	problems.	There	have	been	complaints	about
restriction	of	free	speech.	And	parents	were	outraged	when	their	family
account	was	closed	after	their	eleven-year-old	made	an	objectionable
comment	to	a	moderator.	Companies	will	create	special	communities	on	the
Internet	and	will	"compete"	by	having	rules	about	how	they	are	going	to	deal
with	these	issues.
Politicians	are	already	wrestling	with	the	question	of	when	an	on-line	service
should	be	treated	as	a	common	carrier	and	when	it	should	be	treated	as	a
publisher.	Telephone	companies	are	legally	considered	common	carriers.
They	transport	messages	without	assuming	any	responsibility	for	them.	If	an
obscene	caller	bothers	you,	the	telephone	company	will	cooperate	with	the
police,	but	nobody	thinks	it	is	the	phone	company's	fault	that	some	creep	is
calling	you	and	talking	dirty.	Magazines	and	newspapers,	on	the	other	hand,
are	publishers.	They	are	legally	responsible	for	their	content	and	can	be	sued
for	libel.	They	also	have	a	strong	interest	in	maintaining	their	reputation	and
editorial	integrity	because	that	is	an	important	part	of	their	business.	Any
responsible	newspaper	checks	very	carefully	before	making	a	previously

unpublished	allegation	about	someone—in	part	because	it	doesn't	want	a	libel
suit,	but	also	because	inaccuracy	would	hurt	its	reputation.
On-line	services	function	simultaneously	as	common	carriers	and	publishers,
which	is	where	the	problem	lies.	When	they	act	as	publishers,	and	offer
content	they	have	acquired,	authored,	or	edited,	it	makes	sense	that	the	rules
of	libel	and	the	self-governing	incentive	of	editorial	reputation	would	apply.
But	we	also	expect	them	to	deliver	our	e-mail	like	a	common	carrier	without
examining	or	taking	responsibility	for	its	contents.	Likewise,	chat	lines,
bulletin	boards,	and	forums	that	encourage	users	to	interact	without	editorial
supervision	are	a	new	means	of	communication,	and	shouldn't	be	treated	the
same	way	as	material	published	on	the	service.	A	New	York	judge,	however,
recently	cleared	the	way	for	a	libel	lawsuit	by	ruling	that	the	on-line	service
involved	was	a	publisher	of	information,	not	just	a	distributor.	Perhaps	by	the
time	you	read	this	things	will	have	been	clarified.	The	stakes	in	the	resolution
of	this	issue	are	high.	If	network	providers	are	treated	entirely	as	publishers,
they	will	have	to	monitor	and	preapprove	the	content	of	all	information	they
transmit.	This	could	create	an	unwelcome	atmosphere	of	censorship	and
curtail	spontaneous	exchange,	so	important	in	the	electronic	world.
Ideally,	the	industry	will	develop	some	standards	so	that	when	you	go	into	a
bulletin	board	or	article,	you	get	an	indication	of	whether	or	not	some
"publisher"	has	looked	it	over,	edited	it,	and	stands	behind	its	content.	The
question	will	be	what	standards	and	who	will	oversee	them?	A	bulletin	board
for	lesbians	should	not	be	forced	to	accept	antilesbian	comments,	nor	should	a
bulletin	board	about	some	product	be	overwhelmed	by	messages	from	a
competitor.	It	would	be	a	shame	to	have	to	keep	children	away	from	all
bulletin	boards,	but	it	would	also	be	unrealistic,	and	possibly	an	abridgment
of	free	expression,	to	force	all	bulletin	boards	to	undergo	review	by	someone
willing	to	accept	liability	for	everything	they	contain.	What	we	will	most
likely	end	up	with	is	a	series	of	categories,	like	the	ratings	given	movies,	that
will	indicate	whether	shrill	voices	have	been	controlled	and	whether	an
"editor"	has	deleted	messages	he	thought	were	out	of	line	with	the	policies	of
the	group	involved.
The	bulletin	boards	I've	been	discussing	are	the	free,	public	ones,	but	there
will	also	be	places	where	professional	information	and	advice	will	be	offered
for	a	fee.	You	might	wonder	why	you	would	need	an	expert	when	so	much
information	will	be	available.	For	the	same	reasons	you	might	need	one	now.
All	sorts	of	consumer	data	can	be	had	now.	Consumer	Reports	offers
objective	evaluations	of	a	lot	of	products,	but	the	reviews	are	aimed	at	a	broad
audience—they	don't	necessarily	discuss	your	particular	requirements.	If	you

can't	find	exactly	the	advice	you	need	on	the	highway,	you	will	be	able	to	hire
a	knowledgeable	sales	consultant,	for	five	minutes	or	an	afternoon,	via
videoconference.	She	will	help	you	choose	products,	which	your	computer
will	then	buy	for	you	from	the	cheapest	reliable	source.
I	expect	the	traditional	binding	together	of	advice	and	sales	to	be	much	less
prevalent,	because	although	the	advice	appears	free	to	the	customer,	it	is	paid
for	by	the	stores	and	services	that	offer	it.	This	cost	then	gets	added	on	to	the
price	of	the	goods.	Stores	that	are	charging	more	because	they	offer	advice
will	have	increasing	difficulty	competing	with	the	discounters	who	will
operate	on	the	information	highway.	The======================================================== will	connect	to	the	wireless	part	of	the	highway,	a	switch	will
connect	that	to	the	wired	part,	and	then	to	the	computer/server	in	your	home
or	office	and	bring	you	the	information	you	asked	for.
There	will	also	be	local,	less	expensive	kinds	of	wireless	networks	available
inside	businesses	and	most	homes.	These	networks	will	allow	you	to	connect
to	the	highway	or	your	own	computer	system	without	paying	time	charges	so
long	as	you	are	within	a	certain	range.	Local	wireless	networks	will	use
technology	different	from	the	one	used	by	the	wide-area	wireless	networks.
However,	portable	information	devices	will	automatically	select	the	least
expensive	network	they	are	able	to	connect	to,	so	the	user	won't	be	aware	of
the	technological	differences.	The	indoor	wireless	networks	will	allow	wallet
PCs	to	be	used	in	place	of	remote	controls.
Wireless	service	poses	obvious	concerns	about	privacy	and	security,	because
radio	signals	can	easily	be	intercepted.	Even	wired	networks	can	be	tapped.
The	highway	software	will	have	to	encrypt	transmission	to	avoid
eavesdropping.
Governments	have	long	understood	the	importance	of	keeping	information
private,	for	both	economic	and	military	reasons.	The	need	to	make	personal,
commercial,	military,	or	diplomatic	messages	secure	(or	to	break	into	them)
has	attracted	powerful	intellects	through	the	generations.	It	is	very	satisfying
to	break	an	encoded	message.	Charles	Babbage,	who	made	dramatic	advances
in	the	art	of	code	breaking	in	the	mid-1800s,	wrote:	"Deciphering	is,	in	my
opinion,	one	of	the	most	fascinating	of	arts,	and	I	fear	I	have	wasted	upon	it
more	time	than	it	deserves."	I	discovered	its	fascination	as	a	kid	when,	like
kids	everywhere,	a	bunch	of	us	played	with	simple	ciphers.	We	would	encode
messages	by	substituting	one	letter	of	the	alphabet	for	another.	If	a	friend	sent
me	a	cipher	that	began	"ULFW	NZXX"	it	would	be	fairly	easy	to	guess	that
this	represented	"DEAR	BILL,"	and	that	U	stood	for	D,	and	L	for	E,	and	so
forth.	With	those	seven	letters	it	wasn't	hard	to	unravel	the	rest	of	the	cipher
fairly	quickly.

Past	wars	have	been	won	or	lost	because	the	most	powerful	governments	on
earth	didn't	have	the	cryptological	power	any	interested	junior	high	school
student	with	a	personal	computer	can	harness	today.	Soon	any	child	old
enough	to	use	a	computer	will	be	able	to	transmit	encoded	messages	that	no
government	on	earth	will	find	easy	to	decipher.	This	is	one	of	the	profound
implications	of	the	spread	of	fantastic	computing	power.
When	you	send	a	message	across	the	information	highway	it	will	be	"signed"
by	your	computer	or	other	information	appliance	with	a	digital	signature	that
only	you	are	capable	of	applying,	and	it	will	be	encrypted	so	that	only	the
intended	recipient	will	be	able	to	decipher	it.	You'll	send	a	message,	which
could	be	information	of	any	kind,	including	voice,	video,	or	digital	money.
The	recipient	will	be	able	to	be	almost	positive	that	the	message	is	really	from
you,	that	it	was	sent	at	exactly	the	indicated	time,	that	it	has	not	been
tampered	with	in	the	slightest,	and	that	others	cannot	decipher	it.
The	mechanism	that	will	make	this	possible	is	based	on	mathematical
principles,	including	what	are	called	"one-way	functions"	and	"public-key
encryption."	These	are	quite	advanced	concepts,	so	I'm	only	going	to	touch	on
them.	Keep	in	mind	that	regardless	of	how	complicated	the	system	is
technically,	it	will	be	extremely	easy	for	you	to	use.	You'll	just	tell	your
information	appliance	what	you	want	it	to	do	and	it	will	seem	to	happen
effortlessly.
A	one-way	function	is	something	that	is	much	easier	to	do	than	undo.
Breaking	a	pane	of	glass	is	a	one-way	function,	but	not	one	useful	for
encoding.	The	sort	of	one-way	function	required	for	cryptography	is	one	that
is	easy	to	undo	if	you	know	an	extra	piece	of	information	and	very	difficult	to
undo	without	that	information.	There	are	a	number	of	such	one-way	functions
in	mathematics.	One	involves	prime	numbers.	Kids	learn	about	prime
numbers	in	school.	A	prime	number	cannot	be	divided	evenly	by	any	number
except	1	and	itself.	Among	the	first	dozen	numbers,	the	primes	are	2,	3,	5,	7,
and	11.	The	numbers	4,	6,	8,	and	10	are	not	prime	because	2	divides	into	each
of	them	evenly.	The	number	9	is	not	prime	because	3	divides	into	it	evenly.
There	are	an	infinite	number	of	prime	numbers,	and	there	is	no	known	pattern
to	them	except	that	they	are	prime.	When	you	multiply	two	prime	numbers
together,	you	get	a	number	that	can	be	divided	evenly	only	by	those	same	two
primes.	For	example,	only	5	and	7	can	be	divided	evenly	into	35.	Finding	the
primes	is	called	"factoring"	the	number.
It	is	easy	to	multiply	the	prime	numbers	11,927	and	20,903	and	get	the
number	249,310,081,	but	it	is	much	harder	to	recover	from	the	product,

249,310,081,	the	two	prime	numbers	that	are	its	factors.	This	one-way
function,	the	difficulty	of	factoring	numbers,	underlies	an	ingenious	kind	of
cipher:	the	most	sophisticated	encryption	system	in	use	today.	It	takes	a	long
time	for	even	the	largest	computers	to	factor	a	really	large	product	back	into
its	constituent	primes.	A	coding	system	based	on	factoring	uses	two	different
decoding	keys,	one	to	encipher	a	message	and	a	different	but	related	one	to
decipher.	With	only	the	enciphering	key,	it's	easy	to	encode	a	message,	but
deciphering	it	within	any	practical	period	of	time	is	nearly	impossible.
Deciphering	requires	a	separate	key,	available	only	to	the	intended	recipient
of	the	message—or,	rather,	to	the	recipient's	computer.	The	enciphering	key	is
based	on	the	product	of	two	huge	prime	numbers,	whereas	the	deciphering
key	is	based	on	the	primes	themselves.	A	computer	can	generate	a	new	pair	of
unique	keys	in	a	flash,	because	it	is	easy	for	a	computer	to	generate	two	large
prime	numbers	and	multiply	them	together.	The	enciphering	key	thus	created
can	be	made	public	without	appreciable	risk,	because	of	the	difficulty	even
another	computer	would	have	factoring	it	to	obtain	the	deciphering	key.
The	practical	application	of	this	encryption	will	be	at	the	center	of	the
information	highway's	security	system.	The	world	will	become	quite	reliant
on	this	network,	so	it	is	important	that	security	be	handled	competently.	You
can	think	of	the	information	highway	as	a	postal	network	where	everyone	has
a	mailbox	that	is	impervious	to	tampering	and	has	an	unbreakable	lock.	Each
mailbox	has	a	slot	that	lets	anyone	slide	information	in,	but	only	the	owner	of
a	mailbox	has	the	key	to	get	information	out.	(Some	governments	may	insist
that	each	mailbox	have	a	second	door	with	a	separate	key	that	the	government
keeps,	but	we'll	ignore	that	political	consideration	for	now	and	concentrate	on
the	security	that	software	will	provide.)
Each	user's	computer	or	other	information	appliance	will	use	prime	numbers
to	generate	an	enciphering	key,	which	will	be	listed	publicly,	and	a
corresponding	deciphering	key,	which	only	the	user	will	know.	This	is	how	it
will	work	in	practice:	I	have	information	I	want	to	send	you.	My	information
appliance/computer	system	looks	up	your	public	key	and	uses	it	to	encrypt	the
information	before	sending	it.	No	one	can	read	the	message,	even	though	your
key	is	public	knowledge,	because	your	public	key	does	not	contain	the
information	needed	for	decryption.	You	receive	the	message	and	your
computer	decrypts	it	with	a	private	key	that	corresponds	to	your	public	key.
You	want	to	answer.	Your	computer	looks	up	my	public	key	and	uses	it	to
encrypt	your	reply.	No	one	else	can	read	the	message,	even	though	it	was
encrypted	with	a	key	that	is	totally	public.	Only	I	can	read	it	because	only	I
have	the	private	deciphering	key.	This	is	very	practical,	because	no	one	has	to

trade	keys	in	advance.
How	big	do	the	prime	numbers	and	their	products	have	to	be	to	ensure	an
effective	one-way	function?.
The	concept	of	public-key	encryption	was	invented	by	Whitfield	Diffie	and
Martin	Hellman	in	1977.	Another	set	of	computer	scientists,	Ron	Rivest,	Adi
Shamir,	and	Leonard	Adelman,	soon	came	up	with	the	notion	of	using	prime
factorization	as	part	of	what	is	now	known	as	the	RSA	cryptosystem,	after	the
initials	of	their	last	names.	They	projected	that	it	would	take	millions	of	years
to	factor	a	130-digit	number	that	was	the	product	of	two	primes,	regardless	of
how	much	computing	power	was	brought	to	bear.	To	prove	the	point,	they
challenged	the	world	to	find	the	two	factors	in	this	129-digit	number,	known
to	people	in	the	field	as	RSA	129:
114,381,625,757,888,867,669,235,779,976,146,612,010,218,296,
721,242,362,562,561,842,935,706,935,245,733,897,830,597,123,563,958,705,058,989,075,147,599,29.0,026,879,543,541
They	were	sure	that	a	message	they	had	encrypted	using	the	number	as	the
public	key	would	be	totally	secure	forever.	But	they	hadn't	anticipated	either
the	full	effects	of	Moore's	Law,	as	discussed	in	chapter	2,	which	has	made
computers	much	more	powerful,	or	the	success	of	the	personal	computer,
which	has	dramatically	increased	the	number	of	computers	and	computer
users	in	the	world.	In	1993	a	group	of	more	than	600	academics	and	hobbyists
from	around	the	world	began	an	assault	on	the	129-digit	number,	using	the
Internet	to	coordinate	the	work	of	various	computers.	In	less	than	a	year	they
factored	the	number	into	two	primes,	one	64	digits	long	and	the	other	65.	The
primes	are	as	follows:
3,490,529,510,847,650,949,147,849,619,903,898,133,417,764,638,
493,387,843,990,820,577
and
32,769,132,993,266,709,549,961,988,190,834,461,413,177,642,
967,992,942,539,798,288,533
And	the	encoded	message	says:	"The	magic	words	are	squeamish	and
ossifrage."
One	lesson	that	came	out	of	this	challenge	is	that	a	129-digit	public	key	is	not
long	enough	if	the	information	being	encrypted	is	really	important	and
sensitive.	Another	is	that	no	one	should	get	too	cocksure	about	the	security	of

encryption.
Increasing	the	key	just	a	few	digits	makes	it	much	more	difficult	to	crack.
Mathematicians	today	believe	that	a	250-digit-long	pr======================================================== We	saw	three	ways	to	get	MS-DOS	out	in	front.	First	was	to	make
MS-DOS	the	best	product.	Second	was	to	help	other	software	companies
write	MS-DOS-based	software.	Third	was	to	ensure	MS-DOS	was
inexpensive.
1981:	The	IBM	personal	computer
We	gave	IBM	a	fabulous	deal—a	low,	one-time	fee	that	granted	the	company
the	right	to	use	Microsoft's	operating	system	on	as	many	computers	as	it
could	sell.	This	offered	IBM	an	incentive	to	push	MS-DOS,	and	to	sell	it
inexpensively.	Our	strategy	worked.	IBM	sold	the	UCSD	Pascal	P-System	for
about	$450,	CP/M-86	for	about	$175,	and	MS-DOS	for	about	$60.
Our	goal	was	not	to	make	money	directly	from	IBM,	but	to	profit	from
licensing	MS-DOS	to	computer	companies	that	wanted	to	offer	machines
more	or	less	compatible	with	the	IBM	PC.	IBM	could	use	our	software	for
free,	but	it	did	not	have	an	exclusive	license	or	control	of	future
enhancements.	This	put	Microsoft	in	the	business	of	licensing	a	software
platform	to	the	personal-computer	industry.	Eventually	IBM	abandoned	the
UCSD	Pascal	P-system	and	CP/M-86	enhancements.
Consumers	bought	the	IBM	PC	with	confidence,	and	in	1982,	software

developers	began	turning	out	applications	to	run	on	it.	Each	new	customer,
and	each	new	application,	added	to	the	IBM	PC's	strength	as	a	potential	de
facto	standard	for	the	industry.	Soon	most	of	the	new	and	best	software,	such
as	Lotus	1-2-3,	was	being	written	for	it.	Mitch	Kapor,	with	Jonathan	Sachs,
created	1-2-3	and	revolutionized	spreadsheets.	The	original	inventors	of	the
electronic	spreadsheet,	Dan	Bricklin	and	Bob	Frankston,	deserve	immense
credit	for	their	product,	VisiCalc,	but	1-2-3	made	it	obsolete.	Mitch	is	a
fascinating	person	whose	eclectic	background—in	his	case	as	a	disc	jockey
and	transcendental	meditation	instructor—is	typical	of	that	of	the	best
software	designers.
A	positive-feedback	cycle	began	driving	the	PC	market.	Once	it	got	going,
thousands	of	software	applications	appeared,	and	untold	numbers	of
companies	began	making	add-in	or	"accessory"	cards,	which	extended	the
hardware	capabilities	of	the	PC.	The	availability	of	software	and	hardware
add-ons	sold	PCs	at	a	far	greater	rate	than	IBM	had	anticipated—by	a	factor
of	millions.	The	positive-feedback	cycle	spun	out	billions	of	dollars	for	IBM.
For	a	few	years,	more	than	half	of	all	personal	computers	used	in	business
were	IBMs	and	most	of	the	rest	were	compatible	with	its	machines.
The	IBM	standard	became	the	platform	everybody	imitated.	A	lot	of	the
reason	was	timing	and	its	use	of	a	16-bit	processor.	Both	timing	and
marketing	are	key	to	acceptance	with	technology	products.	The	PC	happened
to	be	a	good	machine,	but	another	company	could	have	set	the	standard	by
getting	enough	desirable	applications	and	selling	enough	machines.
IBM's	early	business	decisions,	caused	by	its	rush	to	get	the	PCs	out,	made	it
very	easy	for	other	companies	to	build	compatible	machines.	The	architecture
was	for	sale.	The	microprocessor	chips	from	Intel	and	Microsoft's	operating
system	were	available.	This	openness	was	a	powerful	incentive	for
component	builders,	software	developers,	and	everyone	else	in	the	business	to
try	to	copy.
Within	three	years	almost	all	the	competing	standards	for	personal	computers
disappeared.	The	only	exceptions	were	Apple's	Apple	II	and	Macintosh.
Hewlett	Packard,	DEC,	Texas	Instruments,	and	Xerox,	despite	their
technologies,	reputations,	and	customer	bases,	failed	in	the	personal-computer
market	in	the	early	1980s	because	their	machines	weren't	compatible	and
didn't	offer	significant	enough	improvements	over	the	IBM	architecture.	A
host	of	start-ups,	such	as	Eagle	and	Northstar,	thought	people	would	buy	their
hardware	because	it	offered	something	different	and	slightly	better	than	the
IBM	PC.	All	of	the	start-ups	either	changed	to	building	compatible	hardware

or	failed.	The	IBM	PC	became	the	hardware	standard.	By	the	mid-1980s,
there	were	dozens	of	IBM-compatible	PCs.	Although	buyers	of	a	PC	might
not	have	articulated	it	this	way,	what	they	were	looking	for	was	the	hardware
that	ran	the	most	software,	and	they	wanted	the	same	system	the	people	they
knew	and	worked	with	had.
It	has	become	popular	for	certain	revisionist	historians	to	conclude	that	IBM
made	a	mistake	working	with	Intel	and	Microsoft	to	create	its	PC.	They	argue
that	IBM	should	have	kept	the	PC	architecture	proprietary,	and	that	Intel	and
Microsoft	somehow	got	the	better	of	IBM.	But	the	revisionists	are	missing	the
point.	IBM	became	the	central	force	in	the	PC	industry	precisely	because	it
was	able	to	harness	an	incredible	amount	of	innovative	talent	and
entrepreneurial	energy	and	use	it	to	promote	its	open	architecture.	IBM	set	the
standards.
In	the	mainframe	business	IBM	was	king	of	the	hill,	and	competitors	found	it
hard	to	match	the	IBM	sales	force	and	high	R&D.	If	a	competitor	tried
climbing	the	hill,	IBM	could	focus	its	assets	to	make	the	ascent	nearly
impossible.	But	in	the	volatile	world	of	the	personal	computer,	IBM's	position
was	more	like	that	of	the	leading	runner	in	a	marathon.	As	long	as	the	leader
keeps	running	as	fast	or	faster	than	the	others,	he	stays	in	the	lead	and
competitors	will	have	to	keep	trying	to	catch	up.	If,	however,	he	slacks	off	or
stops	pushing	himself,	the	rest	will	pass	him	by.	There	weren't	many
deterrents	to	the	other	racers,	as	would	soon	become	clear.
By	1983,	I	thought	our	next	step	should	be	to	develop	a	graphical	operating
system.	I	didn't	believe	we	would	be	able	to	retain	our	position	at	the
forefront	of	the	software	industry	if	we	stuck	with	MS-DOS,	because	MS-
DOS	was	character-based.	A	user	had	to	type	in	often-obscure	commands,
which	then	appeared	on	the	screen.	MS-DOS	didn't	provide	pictures	and	other
graphics	to	help	users	with	applications.	The	interface	is	the	way	the
computer	and	the	user	communicate.	I	believed	that	in	the	future	interfaces
would	be	graphical	and	that	it	was	essential	for	Microsoft	to	move	beyond
MS-DOS	and	set	a	new	standard	in	which	pictures	and	fonts	(typefaces)
would	be	part	of	an	easier-to-use	interface.	In	order	to	realize	our	vision,	PCs
had	to	be	made	easier	to	use	not	only	to	help	existing	customers,	but	also	to
attract	new	ones	who	wouldn't	take	the	time	to	learn	to	work	with	a
complicated	interface.
To	illustrate	the	huge	difference	between	a	character-based	computer	program
and	a	graphical	one,	imagine	playing	a	board	game	such	as	chess,	checkers,
Go,	or	Monopoly	on	a	computer	screen.	With	a	character-based	system,	you

type	in	your	moves	using	characters.	You	write	"Move	the	piece	on	square	11
to	square	19"	or	something	slightly	more	cryptic	like	"Pawn	to	QB3."	But	in	a
graphical	computer	system,	you	see	the	board	game	on	your	screen.	You
move	pieces	by	pointing	at	them	and	actually	dragging	them	to	their	new
locations.
Researchers	at	Xerox's	now-famous	Palo	Alto	Research	Center	in	California
explored	new	paradigms	for	human-computer	interaction.	They	showed	that	it
was	easier	to	instruct	a	computer	if	you	could	point	at	things	on	the	screen
and	see	pictures.	They	used	a	device	called	a	"mouse,"	which	could	be	rolled
on	a	tabletop	to	move	a	pointer	around	on	the	screen.	Xerox	did	a	poor	job	of
taking	commercial	advantage	of	this	groundbreaking	idea,	because	its
machines	were	expensive	and	didn't	use	standard	microprocessors.	Getting
great	research	to	translate	into	products	that	sell	is	still	a	big	problem	for
many	companies.
1984:	Character	user	interface	in	an	early	version	of	Microsoft	Word	for	DOS
In	1983,	Microsoft	announced	that	we	planned	to	bring	graphical	computing
to	the	IBM	PC,	with	a	product	called	Windows.	Our	goal	was	to	create
software	that	would	extend	MS-DOS	and	let	people	use	a	mouse,	employ
graphical	images	on	the	computer	screen,	and	make	available	on	the	screen	a
number	of	"windows,"	each	running	a	different	computer	program.	At	that
time	two	of	the	personal	computers	on	the	market	had	graphical	capabilities:
the	Xerox	Star	and	the	Apple	Lisa.	Both	were	expensive,	limited	in	capability,
and	built	on	proprietary	hardware	architectures.	Other	hardware	companies
couldn't	license	the	operating	systems	to	build	compatible	systems,	and
neither	computer	attracted	many	software	companies	to	develop	applications.
Microsoft	wanted	to	create	an	open	standard	and	bring	graphical	capabilities
to	any	computer	that	was	running	MS-DOS.

1995:	Graphical	user	interface	in	Microsoft	Word	for	Windows
The	first	popular	graphical	platform	came	to	market	in	1984,	when	Apple
released	its	Macintosh.	Everything	about	the	Macintosh's	proprietary
operating	system	was	graphical,	and	it	was	an	enormous	success.	The	initial
hardware	and	operating-system	software	Apple	released	were	quite	limited
but	vividly	demonstrated	the	potential	of	the	graphical	interface.	As	the
hardware	and	software	improved,	the	potential	was	realized.
We	worked	closely	with	Apple	throughout	the	development	of	the	Macintosh.
Steve	Jobs	led	the	Macintosh	team.	Working	with	him	was	really	fun.	Steve
has	an	amazing	intuition	for	engineering	and	design	as	well	as	an	ability	to
motivate	people	that	is	world	class.
It	took	a	lot	of	imagination	to	develop	graphical	computer	programs.	What
should	one	look	like?	How	should	it	behave?	Some	ideas	were	inherited	from
the	work	done	at	Xerox	and	some	were	original.	At	first	we	went	to	excess
with	the	possibilities.	We	used	nearly	every	one	of	the	fonts	and	icons	we
could.	Then	we	figured	out	all	that	made	it	hard	to	look	at	and	changed	to
more	sober	menus.	We	created	a	word	processor,	Microsoft	Word,	and	a
spreadsheet,	Microsoft	Excel,	for	the	Macintosh.	These	were	Microsoft's	first
graphical	products.
The	Macintosh	had	great	system	software,	but	Apple	refused	(until	1995)	to
let	anyone	else	make	computer	hardware	that	would	run	it.	This	was
traditional	hardware-company	thinking:	If	you	wanted	the	software,	you	had
to	buy	Apple	computers.	Microsoft	wanted	the	Macintosh	to	sell	well	and	be
widely	accepted,	not	only	because	we	had	invested	a	lot	in	creating
applications======================================================== gy	worked.	Virtually	every	personal-computer	manufacturer
licensed	a	programming	language	from	us.	Even	though	the	hardware	of	two
companies'	computers	was	different,	the	fact	that	both	ran	Microsoft	BASIC
meant	they	were	somewhat	compatible.	That	compatibility	became	an
important	part	of	what	people	purchased	with	their	computers.	Manufacturers
frequently	advertised	that	Microsoft	programming	languages,	including
BASIC,	were	available	for	their	computers.
Along	the	way,	Microsoft	BASIC	became	an	industry	software	standard.
Some	technologies	do	not	depend	upon	widespread	acceptance	for	their	value.
A	wonderful	nonstick	frying	pan	is	useful	even	if	you're	the	only	person	who
ever	buys	one.	But	for	communications	and	other	products	that	involve
collaboration,	much	of	the	product's	value	comes	from	its	widespread
deployment.	Given	a	choice	between	a	beautiful,	handcrafted	mailbox	with	an
opening	that	would	accommodate	only	one	size	envelope,	and	an	old	carton
that	everyone	routinely	dropped	all	mail	and	messages	for	you	into,	you'd
choose	the	one	with	broader	access.	You	would	choose	compatibility.
Sometimes	governments	or	committees	set	standards	intended	to	promote
compatibility.	These	are	called	"de	jure"	standards	and	have	the	force	of	law.
Many	of	the	most	successful	standards,	however,	are	"de	facto":	ones	the
market	discovers.	Most	analog	timepieces	operate	clockwise.	English-
language	typewriter	and	computer	keyboards	use	a	layout	in	which	the	keys

across	the	top	letter	row,	left	to	right,	spell	QWERTY.	No	law	says	they	must.
They	work,	and	most	customers	will	stick	with	those	standards	unless
something	dramatically	better	comes	along.
But	because	de	facto	standards	are	supported	by	the	marketplace	rather	than
by	law,	they	are	chosen	for	the	right	reasons	and	replaced	when	something
truly	better	shows	up—the	way	the	compact	disc	has	almost	replaced	the
vinyl	record.
De	facto	standards	often	evolve	in	the	marketplace	through	an	economic
mechanism	very	similar	to	the	concept	of	the	positive	spiral	that	drives
successful	businesses,	in	which	success	reinforces	success.	This	concept,
called	positive	feedback,	explains	why	de	facto	standards	often	emerge	as
people	search	for	compatibility.
A	positive-feedback	cycle	begins	when,	in	a	growing	market,	one	way	of
doing	something	gets	a	slight	advantage	over	its	competitors.	It	is	most	likely
to	happen	with	high-technology	products	that	can	be	made	in	great	volume
for	very	little	increase	in	cost	and	derive	some	of	their	value	from
compatibility.	A	home	video-game	system	is	one	example.	It	is	a	special-
purpose	computer,	equipped	with	a	special-purpose	operating	system	that
forms	a	platform	for	the	game's	software.	Compatibility	is	important	because
the	more	applications—in	this	case,	games—that	are	available,	the	more
valuable	the	machine	becomes	to	a	consumer.	At	the	same	time,	the	more
machines	consumers	buy,	the	more	applications	software	developers	create
for	it.	A	positive-feedback	cycle	sets	in	once	a	machine	reaches	a	high	level	of
popularity	and	sales	grow	further.
Perhaps	the	most	famous	industry	demonstration	of	the	power	of	positive
feedback	was	the	videocassette-recorder	format	battle	of	the	late	1970s	and
early	1980s.	The	persistent	myth	has	been	that	positive	feedback	alone	caused
the	VHS	format	to	win	out	over	Beta,	even	though	Beta	was	technically
better.	Actually,	early	Beta	tapes	only	recorded	for	an	hour—compared	to
three	hours	for	VHS—not	enough	for	a	whole	movie	or	football	game.
Customers	care	more	about	a	tape's	capacity	than	some	engineer's	specs.	The
VHS	format	got	off	to	a	small	lead	over	the	Beta	format	used	by	Sony	in	its
Betamax	player.	JVC,	which	developed	the	VHS	standard,	allowed	other
VCR	manufacturers	to	use	the	VHS	standard	for	a	very	low	royalty.	As	VHS-
compatible	players	proliferated,	video-rental	stores	tended	to	stock	more	VHS
than	Beta	tapes.	This	made	the	owner	of	a	VHS	player	more	likely	than	a
Beta	owner	to	find	the	movie	she	wanted	at	the	video	store,	which	made	VHS
fundamentally	more	useful	to	its	owners	and	caused	even	more	people	to	buy

VHS	players.	This,	in	turn,	further	motivated	video	stores	to	stock	VHS.	Beta
lost	out	as	people	chose	VHS	in	the	belief	that	it	represented	a	durable
standard.	VHS	was	the	beneficiary	of	a	positive-feedback	cycle.	Success	bred
success.	But	not	at	the	expense	of	quality.
While	the	duel	between	the	Betamax	and	VHS	formats	was	going	on,	sales	of
prerecorded	videocassettes	to	U.S.	tape-rental	dealers	were	almost	flat,	just	a
few	million	copies	a	year.	Once	VHS	emerged	as	the	apparent	standard,	in
about	1983,	an	acceptance	threshold	was	crossed	and	the	use	of	the	machines,
as	measured	by	tape	sales,	turned	abruptly	upward.	That	year,	over	9.5	million
tapes	were	sold,	a	more	than	50	percent	increase	over	the	year	before.	In
1984,	tapes	sales	reached	22	million.	Then,	in	successive	years:	52	million,	84
million,	and	110	million	units	in	1987,	by	which	time	renting	movies	had
became	one	of	the	most	popular	forms	of	home	entertainment,	and	the	VHS
machine	had	become	ubiquitous.
This	is	an	example	of	how	a	quantitative	change	in	the	acceptance	level	of	a
new	technology	can	lead	to	a	qualitative	change	in	the	role	the	technology
plays.	Television	is	another.	In	1946,	10,000	television	sets	were	sold	in	the
United	States	and	only	16,000	in	the	next	year.	But	then	a	threshold	was
crossed,	and	in	1948	the	number	was	190,000.	In	successive	years	it	was	1
million	units,	followed	by	4	million,	10	million,	and	steadily	up	to	32	million
sold	in	1955.	As	more	television	sets	were	sold,	more	was	invested	in	creating
programming,	which	in	turn	further	enticed	people	to	buy	television	sets.
For	the	first	few	years	after	they	were	introduced,	audio	compact	disc	(CD)
players	and	discs	didn't	sell	well,	in	part	because	it	was	difficult	to	find	music
stores	that	carried	many	titles.	Then,	seemingly	overnight,	enough	players
were	sold	and	titles	were	available,	and	an	acceptance	threshold	was	crossed.
More	people	bought	players	because	more	titles	were	available,	and	record
companies	made	more	titles	available	on	CDs.	Music	lovers	preferred	the
new,	high-quality	sound	and	convenience	of	compact	discs,	and	they	became
the	de	facto	standard	and	drove	LPs	out	of	the	record	stores.
One	of	the	most	important	lessons	the	computer	industry	learned	is	that	a
great	deal	of	a	computer's	value	to	its	user	depends	on	the	quality	and	variety
of	the	application	software	available	for	it.	All	of	us	in	the	industry	learned
that	lesson—some	happily,	some	unhappily.
In	the	summer	of	1980,	two	IBM	emissaries	came	to	Microsoft	to	discuss	a
personal	computer	they	might	or	might	not	build.
At	the	time,	IBM's	position	was	unchallenged	in	the	realm	of	hardware,	with

a	more	than	80	percent	market	share	of	large	computers.	It	had	had	only
modest	success	with	small	computers.	IBM	was	used	to	selling	big,	expensive
machines	to	big	customers.	IBM's	management	suspected	that	IBM,	which
had	340,000	employees,	would	require	the	assistance	of	outsiders	if	it	was
going	to	sell	little,	inexpensive	machines	to	individuals	as	well	as	companies
anytime	soon.
IBM	wanted	to	bring	its	personal	computer	to	market	in	less	than	a	year.	In
order	to	meet	this	schedule	it	had	to	abandon	its	traditional	course	of	doing	all
the	hardware	and	software	itself.	So	IBM	had	elected	to	build	its	PC	mainly
from	off-the-shelf	components	available	to	anyone.	This	made	a	platform	that
was	fundamentally	open,	which	made	it	easy	to	copy.
Although	it	generally	built	the	microprocessors	used	in	its	products,	IBM
decided	to	buy	microprocessors	for	its	PCs	from	Intel.	Most	important	for
Microsoft,	IBM	decided	to	license	the	operating	system	from	us,	rather	than
creating	software	itself.
Working	together	with	the	IBM	design	team,	we	promoted	a	plan	for	IBM	to
build	one	of	the	first	personal	computers	to	use	a	16-bit	microprocessor	chip,
the	8088.	The	move	from	8	to	16	bits	would	take	personal	computers	from
hobbyist	toys	to	high-volume	business	tools.	The	16-bit	generation	of
computers	could	support	up	to	one	full	megabyte	of	memory—256	times	as
much	as	an	8-bit	computer.	At	first	this	would	be	just	a	theoretical	advantage
because	IBM	initially	intended	to	offer	only	16K	of	memory,	1/64	of	the	total
memory	possible.	The	benefit	of	going	16-bit	was	further	lessened	by	IBM's
decision	to	save	money	by	using	a	chip	that	employed	only	8-bit	connections
to	the	rest	of	the	computer.	Consequently,	the	chip	could	think	much	faster
than	it	could	communicate.	However,	the	decision	to	use	a	16-bit	processor
was	very	smart	because	it	allowed	the	IBM	PC	to	evolve	and	remain	the
standard	for	PCs	to	this	day.
IBM,	with	its	reputation	and	its	decision	to	employ	an	open	design	that	other
companies	could	copy,	had	a	real	chance	to	create	a	new,	broad	standard	in
personal	computing.	We	wanted	to	be	a	part	of	it.	So	we	took	on	the
operating-system	challenge.	We	bought	some	early	work	from	another	Seattle
company	and	hired	its	top	engineer,	Tim	Paterson.	With	lots	of	modifications
the	system	became	the	Microsoft	Disk	Operating	System,	or	MS-DOS.	Tim
became,	in	effect,	the	father	of	MS-DOS.
IBM,	our	first	licensee,	called	the	system	PC-DOS;	the	PC	was	for	personal
computer.	The	IBM	Personal	Computer	hit	the	market	in	August	1981	and

was	a	triumph.	The	company	marketed	it	well	and	popularized	the	term	"PC."
The	project	had	been	conceived	by	Bill	Lowe	and	shepherded	to	completion
by	Don	Estridge.	It	is	a	tribute	to	the	quality	of	the	IBM	people	involved	that
they	were	able	to	take	their	personal	computer	from	idea	to	market	in	less
than	a	year.
Few	remember	this	now,	but	the	original	IBM	PC	actually	shipped	with	a
choice	of	three	operating	systems—our	PC-DOS,	CP/M-86,	and	the	UCSD
Pascal	P-system.	We	knew	that	only	one	of	the	three	could	succeed	and
become	the	standard.	We	wanted	the	same	kinds	of	forces	that	were	putting
VHS	cassettes	into	every	video	store	to	push	MS-DOS	to	become	the
standard.======================================================== er.
Conversely,	there	is	a	negative	spiral	companies	can	get	caught	in.	A
company	in	a	positive	spiral	has	an	air	of	destiny,	while	one	in	a	negative

spiral	feels	doomed.	If	a	company	starts	to	lose	market	share	or	delivers	one
bad	product,	the	talk	becomes	"Why	do	you	work	there?"	"Why	would	you
invest	in	that	company?"	"I	don't	think	you	should	buy	from	them."	The	press
and	analysts	smell	blood	and	begin	telling	inside	stories	about	who's
quarreling	and	who's	responsible	for	mismanagement.	Customers	begin	to
question	whether,	in	the	future,	they	should	continue	to	buy	the	company's
products.	Within	a	sick	company	everything	is	questioned,	including	things
that	are	being	done	well.	Even	a	fine	strategy	can	get	dismissed	with	the
argument	"You	are	just	defending	the	old	way"	and	that	can	cause	more
mistakes.	Then	down	the	company	spirals.	Leaders	such	as	Lee	Iacocca	who
have	been	able	to	reverse	a	negative	spiral	deserve	a	lot	of	credit.
Throughout	my	youth	the	hot	computer	firm	was	Digital	Equipment
Corporation,	known	as	DEC.	For	twenty	years	its	positive	spiral	seemed
unstoppable.	Ken	Olsen,	the	company's	founder,	was	a	legendary	hardware
designer	and	a	hero	of	mine,	a	distant	god.	In	1960	he	had	created	the
minicomputer	industry	by	offering	the	first	"small"	computers.	The	earliest
was	the	PDP-1,	the	ancestor	of	my	high	school's	PDP-8.	A	buyer,	instead	of
paying	the	millions	asked	by	IBM	for	its	"Big	Iron,"	could	get	one	of	Olsen's
PDP-1s	for	$120,000.	It	wasn't	nearly	as	powerful	as	the	big	machines,	but	it
could	be	used	for	a	wide	variety	of	applications.	DEC	grew	to	a	$6.7	billion
company	in	eight	years	by	offering	a	wide	range	of	computers	in	different
sizes.
Two	decades	later,	Olsen's	vision	faltered.	He	couldn't	see	the	future	of	small
desktop	computers.	Eventually	he	was	forced	out	of	DEC,	and	part	of	his
legend	now	is	that	he	is	the	man	famous	for	repeatedly,	and	publicly,
dismissing	the	personal	computer	as	a	passing	fad.	I	am	sobered	by	stories
like	Olsen's.	He	was	brilliant	at	seeing	new	ways	of	doing	things,	and	then—
after	years	of	being	an	innovator—he	missed	a	big	bend	in	the	road.
Another	visionary	who	faltered	was	An	Wang,	the	Chinese	immigrant	who
built	Wang	Laboratories	into	the	dominant	supplier	of	electronic	calculators	in
the	1960s.	In	the	1970s	he	ignored	the	advice	of	everyone	around	him	and	left
the	calculator	market	just	before	the	arrival	of	low-cost	competition	that
would	have	ruined	him.	It	was	a	brilliant	move.	Wang	reinvented	his	company
to	be	the	leading	supplier	of	word-processing	machines.	During	the	1970s,	in
offices	around	the	world,	Wang	word-processing	terminals	began	to	replace
typewriters.	The	machines	contained	a	microprocessor	but	weren't	true
personal	computers,	because	they	were	designed	to	do	only	one	thing—
handle	text.

Wang	was	a	visionary	engineer.	The	kind	of	insight	that	had	led	him	to
abandon	calculators	could	have	led	to	success	in	personal-computer	software
in	the	1980s,	but	he	failed	to	spot	the	next	industry	turn.	Even	though	he
developed	great	software,	it	was	tied	proprietarily	to	his	word	processors.	His
software	was	doomed	once	general-purpose	personal	computers	appeared	that
could	run	a	variety	of	word-processing	software	applications	such	as
WordStar,	WordPerfect,	and	MultiMate	(which	imitated	Wang	software).	If
Wang	had	recognized	the	importance	of	compatible	software	applications,
there	might	not	be	a	Microsoft	today.	I	might	be	a	mathematician	or	an
attorney	somewhere,	and	my	adolescent	foray	into	personal	computing	might
be	little	more	than	a	distant	personal	memory.
IBM	was	another	major	company	that	missed	technological	changes	at	the
start	of	the	PC	revolution.	The	company's	leader	had	been	a	hard-driving
former	cash-register	salesman,	Thomas	J.	Watson.	Technically,	Watson	wasn't
the	founder	of	IBM,	but	it	was	thanks	to	his	aggressive	management	style	that
by	the	early	1930s	IBM	dominated	the	market	for	accounting	machines.
IBM	began	working	on	computers	in	the	middle	1950s.	It	was	one	of	many
companies	in	the	business	vying	for	leadership	in	the	field.	Until	1964	each
computer	model,	even	from	the	same	manufacturer,	had	had	a	unique	design
and	required	its	own	operating	system	and	application	software.	An	operating
system	(sometimes	called	a	disk-operating	system,	or	just	DOS)	is	the
fundamental	software	that	coordinates	a	computer	system's	components,	tells
them	how	to	work	together,	and	performs	other	functions.	Without	an
operating	system,	a	computer	is	useless.	The	operating	system	is	a	platform
on	which	all	the	software	programs	for	applications—such	as	accounting	or
payroll	or	word-processing	or	electronic-mail	programs—are	built.
Computers	at	different	price	levels	had	different	designs.	Some	models	were
dedicated	to	scientific	study,	others	to	commerce.	As	I	discovered	when	I
wrote	the	BASIC	for	various	personal	computers,	significant	work	was
required	to	move	software	from	one	computer	model	to	another.	This	was	true
even	if	the	software	was	written	in	a	standard	language	such	as	COBOL	or
FORTRAN.	Under	the	direction	of	young	Tom,	as	Watson's	son	and	successor
was	known,	the	company	gambled	$5	billion	on	the	novel	notion	of	scalable
architecture—all	the	computers	in	the	System/360	family,	no	matter	what
size,	would	respond	to	the	same	set	of	instructions.	Models	built	with
different	technology,	from	the	slowest	to	the	fastest,	from	small	machines	that
could	fit	into	a	normal	office	to	water-cooled	giants	that	sat	in	climate-
controlled	glass	rooms,	could	run	the	same	operating	system.	Customers
could	move	their	applications	and	peripherals,	accessories	such	as	disks,	tape

drives,	and	printers,	freely	from	one	model	to	the	next.	Scalable	architecture
completely	reshaped	the	industry.
System/360	was	a	runaway	success	and	made	IBM	the	powerhouse	in
mainframe	computers	for	the	next	thirty	years.	Customers	made	large
investments	in	the	360,	confident	that	their	commitment	to	software	and
training	would	not	be	wasted.	If	they	needed	to	move	to	a	larger	computer,
they	could	get	an	IBM	that	ran	the	same	system,	and	shared	the	same
architecture.	In	1977,	DEC	introduced	its	own	scalable-architecture	platform,
the	VAX.	The	VAX	family	of	computers	ultimately	ranged	from	desktop
systems	to	mainframe-size	machine	clusters	and	did	for	DEC	what
System/360	did	for	IBM.	DEC	became	overwhelmingly	the	leader	in	the
minicomputer	market.
The	scalable	architecture	of	the	IBM	System/360	and	its	successor,	the
System/370,	drove	many	of	IBM's	competitors	out	of	business	and	scared
away	potential	newcomers.	In	1970,	a	new	competing	company	was	founded
by	Eugene	Amdahl,	who	had	been	a	senior	engineer	at	IBM.	Amdahl	had	a
novel	business	plan.	His	company,	also	called	Amdahl,	would	build
computers	fully	compatible	with	the	IBM	360	software.	Amdahl	delivered
hardware	that	not	only	ran	the	same	operating	systems	and	applications	as
IBM,	but,	because	it	took	advantage	of	new	technology,	also	outperformed
IBM's	comparably	priced	systems.	Soon	Control	Data,	Hitachi,	and	Itel	all
also	offered	mainframes	that	were	"plug-compatible"	to	IBM.	By	the	mid-
1970s,	the	importance	of	360	compatibility	was	becoming	obvious.	The	only
mainframe	companies	doing	well	were	those	whose	hardware	could	run
IBM's	operating	systems.
Before	the	360,	computer	designs	were	intentionally	incompatible	with	those
from	other	companies	because	the	manufacturer's	goal	was	to	make	it
discouragingly	difficult	and	expensive	for	customers	heavily	invested	in	one
company's	computer	to	switch	to	a	different	brand.	Once	a	customer
committed	to	a	machine,	he	or	she	was	stuck	with	offerings	from	the
computer's	manufacturer	because	changing	the	software	could	be	done	but
was	too	difficult.	Amdahl	and	the	others	ended	that.	Market-driven
compatibility	is	an	important	lesson	for	the	future	personal-computer	industry.
It	should	also	be	remembered	by	those	creating	the	highway.	Customers
choose	systems	that	give	them	a	choice	of	hardware	suppliers	and	the	widest
variety	of	software	applications.
While	this	was	going	on,	I	was	busy	enjoying	school	and	experimenting	with
computers.	I	arrived	at	Harvard	in	the	fall	of	1973.	In	college	there	is	a	lot	of

posturing,	and	appearing	to	slack	off	was	considered	a	great	way	to	establish
your	coolness.	Therefore,	during	my	freshman	year	I	instituted	a	deliberate
policy	of	skipping	most	classes	and	then	studying	feverishly	at	the	end	of	the
term.	It	became	a	game—a	not	uncommon	one—to	see	how	high	a	grade	I
could	pull	while	investing	the	least	time	possible.	I	filled	in	my	leisure	hours
with	a	good	deal	of	poker,	which	had	its	own	attraction	for	me.	In	poker,	a
player	collects	different	shards	of	information—who's	betting	boldly,	what
cards	are	showing,	what's	this	guy's	pattern	of	betting	and	bluffing—and	then
crunches	all	that	information	together	to	devise	a	plan	for	his	own	hand.	I	got
pretty	good	at	this	kind	of	information	processing.
The	experience	of	poker	strategizing—and	the	money—were	helpful	when	I
got	into	business,	but	the	other	game	I	was	playing,	the	postponing	one,	didn't
serve	me	well	at	all.	But	I	didn't	know	that	then.	In	fact,	I	was	encouraged	that
my	dilatory	practices	were	shared	by	a	new	friend,	Steve	Ballmer,	a	math
major	whom	I	met	freshman	year,	when	we	lived	in	the	same	student	dorm,
Currier	House.	Steve	and	I	led	very	different	lives,	but	we	were	both	trying	to
pare	down	to	the	minimum	the	course	time	needed	to	get	top	grades.	Steve	is
a	man	of	endless	energy,	effortlessly	social.	His	activities	took	a	lot	of	his
time.	By	his	sophomore	year	he	was	a	manager	of	the	football	team,	the
advertising	manager	for	the	Harvard	Crimson,	the	school	newspaper,	and
president	of	a	literary	magazine.	He	also	belonged	to	a	social	club,	the
Harvard	equivalent	of	a	fraternity.
He	and	I	would	pay	very	little	attention	to	our	classes	and	then	furiously
inhale	the	key	books	just	before	an	exam.	Once	we	took	a	tough	graduate-
level	economics	course	together—E======================================================== fore	asking	if	you
want	to	buy	it.	This	kind	of	"demo"	usage	might	replace	part	of	the	function
served	by	radio	stations	today.	An	author	could	allow	you	to	mail	a	new	song
to	a	friend,	but	she	will	only	be	able	to	listen	to	it	a	few	times	before	getting
charged.	A	musical	group	could	have	a	special	price,	far	lower	than	if	every
album	was	bought	individually,	for	a	buyer	who	wanted	all	their	work.
Even	today,	paying	for	entertainment	information	isn't	without	nuances.	The
limited	time	value	of	entertainment	information	affects	the	way	publishers
and	film	studios	market	their	products.	The	book	publisher	often	does	this	by
having	two	release	windows,	hardcover	and	paperback.	If	a	customer	wants	a
book	and	can	comfortably	afford	it,	he	or	she	pays	$25	to	$30.	Or	the
customer	can	wait	for	between	six	months	and	two	years	and	buy	the	same
book,	in	a	somewhat	less	expensive	and	long-lasting	format,	for	$5	to	$10.
Successful	movies	are	progressively	shown	in	first-run	theaters,	secondary
theaters,	hotel	rooms,	on	pay-per-view	TV,	and	on	airplanes.	Then	they	are
available	as	video	rentals,	on	premium	channels	such	as	HBO,	and	eventually
on	network	TV.	Still	later	they	appear	on	local	television	or	basic	cable
channels.	Each	new	form	brings	the	movie	to	a	different	audience	as
customers	who	missed	the	previous	forms	of	release	(accidentally	or	on
purpose)	take	advantage	of	the	new	opportunity.
On	the	information	highway	various	release	windows	for	content	will	almost
certainly	be	tried.	When	a	hot	movie,	multi-media	title,	or	electronic	book	is
released,	there	may	be	an	initial	period	during	which	it	is	priced	at	a	premium.
Some	will	be	willing	to	pay	a	high	fee,	perhaps	as	much	as	$30,	to	see	a
movie	at	the	same	time	it	appears	in	the	first-run	theaters.	After	a	week,	a
month,	or	a	season,	the	price	will	drop	to	the	$3	or	$4	we	are	charged	today

for	pay-per-view	movies.	Marketers	may	try	some	wild	things.	Perhaps	a
movie	will	come	along	that	you	won't	be	able	to	see	at	all	in	its	first	month	of
release	unless	you're	one	of	the	top	1,000	bidders	in	an	electronic	auction	on
the	highway.	At	the	other	extreme,	if	you	have	a	track	record	of	buying	movie
posters	and	merchandise	related	to	what	you	watch,	you	may	find	you	can	get
certain	movies	for	next	to	nothing	or	with	few,	if	any,	commercial
interruptions.	Purchases	of	The	Little	Mermaid	and	Aladdin	videotapes	and
associated	merchandise	might	justify	Disney's	allowing	every	child	in	the
world	one	free	viewing.
The	transferability	of	information	will	be	another	big	pricing	issue.	The
information	highway	will	allow	the	transfer	of	intellectual	property	rights
from	one	person	to	another	at	the	speed	of	light.	Almost	all	the	music,
writing,	or	other	intellectual	properties	stored	on	disks	or	in	books	sits	unused
most	of	the	time.	When	you're	not	consuming	your	particular	copy	of	Thriller
or	Bonfire	of	the	Vanities,	most	likely	no	one	else	is,	either.	Publishers	count
on	this.	If	the	average	buyer	lent	his	or	her	albums	and	books	frequently,
fewer	would	be	sold	and	prices	would	be	higher.	If	we	assume	that	an	album
is	in	use,	say,	0.1	percent	of	the	time,	"light	speed"	lending	might	cut	the
number	of	copies	sold	by	a	factor	of	1,000.	Lending	will	probably	be
restricted	so	users	will	only	be	allowed	to	lend	a	copy	out	perhaps	up	to	ten
times	a	year.
Public	libraries	will	become	places	where	anyone	can	sit	down	and	use	high-
quality	equipment	to	gain	access	to	the	information	highway's	resources.
Library	committees	might	use	the	budgets	that	today	pay	for	buying	books,
albums,	movies,	and	subscriptions	to	fund	the	royalties	for	using	educational
electronic	materials.	Authors	may	decide	to	forfeit	some	or	all	of	their
royalties	if	their	work	is	to	be	used	in	a	library.
New	copyright	laws	will	be	required	to	clarify	the	purchaser's	rights	to	the
content	under	different	schemes.	The	highway	will	force	us	to	think	more
explicitly	about	what	rights	users	have	to	intellectual	property.
Videos,	which	tend	to	be	watched	only	once,	will	continue	to	be	rented,	but
probably	not	from	stores.	Instead,	consumers	will	shop	on	the	information
highway	to	find	movies	and	other	programs	deliverable	on	demand.
Neighborhood	video-rental	stores	and	music	stores	will	face	a	dwindling
market.	Bookstores	will	continue	to	stock	printed	books	for	a	long	time,	but
nonfiction	and	especially	reference	material	will	probably	be	used	much	more
often	in	electronic	rather	than	print	form.

Efficient	electronic	markets	are	going	to	change	a	lot	more	than	just	the	ratio
of	renting	to	buying	for	entertainment.	Almost	any	person	or	business	that
serves	as	a	middleman	will	feel	the	heat	of	electronic	competition.
A	small-town	lawyer	will	face	new	competition	when	legal	services	are
available	by	videoconference	over	the	network.	A	person	buying	a	piece	of
property	might	choose	to	consult	with	a	sharp	real	estate	attorney	from	the
other	side	of	the	county	rather	than	using	a	local	lawyer	who	is	a	generalist.
The	resources	of	the	highway,	however,	will	allow	the	local	lawyer	to	retrain
and	become	an	expert	in	any	specialty	of	her	choice.	She	will	be	able	to
compete	in	this	specialty	because	of	her	lower	overhead.	Clients	will	benefit
as	well.	The	prices	for	executing	routine	legal	tasks,	such	as	the	drafting	of
wills,	will	be	driven	down	by	the	efficiency	and	specialization	of	the
electronic	marketplace.	The	information	highway	will	also	be	able	to	deliver
complicated	medical,	financial,	and	other	video	consulting	services.	These
will	be	convenient	and	popular,	especially	when	they	are	short.	It	will	be
much	easier	to	make	an	appointment	and	turn	on	your	television	or	computer
screen	for	a	fifteen-minute	meeting	than	it	will	be	to	drive	somewhere,	park,
sit	in	a	waiting	room,	and	then	drive	back	to	your	home	or	office.
Videoconferences	of	all	sorts	will	increasingly	become	alternatives	to	having
to	drive	or	fly	to	a	meeting.	When	you	do	go	somewhere,	it	will	be	because	it
is	important	that	a	particular	meeting	be	face-to-face,	or	because	something
fun	requires	that	you	be	there	physically.	Business	travel	may	fall	off,	but
leisure	travel	will	rise	because	people	will	be	able	to	take	working	vacations,
knowing	they	can	stay	connected	to	their	ofrices	and	homes	through	the
information	highway.
The	travel	industry	will	change	even	though	the	total	amount	of	traveling	may
stay	the	same.	Travel	agents,	like	all	professionals	whose	service	has	been	to
offer	specialized	access	to	information,	will	have	to	add	value	in	new	ways.
Travel	agents	now	search	for	the	availability	of	travel	arrangements	using
databases	and	reference	books	customers	don't	have	access	to.	Once	they
become	familiar	with	the	power	of	the	highway	and	all	the	information	that
will	be	on	it,	many	travelers	will	prefer	to	conduct	searches	themselves.
Smart,	experienced,	and	creative	travel	agents	will	prosper,	but	they	will
specialize	and	do	more	than	book	reservations.	Say	you	want	to	visit	Africa.
You	will	be	able	to	find	the	cheapest	tickets	to	Kenya,	so	the	travel	agency
will	have	to	be	able	to	provide	something	else.	Perhaps	the	agency	books
nothing	but	trips	to	East	Africa—hence,	they'll	be	able	to	tell	you	what	other
customers	especially	liked,	or	that	the	Tsavo	National	Park	is	too	crowded,	or

that	if	you're	really	interested	in	seeing	herds	of	zebra,	you	are	better	off
visiting	Tanzania.	Some	other	travel	agents	may	decide	to	specialize	in	selling
travel	to,	rather	than	from,	their	own	cities.	An	agent	in	Chicago	might	offer
services	across	the	network	to	people	around	the	world	who	want	to	visit	his
hometown,	rather	than	selling	services	to	Chicagoans	who	want	to	visit	other
places.	Customers	wouldn't	know	the	travel	agent,	but	the	travel	agent
certainly	would	know	Chicago,	which	might	be	more	important.
Although	today's	newspapers	will	be	around	for	a	long,	long	time,	the
newspaper	business	will	be	fundamentally	altered	when	the	consumer	has
access	to	the	information	highway.	In	the	United	States,	daily	newspapers	are
dependent	on	local	advertising	for	most	of	their	revenue.	In	1950,	when
television	sets	were	still	novelties,	national	advertising	contributed	25	percent
of	the	advertising	revenue	of	American	newspapers.	By	1993,	national
advertising	contributed	only	12	percent,	in	large	measure	because	of
competition	from	television.	The	number	of	daily	newspapers	in	the	United
States	has	declined	dramatically	and	the	burden	of	financing	those	that	remain
has	shifted	to	local	retail	and	classified	advertising.	Classifieds	don't	really
work	on	radio	or	television.	In	1950,	only	18	percent	of	the	advertising
revenue	of	daily	newspapers	in	the	United	States	came	from	classifieds,	but
by	1993	that	had	risen	to	35	percent	and	represented	billions	of	dollars.
The	information	highway	will	provide	alternative,	more	efficient	ways	for
individual	buyers	and	sellers	to	get	together.	Once	the	majority	of	customers
in	a	market	use	electronic	access	to	shop,	classified	revenues	will	be
threatened.	That	means	much	of	the	newspaper	advertising	base	could	be	in
jeopardy.
It	does	not,	however,	mean	that	newspapers	will	disappear	overnight,	or	that
newspaper	companies	can't	continue	to	be	important	and	profitable	players	in
the	delivery	of	news	and	advertising.	But,	like	all	companies	that	have	a
middleman	or	brokering	role,	they'll	have	to	be	alert	to	change	and	take
advantage	of	their	unique	qualities	to	succeed	in	the	electronic	world.
Banking	is	another	industry	destined	for	change.	There	are	about	14,000
banks	in	the	United	States	that	cater	to	retail	customers.	Most	people	bank
with	a	firm	that	has	a	branch	office	near	their	home	or	on	their	commuting
path.	Although	minor	differences	in	interest	rates	and	services	might	shift
people	from	one	local	bank	to	another,	few	customers	would	consider
switching	to	a	branch	ten	miles	out	of	their	way.	Today,	moving	your	bank
records	is	time-consuming.

But	when	the	information	highway	makes	geography	less	important,======================================================== around.	Another	time,	when	the	team
thought	they	had	created	a	program	that	worked,	they	came	proudly	to
demonstrate	their	achievement	to	me.	It	didn't	work	at	the	demonstration.
Everyone	on	the	project	happened	to	be	right-handed,	and	the	computer,
which	was	programmed	to	look	at	the	strokes	in	the	writing,	couldn't	interpret
the	very	different	ones	in	my	left-handed	penmanship.	It	turned	out	that
getting	a	computer	to	recognize	handwriting	is	as	difficult	as	getting	one	to
recognize	speech.	But	I	remain	optimistic	that	as	computer	performance
increases	we'll	have	computers	able	to	do	this	too.
Whether	you	give	the	command	by	voice,	in	writing,	or	by	pointing,	the
selections	you're	going	to	want	to	make	will	involve	more	complicated
choices	than	just	which	movie	to	watch,	and	you'll	want	to	be	able	to	make
them	easily.	Users	won't	stand	for	being	confused	or	frustrated	or	for	having
their	time	wasted.	The	highway's	software	platform	will	have	to	make	it
almost	infallibly	easy	to	find	information,	even	if	users	don't	know	what
they're	looking	for.	There	will	be	lots	of	information.	The	highway	will	have
access	to	everything	in	hundreds	of	libraries	and	to	all	types	of	merchandise.
One	of	the	worries	most	often	expressed	about	the	highway	concerns
"information	overload."	It	is	usually	voiced	by	someone	who	imagines,	rather
aptly,	that	the	fiber-optic	cables	of	the	information	highway	will	be	like
enormous	pipes	spewing	out	large	quantities	of	information.
Information	overload	is	not	unique	to	the	highway,	and	it	needn't	be	a
problem.	We	already	cope	with	astonishing	amounts	of	information	by	relying
on	an	extensive	infrastructure	that	has	evolved	to	help	us	be	selective—
everything	from	library	catalogs	to	movie	reviews	to	the	Yellow	Pages	to
recommendations	from	friends.	When	people	worry	about	the	information-
overload	problem,	ask	them	to	consider	how	they	choose	what	to	read.	When
we	visit	a	bookstore	or	a	library	we	don't	worry	about	reading	every	volume.
We	get	by	without	reading	everything	because	there	are	navigational	aids	that
point	to	information	of	interest	and	help	us	find	the	print	material	we	want.
These	pointers	include	the	corner	newsstand,	the	Dewey	decimal	system	in
libraries,	and	book	reviews	in	the	local	newspaper.
On	the	information	highway,	technology	and	editorial	services	will	combine
to	offer	a	number	of	ways	to	help	us	find	information.	The	ideal	navigation
system	will	be	powerful,	expose	seemingly	limitless	information,	and	yet
remain	very	easy	to	use.	Software	will	offer	queries,	filters,	spatial	navigation,
hyperlinks,	and	agents	as	the	primary	selection	techniques.

One	way	to	understand	the	different	selection	methods	is	to	think	of	them
metaphorically.	Imagine	specific	information—a	collection	of	facts,	a
breaking	news	story,	a	list	of	movies—all	placed	in	an	imaginary	warehouse.
A	query	does	a	search	through	every	item	in	the	warehouse	to	see	if	it	meets
some	criterion	you	have	established.	A	filter	is	a	check	on	everything	new	that
comes	into	the	warehouse	to	see	if	it	matches	that	criterion.	Spatial	navigation
is	a	way	you	can	walk	around	inside	the	warehouse	checking	on	inventory	by
location.	Perhaps	the	most	intriguing	approach,	and	the	one	that	promises	to
be	the	easiest	of	all	to	use,	will	be	to	enlist	the	aid	of	a	personal	agent	who
will	represent	you	on	the	highway.	The	agent	will	actually	be	software,	but	it
will	have	a	personality	you'll	be	able	to	talk	to	in	one	form	or	another.	This
will	be	like	delegating	an	assistant	to	look	at	the	inventory	for	you.
Here's	how	the	different	systems	will	work.	A	query,	as	its	name	indicates,	is
a	question.	You	will	be	able	to	ask	a	wide	range	of	questions	and	get	complete
answers.	If	you	can't	recall	the	name	of	a	movie	but	you	remember	that	it
starred	Spencer	Tracy	and	Katharine	Hepburn	and	that	there	is	a	scene	in
which	he's	asking	a	lot	of	questions	and	she's	shivering,	then	you	could	type
in	a	query	that	asks	for	all	movies	that	match:"Spencer	Tracy,"	"Katharine
Hepburn,"	"cold,"	and	"questions"	In	reply,	a	server	on	the	highway	would	list
the	1957	romantic	comedy	Desk	Set,	in	which	Tracy	quizzes	a	shivering
Hepburn	on	a	rooftop	terrace	in	the	middle	of	winter.	You	could	watch	the
scene,	watch	the	whole	film,	read	the	script,	examine	reviews	of	the	movie,
and	read	any	comments	that	Tracy	or	Hepburn	might	have	made	publicly
about	the	scene.	If	a	dubbed	or	subtitled	print	had	been	made	for	release
outside	English-speaking	countries,	you	could	watch	the	foreign	versions.
They	might	be	stored	on	servers	in	various	countries	but	would	be	instantly
available	to	you.
The	system	will	accommodate	straightforward	queries	such	as	"Show	me	all
the	articles	that	ran	worldwide	about	the	first	test-tube	baby,"	or	"List	all	the
stores	that	carry	two	or	more	kinds	of	dog	food	and	will	deliver	a	case	within
sixty	minutes	to	my	home	address,"	or	"Which	of	my	relatives	have	I	been	out
of	touch	with	for	more	than	three	months?"	It	will	also	be	able	to	deliver
answers	to	much	more	complex	queries.	You	might	ask,	"Which	major	city
has	the	greatest	percentage	of	the	people	who	watch	rock	videos	and	regularly
read	about	international	trade?"	Generally,	queries	won't	require	much
response	time,	because	most	of	the	questions	are	likely	to	have	been	asked
before	and	the	answers	will	already	have	been	computed	and	stored.
You'll	also	be	able	to	set	up	"filters,"	which	are	really	just	standing	queries.
Filters	will	work	around	the	clock,	watching	for	new	information	that	matches

an	interest	of	yours,	filtering	out	everything	else.	You	will	be	able	to	program
a	filter	to	gather	information	on	your	particular	interests,	such	as	news	about
local	sports	teams	or	particular	scientific	discoveries.	If	the	most	important
thing	to	you	is	the	weather,	your	filter	will	put	that	at	the	top	of	your
personalized	newspaper.	Some	filters	will	be	created	automatically	by	your
computer,	based	on	its	information	about	your	background	and	areas	of
interest.	Such	a	filter	might	alert	me	to	an	important	event	regarding	a	person
or	institution	from	my	past:	"Meteorite	crashes	into	Lakeside	School."	You
will	also	be	able	to	create	an	explicit	filter.	That	will	be	an	on-going	request
for	something	particular,	such	as	"Wanted:	1990	Nissan	Maxima	for	parts"	or
"Tell	me	about	anybody	selling	memorabilia	from	the	last	World	Cup"	or	"Is
anyone	around	here	looking	for	someone	to	bicycle	with	on	Sunday
afternoons,	rain	or	shine?"	The	filter	will	keep	looking	until	you	call	off	the
search.	If	a	filter	finds	a	potential	Sunday	bicycling	companion,	for	instance,
it	will	automatically	check	on	any	other	information	the	person	might	have
published	on	the	network.	It	will	try	to	answer	the	question	"What's	he
like?"—which	is	the	first	question	you'd	be	likely	to	ask	about	a	potential	new
friend.
Spatial	navigation	will	be	modeled	on	the	way	we	locate	information	today.
When	we	want	to	find	out	about	some	subject	now,	it's	natural	to	go	to	a
labeled	section	of	a	library	or	bookstore.	Newspapers	have	sports,	real	estate,
and	business	sections	where	people	"go"	for	certain	kinds	of	news.	In	most
newspapers,	weather	reports	appear	in	the	same	general	location	day	after
day.
Spatial	navigation,	which	is	already	being	used	in	some	software	products,
will	let	you	go	where	the	information	is	by	enabling	you	to	interact	with	a
visual	model	of	a	real	or	make-believe	world.	You	can	think	of	such	a	model
as	a	map—an	illustrated,	three-dimensional	table	of	contents.	Spatial
navigation	will	be	particularly	important	for	interacting	with	televisions	and
small,	portable	PCs,	which	are	unlikely	to	have	conventional	keyboards.	To
do	some	banking,	you	might	go	to	a	drawing	of	a	main	street,	then	point,
using	a	mouse	or	a	remote	control	or	even	your	finger,	at	the	drawing	of	a
bank.	You	will	point	to	a	courthouse	to	find	out	which	cases	are	being	heard
by	which	judges	or	what	the	backlog	is.	You	will	point	to	the	ferry	terminal	to
learn	the	schedule	and	whether	the	boats	are	running	on	time.	If	you	are
considering	visiting	a	hotel,	you	will	be	able	to	find	out	when	rooms	are
available	and	look	at	a	floor	plan,	and	if	the	hotel	has	a	video	camera
connected	to	the	highway,	you	might	be	able	to	look	at	its	lobby	and
restaurant	and	see	how	crowded	it	is	at	the	moment.

You'll	be	able	to	jump	into	the	map	so	you	can	navigate	down	a	street	or
through	the	rooms	of	a	building.	You'll	be	able	to	zoom	in	and	out	and	pan
around	to	different	locations	very	easily.	Let's	say	you	want	to	buy	a	lawn
mower.	If	the	screen	shows	the	inside	of	a	house,	you	might	move	out	the
back	door,	where	you	might	see	landmarks,	including	a	garage.	A	click	on	the
garage	will	take	you	inside	it,	where	you	might	see	tools,	including	a	lawn
mower.	A	click	on	the	lawn	mower	will	take	you	to	categories	of	relevant
information,	including	advertisements,	reviews,	user	manuals,	and	sales
showrooms	in	cyberspace.	It	will	be	simple	to	do	some	quick	comparison
shopping,	taking	advantage	of	any	amount	of	information	you	want.	When
you	click	on	the	picture	of	the	garage	and	seem	to	move	inside	it,	behind-the-
scenes	information	relating	to	the	objects	"inside"	the	garage	will	be	fed	to
your	screen	from	servers	spread	over	thousands	of	miles	on	the	highway.
When	you	point	at	an	object	on	the	screen	to	bring	up	information	about	the
object,	you	are	employing	a	form	of	"hyperlinking."	Hyperlinks	let	users	leap
from	informational	place	to	informational	place	instantly,	just	as	spaceships	in
science	fiction	jump	from	geographic	place	to	geographic	place	through
"hyperspace."	Hyperlinks	on	the	information	highway	will	let	you	find
answers	to	your	questions	when	they	occur	to	you	and	you're	interested.	Let's
say	you're	watching	the	news	and	you	see	someone	you	don't	recognize
walking	with	the	British	prime	minister.	You	want	to	know	who	she	is.	Using
your	television's	remote	control,	you	will	point	at	the	person.	That	action	will
bring	up	a	biography	and	a	lis======================================================== f	political	debate.	Radio	and	then	television
allowed	government	leaders	to	talk	directly	and	intimately	with	the	populace.
Similarly,	the	information	highway	will	have	its	own	influence	on	politics.
For	the	first	time	politicians	will	be	able	to	see	immediate	representative
surveys	of	public	opinions.	Voters	will	be	able	to	cast	their	ballots	from	home
or	their	wallet	PCs	with	less	risk	of	miscounts	or	fraud.	The	implications	for
government	may	be	as	great	as	they	are	for	industry.
Even	if	the	model	of	political	decision	making	does	not	change	explicitly,	the
highway	will	bestow	power	on	groups	of	citizens	who	want	to	organize	to
promote	causes	or	candidates.	This	could	lead	to	an	increased	number	of
special-interest	groups	and	even	political	parties.	Today,	organizing	a	political
movement	on	an	issue	requires	an	immense	amount	of	coordination.	How	do
you	find	the	people	who	share	your	view?	How	do	you	motivate	and
communicate	with	them?	Telephones	and	fax	machines	are	great	for
connecting	people	one-on-one	but	only	if	you	know	whom	to	call.	Television
lets	one	person	reach	millions,	but	it	is	expensive	and	wasteful	if	most
viewers	are	not	interested.
Political	organizations	require	thousands	of	hours	of	volunteer	time.
Envelopes	have	to	be	stuffed	for	direct-mail	appeals,	and	volunteers	must	go
out	and	contact	people	by	whatever	means	possible.	Only	a	few	issues,	the
environment	being	one,	are	potent	enough	to	overcome	the	difficulties
involved	in	recruiting	enough	volunteers	to	operate	an	effective	political
organization.
The	information	highway	makes	all	communication	easier.	Bulletin	boards
and	other	on-line	forums	allow	people	to	be	in	touch	one-to-one,	or	one-to-
many,	or	many-to-many,	in	very	efficient	ways.	People	of	similar	interests	are
able	to	meet	on-line	and	organize	without	any	physical	overhead.	It	will
become	so	easy	to	organize	a	political	movement	that	no	cause	will	be	too
small	or	scattered.	I	expect	the	Internet	will	be	a	significant	focus	for	all	the
candidates	and	political-action	groups	for	the	first	time	during	the	1996	U.S.
national	elections.	Eventually,	the	highway	will	become	a	primary	conduit	of
political	discourse.
Direct	voting	is	already	used	in	the	United	States	for	specific	issues	at	the
state	level.	For	logistical	reasons	these	ballot	propositions	can	occur	only
when	a	major	election	is	already	taking	place.	The	information	highway
would	allow	such	votes	to	be	scheduled	far	more	frequently,	because	they

would	cost	very	little.
Someone	will	doubtless	propose	total	"direct	democracy,"	having	all	issues
put	to	a	vote.	Personally,	I	don't	think	direct	voting	would	be	a	good	way	to
run	a	government.	There	is	a	place	in	governance	for	representatives—
middlemen—to	add	value.	They	are	the	ones	whose	job	it	is	to	take	the	time
to	understand	all	the	nuances	of	complicated	issues.	Politics	involves
compromise,	which	is	nearly	impossible	without	a	relatively	small	number	of
representatives	making	decisions	on	behalf	of	the	people	who	elected	them.
The	art	of	management—whether	of	a	society	or	a	company—revolves
around	making	informed	choices	about	the	allocation	of	resources.	It's	the	job
of	a	full-time	policymaker	to	develop	expertise.	This	enables	the	best	of	them
to	come	up	with	and	embrace	nonobvious	solutions	direct	democracy	might
not	allow,	because	voters	might	not	understand	the	trade-offs	necessary	for
long-term	success.
Like	all	middlemen	in	the	new	electronic	world,	political	representatives	will
have	to	justify	themselves.	The	information	highway	will	put	the	spotlight	on
them	as	never	before.	Instead	of	being	given	photos	and	sound	bites,	voters
will	be	able	to	get	a	much	more	direct	sense	of	what	their	representatives	are
doing	and	how	they're	voting.	The	day	a	senator	receives	a	million	pieces	of
e-mail	on	a	topic	or	is	able	to	have	his	beeper	announce	the	results	of	a	real-
time	opinion	poll	from	his	constituents	is	not	far	away.
Despite	the	problems	posed	by	the	information	highway,	my	enthusiasm	for	it
remains	boundless.	Information	technology	is	already	touching	lives	deeply,
as	evidenced	by	a	piece	of	electronic	mail	a	reader	of	my	newspaper	column
sent	me	in	June	of	1995.	"Mr.	Gates,	I	am	a	poet	who	has	Dyslexia,	which
basically	means	I	can	not	spell	worth	a	damn,	and	I	would	never	have	any
hope	of	getting	my	poetry	or	my	novels	published	if	not	for	this	computer
Spellcheck.	I	may	fail	as	a	writer,	but	thanks	to	you	I	will	succeed	or	fail
because	of	my	talent,	or	a	lack	of	talent,	and	not	because	of	my	disability"
We	are	watching	something	historic	happen,	and	it	will	affect	the	world
seismically,	rocking	us	the	same	way	the	discovery	of	the	scientific	method,
the	invention	of	printing,	and	the	arrival	of	the	Industrial	Age	did.	If	the
information	highway	is	able	to	increase	the	understanding	citizens	of	one
country	have	about	their	neighboring	countries,	and	thereby	reduce
international	tensions,	that,	in	and	of	itself,	could	be	sufficient	to	justify	the
cost	of	implementation.	If	it	was	used	only	by	scientists,	permitting	them	to
collaborate	more	effectively	to	find	cures	for	the	still-incurable	diseases,	that
alone	would	be	invaluable.	If	the	system	was	only	for	kids,	so	that	they	could

pursue	their	interests	in	and	out	of	the	classroom,	that	by	itself	would
transform	the	human	condition.	The	information	highway	won't	solve	every
problem,	but	it	will	be	a	positive	force	in	many	areas.
It	won't	roll	out	before	us	according	to	a	preordained	plan.	There	will	be
setbacks	and	unanticipated	glitches.	Some	people	will	seize	upon	the	setbacks
to	proclaim	that	the	highway	never	really	was	more	than	hype.	But	on	the
highway,	the	early	failures	will	just	be	learning	experiences.	The	highway	is
going	to	happen.
Big	changes	used	to	take	generations	or	centuries.	This	one	won't	happen
overnight,	but	it	will	move	much	faster.	The	first	manifestations	of	the
information	highway	will	be	apparent	in	the	United	States	by	the	millennium.
Within	a	decade	there	will	be	widespread	effects.	If	I	had	to	guess	which
applications	of	the	network	will	be	embraced	quickly	and	which	will	take	a
long	time,	I'd	certainly	get	some	of	them	wrong.	Within	twenty	years	virtually
everything	I've	talked	about	in	this	book	will	be	broadly	available	in
developed	countries	and	in	businesses	and	schools	in	developing	countries.
The	hardware	will	be	installed.	Then	it	will	just	be	a	matter	of	what	people	do
with	it—which	is	to	say,	what	software	applications	they	use.
You'll	know	the	information	highway	has	become	part	of	your	life	when	you
begin	to	resent	it	if	information	is	not	available	via	the	network.	One	day
you'll	be	hunting	for	the	repair	manual	for	your	bicycle	and	you'll	be	annoyed
that	the	manual	is	a	paper	document	that	you	could	misplace.	You'll	wish	it
were	an	interactive	electronic	document,	with	animated	illustrations	and	a
video	tutorial,	always	available	on	the	network.
The	network	will	draw	us	together,	if	that's	what	we	choose,	or	let	us	scatter
ourselves	into	a	million	mediated	communities.	Above	all,	and	in	countless
new	ways,	the	information	highway	will	give	us	choices	that	can	put	us	in
touch	with	entertainment,	information,	and	each	other.
I	think	Antoine	de	Saint-Exupéry,	who	wrote	so	eloquently	about	how	people
came	to	think	of	railroad	locomotives	and	other	forms	of	technology	as
friendly,	would	applaud	the	information	highway	and	dismiss	as	backward-
looking	those	who	resist	it.	Fifty	years	ago	he	wrote:	"Transport	of	the	mails,
transport	of	the	human	voice,	transport	of	flickering	pictures—in	this	century
as	in	others	our	highest	accomplishments	still	have	the	single	aim	of	bringing
men	together.	Do	our	dreamers	hold	that	the	invention	of	writing,	of	printing,
of	the	sailing	ship,	degraded	the	human	spirit?"
The	information	highway	will	lead	to	many	destinations.	I've	enjoyed

speculating	about	some	of	these.	Doubtless	I've	made	some	foolish
predictions,	but	I	hope	not	too	many.	In	any	case,	I'm	excited	to	be	on	the
journey.

AFTERWORD
The	information	highway	will	have	a	significant	effect	on	all	of	our	lives	in
the	years	to	come.	As	I	suggested	in	chapter	9,	the	greatest	benefits	will	come
from	the	application	of	technology	to	education—formal	and	informal.	To
help	facilitate	this	in	a	small	way,	my	portion	of	the	proceeds	from	this	book
will	go	to	support	teachers	who	are	incorporating	computers	into	their
classrooms.	Through	the	National	Foundation	for	the	Improvement	of
Education	in	the	United	States	and	comparable	organizations	throughout	the
world,	the	funds	will	help	teachers	create	opportunities	for	students—just	as
the	Mothers'	Club	at	Lakeside	made	my	first	exploration	of	computers
possible.
I've	worked	long	hours	on	this	book.	I	work	hard	because	I	love	my	work.	It's
not	an	addiction,	and	I	like	doing	a	lot	of	other	things,	but	I	find	my	work
very	exciting.	My	focus	is	to	keep	Microsoft	in	the	forefront	through	constant
renewal.	It's	a	little	scary	that	as	computer	technology	has	moved	ahead
there's	never	been	a	leader	from	one	era	who	was	also	a	leader	in	the	next.
Microsoft	has	been	a	leader	in	the	PC	era.	So	from	a	historical	perspective,	I
guess	Microsoft	is	disqualified	from	leading	in	the	highway	era	of	the
Information	Age.	But	I	want	to	defy	historical	tradition.	Somewhere	ahead	is
the	threshold	dividing	the	PC	era	from	the	highway	era.	I	want	to	be	among
the	first	to	cross	over	when	the	moment	comes.	I	think	the	tendency	for
successful	companies	to	fail	to	innovate	is	just	that:	a	tendency.	If	you're	too
focused	on	your	current	business,	it's	hard	to	change	and	concentrate	on
innovating.
For	me,	a	big	part	of	the	fun	has	always	been	to	hire	and	work	with	smart
people.	I	enjoy	learning	from	them.	Some	of	the	smart	people	we're	hiring
now	are	a	lot	younger	than	I	am.	I	envy	them	for	having	grown	up	with	better
computers.	They're	extraordinarily	talented	and	will	contribute	new	visions.	If
Microsoft	can	combine	these	visions	with	listening	carefully	to	cus======================================================== to	choose	the	camera
angles,	the	replays,	and	even	the	commentators	for	your	version.	You'll	be
able	to	listen	to	any	song,	anytime,	anywhere,	piped	in	from	the	world's
largest	record	store:	the	information	highway.	Perhaps	you'll	hum	a	little	tune
of	your	own	invention	into	a	microphone,	and	then	play	it	back	to	hear	what	it
could	sound	like	if	orchestrated	or	performed	by	a	rock	group.	Or	you'll	watch
Gone	With	the	Wind	with	your	own	face	and	voice	replacing	that	of	Vivien
Leigh	or	Clark	Gable.	Or	see	yourself	walking	down	the	runway	at	a	fashion
show,	wearing	the	latest	Paris	creations	adjusted	to	fit	your	body	or	the	one
you	wish	you	had.
Users	with	curiosity	will	be	mesmerized	by	the	abundance	of	information.
Want	to	know	how	a	mechanical	clock	works?	You'll	peer	inside	one	from
any	vantage	point	and	be	able	to	ask	questions.	Eventually	you	may	even	be
able	to	crawl	around	inside	a	clock,	using	a	virtual-reality	application.	Or
you'll	be	able	to	assume	the	role	of	a	heart	surgeon	or	play	the	drums	at	a
sold-out	rock	concert,	thanks	to	the	information	highway's	ability	to	deliver
rich	simulations	to	home	computers.	Some	of	the	choices	on	the	highway	will
be	supersets	of	today's	software,	but	the	graphics	and	animation	will	be	far,
far	better.
Other	applications	will	be	strictly	practical.	For	example,	when	you	go	on
vacation	a	home-management	application	will	be	able	to	turn	down	the	heat,
notify	the	post	office	to	hold	your	mail	and	the	newspaper	carrier	not	to
deliver	the	printed	paper,	cycle	your	indoor	lighting	so	that	it	appears	you	are
home,	and	automatically	pay	routine	bills.
Still	other	applications	will	be	completely	serious.	My	dad	broke	his	finger
badly	one	weekend	and	went	to	the	nearest	emergency	room,	which	happened
to	be	Children's	Hospital	in	Seattle.	They	refused	to	do	anything	for	him
because	he	was	a	few	decades	too	old.	Had	there	been	an	information
highway	at	the	time,	it	would	have	saved	him	some	trouble	by	telling	him	not
to	bother	trying	that	hospital.	An	application,	communicating	on	the	highway,
would	have	told	him	which	nearby	emergency	rooms	were	in	the	best	position
to	help	him	at	that	particular	time.
If	my	dad	were	to	break	another	finger	a	few	years	from	now,	he	not	only

would	be	able	to	use	an	information	highway	application	to	find	an
appropriate	hospital,	he	might	even	be	able	to	register	electronically	with	the
hospital	while	driving	there	and	avoid	conventional	paperwork	entirely.	The
hospital's	computer	would	match	his	injury	to	a	suitable	doctor,	who	would	be
able	to	retrieve	my	father's	medical	records	from	a	server	on	the	information
highway.	If	the	doctor	called	for	an	X	ray,	it	would	be	stored	in	digital	form
on	a	server,	available	for	immediate	review	by	any	authorized	doctor	or
specialist	throughout	the	hospital	or	the	world.	Comments	made	by	anyone
reviewing	the	X	ray,	whether	oral	or	in	text	form,	would	be	linked	to	Dad's
medical	records.	Afterward	my	father	would	be	able	to	look	at	the	X	rays
from	home	and	listen	to	the	professional	commentary.	He	could	share	the	X
rays	with	his	family:	"Look	at	the	size	of	that	fracture!	Listen	to	what	the
doctor	said	about	it!"
Most	of	these	applications,	from	checking	a	pizza	menu	to	sharing	centralized
medical	records,	are	already	starting	to	appear	on	PCs.	Interactive	information
sharing	is	quickly	moving	closer	to	becoming	a	part	of	everyday	life.
However,	before	that	happens,	a	lot	of	pieces	of	the	highway	still	have	to	be
put	in	place.

5
PATHS	TO	THE	HIGHWAY
Before	we	can	enjoy	the	benefits	of	the	applications	and	appliances	described
in	the	preceding	chapter,	the	information	highway	has	to	exist.	It	doesn't	yet.
This	may	surprise	some	people,	who	hear	everything	from	a	long-distance
telephone	network	to	the	Internet	described	as	"the	information
superhighway."	The	truth	is	that	the	full	highway	is	unlikely	to	be	available	in
homes	for	at	least	a	decade.
Personal	computers,	multi-media	CD-ROM	software,	high-capacity	cable
television	networks,	wired	and	wireless	telephone	networks,	and	the	Internet
are	all	important	precursors	of	the	information	highway.	Each	is	suggestive	of
the	future.	But	none	represents	the	actual	information	highway.
Constructing	the	highway	will	be	a	big	job.	It	will	require	the	installation	not
only	of	physical	infrastructure,	such	as	fiber-optic	cable	and	high-speed
switches	and	servers,	but	also	the	development	of	software	platforms.	In
chapter	3,	I	discussed	the	evolution	of	the	hardware	and	the	software	platform
that	enabled	the	PC.	Applications	for	the	information	highway,	such	as	those	I
described	in	chapter	4,	will	also	have	to	be	built	on	a	platform—one	that	will
evolve	out	of	the	PC	and	the	Internet.	The	same	sort	of	competition	that	took
place	within	the	PC	industry	during	the	1980s	is	taking	place	now	to	create
the	software	components	that	will	constitute	the	information	highway
platform.
The	software	that	runs	the	highway	will	have	to	offer	great	navigation	and
security,	electronic	mail	and	bulletin	board	capabilities,	connections	to
competing	software	components,	and	billing	and	accounting	services.
Component	providers	for	the	highway	will	make	available	tools	and	user-
interface	standards	so	it	will	be	easy	for	designers	to	create	applications,	set
up	forms,	and	manage	databases	of	information	on	the	system.	To	make	it
possible	for	applications	to	work	together	seamlessly,	the	platform	will	have
to	define	a	standard	for	user	profiles	so	that	information	about	user
preferences	can	be	passed	from	one	application	to	another.	This	sharing	of
information	will	enable	applications	to	do	their	best	to	meet	user	needs.
A	number	of	companies,	including	Microsoft,	confident	that	there	will	be	a

profitable	business	in	supplying	software	for	the	highway,	are	competing	to
develop	components	of	the	platform.	These	components	will	be	the
foundation	on	which	information	highway	applications	can	be	built.	There
will	be	more	than	one	successful	software	provider	for	the	highway,	and	their
software	will	interconnect.
The	highway's	platform	will	also	have	to	support	many	different	kinds	of
computers,	including	servers	and	all	the	information	appliances.	The
customers	for	much	of	this	software	will	be	the	cable	systems,	telephone
companies,	and	other	network	providers,	rather	than	individuals,	but
consumers	will	ultimately	decide	which	succeed.	The	network	providers	will
gravitate	toward	the	software	that	offers	consumers	the	best	applications	and
the	broadest	range	of	information.	So	the	first	competition	among	companies
developing	platform	software	will	be	waged	for	the	hearts	and	minds	of
applications	developers	and	information	providers,	because	their	work	will
create	most	of	the	value.
As	applications	develop,	they	will	demonstrate	the	value	of	the	information
highway	to	potential	investors—a	crucial	step,	considering	the	amount	of
money	building	the	highway	will	require.	Today's	estimates	put	the	cost	at
about	$1,200,	give	or	take	a	couple	of	hundred	dollars,	depending	on
architecture	and	equipment	choices,	to	connect	one	information	appliance
(such	as	a	TV	or	a	PC)	in	each	U.S.	home	to	the	highway.	This	price	includes
running	the	fiber	into	every	neighborhood,	the	servers,	the	switches	and
electronics	in	the	home.	With	roughly	100	million	homes	in	the	United	States,
this	works	out	to	around	$120	billion	of	investment	in	one	country	alone.
Nobody	is	going	to	spend	this	kind	of	money	until	it	is	clear	that	the
technology	really	works	and	that	consumers	will	pay	enough	for	the	new
applications.	The	fees	customers	will	pay	for	television	service,	including
video-on-demand,	won't	pay	for	building	the	highway.	To	finance	the
construction,	investors	will	have	to	believe	new	services	will	generate	almost
as	much	revenue	again	as	cable	television	does	today.	If	the	financial	return
on	the	highway	is	not	evident,	investment	money	isn't	going	to	materialize
and	construction	of	the	highway	will	be	delayed.	This	is	just	as	it	should	be.	It
would	be	ridiculous	to	do	the	buildout	until	private	firms	see	the	likelihood	of
a	return	on	their	investment.	I	think	investors	will	become	confident	of	such	a
return	as	innovators	bring	new	ideas	to	the	trials.	Once	investors	begin	to
understand	the	new	applications	and	services	and	the	potential	financial
payback	for	the	highway	infrastructure	is	proven,	there	will	be	little	trouble
raising	the	necessary	capital.	The	outlay	will	be	no	greater	than	that	for	other
infrastructures	we	take	for	granted.	The	roads,	water	mains,	sewers,	and

electrical	connections	that	run	to	a	house	each	costs	as	much.
I'm	optimistic.	The	growth	of	the	Internet	over	the	past	few	years	suggests
that	highway	applications	will	quickly	become	extremely	popular	and	justify
large	investments.	The	"Internet"	refers	to	a	group	of	computers	connected
together,	using	standard	"protocols"	(descriptions	of	technologies)	to
exchange	information.	It's	a	long	way	from	being	the	highway,	but	it's	the
closest	approximation	we	have	today,	and	will	evolve	into	the	highway.
The	popularity	of	the	Internet	is	the	most	important	single	development	in	the
world	of	computing	since	the	IBM	PC	was	introduced	in	1981.	The	PC
analogy	is	apt	for	many	reasons.	The	PC	wasn't	perfect.	Aspects	of	it	were
arbitrary	or	even	poor.	Despite	that,	its	popularity	grew	to	the	point	where	it
became	the	standard	for	applications	development.	Companies	that	tried	to
fight	the	PC	standards	often	had	good	reasons	for	doing	so,	but	their	efforts
failed	because	so	many	other	companies	were	continuing	to	work	to	try	and
improve	the	PC.
Today's	Internet	is	made	up	of	a	loose	collection	of	interconnecting
commercial	and	noncommercial	computer	networks,	including	on-line
information	services	to	which	users	subscribe.	Servers	are	scattered	around
the	world,	linked	to	the	Internet	on	a	variety	of	high-	and	low-capacity	paths.
Most	consumers	use	personal	computers	to	plug	into	the	system	through	the
telephone	network,	which	has	a	low	bandwidth======================================================== s	that.
IBM	was	such	a	great	company.	Why	should	it	have	so	much	trouble	with	PC
software	development?	One	answer	was	that	IBM	tended	to	promote	all	their
good	programmers	into	management	and	leave	the	less	talented	behind.	Even
more	significant,	IBM	was	haunted	by	its	successful	past.	Its	traditional
engineering	process	was	unsuitable	for	the	rapid	pace	and	market
requirements	of	PC	software.
In	April	1987,	IBM	unveiled	its	integrated	hardware/software,	which	was
supposed	to	beat	back	imitators.	The	"clone-killer"	hardware	was	called	PS/2
and	it	ran	the	new	operating	system,	OS/2.
The	PS/2	included	a	number	of	innovations.	The	most	celebrated	was	the	new
"microchannel	bus"	circuitry,	which	allowed	accessory	cards	to	connect	to	the
system	and	permitted	the	PC	hardware	to	be	extended	to	meet	such	particular
customer	requirements	as	sound	or	mainframe	communications	capabilities.
Every	compatible	computer	included	a	hardware-connection	"bus"	to	allow
these	cards	to	work	with	the	PC.	The	PS/2's	Microchannel	was	an	elegant
replacement	for	the	connection	bus	in	the	PC	AT.	But	it	solved	problems	that
most	customers	didn't	have.	It	was	potentially	much	faster	than	the	PC	AT's
bus.	But	in	actual	practice	the	speed	of	the	bus	hadn't	been	holding	anyone	up,
and	therefore	customers	couldn't	get	much	benefit	from	this	newly	available
speed.	More	important,	the	Microchannel	didn't	work	with	any	of	the
thousands	of	add-in	cards	that	worked	with	the	PC	AT	and	compatible	PCs.
Ultimately,	IBM	agreed	to	license	the	Microchannel,	for	a	royalty,	to
manufacturers	of	add-in	cards	and	PCs.	But	by	then	a	coalition	of
manufacturers	had	already	announced	a	new	bus	with	many	of	the	capabilities
of	the	Microchannel	but	compatible	with	the	PC	AT	bus.	Customers	rejected
Microchannel	in	favor	of	machines	with	the	old	PC	AT	bus.	The	complement
of	accessory	cards	for	the	PS/2	never	came	close	to	the	number	available	for
PC	AT-compatible	systems.	This	forced	IBM	to	continue	to	release	machines
that	supported	the	old	bus.	The	real	casualty	was	that	IBM	lost	control	of
personal-computer	architecture.	Never	again	would	they	be	able	to	move	the
industry	singlehanded	to	a	new	design.
Despite	a	great	deal	of	promotion	from	both	IBM	and	Microsoft,	customers
thought	OS/2	was	too	unwieldy	and	complicated.	The	worse	OS/2	looked,	the
better	Windows	seemed.	Because	we'd	lost	the	chances	both	for	compatibility
between	Windows	and	OS/2,	and	for	OS/2	to	run	on	modest	machines,	it	still

made	sense	to	us	to	continue	to	develop	Windows.	Windows	was	far
"smaller"—meaning	it	used	less	hard-disk	space	and	could	work	in	a	machine
with	less	memory,	so	there	would	be	a	place	for	it	on	machines	that	could
never	run	OS/2.	We	called	this	the	"family"	strategy.	In	other	words,	OS/2
would	be	the	high-end	system	and	Windows	would	be	the	junior	member	of
the	family,	for	smaller	machines.
IBM	was	never	happy	about	our	family	strategy,	but	it	had	its	own	plans.	In
the	spring	of	1988,	it	joined	other	computer	makers	in	establishing	the	Open
Software	Foundation	to	promote	UNIX,	an	operating	system	that	had
originally	been	developed	at	AT&T's	Bell	Labs	in	1969	but	over	the	years	had
splintered	into	a	number	of	versions.	Some	of	the	versions	were	developed	at
universities,	which	used	UNIX	as	a	working	laboratory	for	operating-systems
theory.	Other	versions	were	developed	by	computer	companies.	Each
company	enhanced	UNIX	for	its	own	computers,	which	made	their	operating
system	incompatible	with	everyone	else's.	This	meant	that	UNIX	had	become
not	a	single	open	system,	but	a	collection	of	operating	systems	competing
with	one	another.	All	the	differences	made	software	compatibility	harder	and
held	back	the	rise	of	a	strong	third-party	software	market	for	UNIX.	Only	a
few	software	companies	could	afford	to	develop	and	test	applications	for	a
dozen	different	versions	of	UNIX.	Also,	computer-software	stores	couldn't
afford	to	stock	all	the	different	versions.
The	Open	Software	Foundation	was	the	most	promising	of	several	attempts	to
"unify"	UNIX	and	create	a	common	software	architecture	that	would	work	on
various	different	manufacturers'	hardware.	In	theory,	a	unified	UNIX	could
get	a	positive-feedback	cycle	going.	But	despite	significant	funding,	it	turned
out	to	be	impossible	for	the	Open	Software	Foundation	to	mandate
cooperation	from	a	committee	of	vendors	who	were	competing	for	each	sale.
Its	members,	including	IBM,	DEC,	and	others,	continued	to	promote	the
benefits	of	their	particular	versions	of	UNIX.	The	UNIX	companies	suggested
their	systems	would	benefit	customers	by	offering	them	more	choices.	But	if
you	bought	a	UNIX	system	from	one	vendor,	your	software	couldn't
automatically	run	on	any	other	system.	This	meant	you	were	tied	to	that
vendor,	whereas	in	the	PC	world	you	have	a	choice	of	where	to	buy	your
hardware.
The	problems	of	the	Open	Software	Foundation	and	similar	initiatives	point
up	the	difficulty	of	trying	to	impose	a	standard	in	a	field	in	which	innovation
is	moving	rapidly	and	all	the	companies	that	make	up	the	standards
committee	are	competitors.	The	marketplace	(in	computers	or	consumer
electronics)	adopts	standards	because	customers	insist	on	standards.	Standards

are	to	ensure	interoperability,	minimize	user	training,	and	of	course	foster	the
largest	possible	software	industry.	Any	company	that	wants	to	create	a
standard	has	to	price	it	very	reasonably	or	it	won't	be	adopted.	The	market
effectively	chooses	a	reasonably	priced	standard	and	replaces	it	when	it	is
obsolete	or	too	expensive.
Microsoft	operating	systems	are	offered	today	by	more	than	nine	hundred
different	manufacturers,	which	gives	customers	choices	and	options.
Microsoft	has	been	able	to	provide	compatibility	because	hardware
manufacturers	have	agreed	not	to	allow	modifications	to	our	software	that
introduce	incompatibility.	This	means	that	hundreds	of	thousands	of	software
developers	don't	need	to	worry	about	what	PCs	their	software	will	run	on.
Although	the	term	"open"	is	used	in	many	different	ways,	to	me	it	means
offering	choice	in	hardware	and	software	applications	to	the	customer.
Consumer	electronics	has	also	benefited	from	standards	managed	by	private
companies.	Years	ago	consumer	electronics	companies	often	tried	to	restrict
competitors	from	using	their	technology,	but	now	all	of	the	major	consumer
electronics	makers	are	quite	open	to	licensing	their	patents	and	trade	secrets.
The	royalties	for	their	products	are	typically	under	5	percent	of	the	cost	of	the
device.	Audiocassettes,	VHS	tapes,	compact	discs,	televisions,	and	cellular
telephones	are	all	examples	of	technologies	that	were	created	by	private
companies	that	receive	royalties	from	everyone	who	makes	the	equipment.
Dolby	Laboratories'	algorithms,	for	example,	are	the	de	facto	standard	for
noise	reduction.
In	May	1990,	the	last	weeks	before	the	release	of	Windows	3.0,	we	tried	to
reach	an	agreement	with	IBM	for	it	to	license	Windows	to	use	on	its	personal
computers.	We	told	IBM	we	thought	that	although	OS/2	would	work	out	over
time,	for	the	moment	Windows	was	going	to	be	a	success	and	OS/2	would
find	its	niche	slowly.
In	1992,	IBM	and	Microsoft	stopped	their	joint	development	of	OS/2.	IBM
continued	to	develop	the	operating	system	alone.	The	ambitious	plan	for
OfficeVision	was	eventually	canceled.
Analysts	estimate	that	IBM	poured	more	than	$2	billion	into	OS/2,
OfficeVision,	and	related	projects.	If	IBM	and	Microsoft	had	found	a	way	to
work	together,	thousands	of	people-years—the	best	years	of	some	of	the	best
employees	at	both	companies—would	not	have	been	wasted.	If	OS/2	and
Windows	had	been	compatible,	graphical	computing	would	have	become
mainstream	years	sooner.

The	acceptance	of	graphical	interfaces	was	also	held	back	because	most	major
software-applications	companies	did	not	invest	in	them.	They	largely	ignored
the	Macintosh	and	ignored	or	ridiculed	Windows.	Lotus	and	WordPerfect,	the
market	leaders	for	spreadsheet	and	word-processing	applications,	made	only
modest	efforts	on	OS/2.	In	retrospect,	this	was	a	mistake,	and,	in	the	end,	a
costly	one.	When	Windows	finally	benefited	from	a	positive-feedback	cycle,
generated	by	applications	from	many	of	the	small	software	companies,	the	big
companies	fell	behind	because	they	didn't	move	to	Windows	fast	enough.
Windows,	like	the	PC,	continues	to	evolve.	Microsoft	has	continued
to	add	new	capabilities	to	various	versions.	Anyone	can	develop	application
software	that	runs	on	the	Windows	platform,	without	having	to	notify	or	get
permission	from	Microsoft.	In	fact,	today	there	are	tens	of	thousands	of
commercially	available	software	packages	for	the	platform,	including
offerings	that	compete	with	most	Microsoft	applications.
Customers	express	to	me	their	worry	that	Microsoft,	because	it	is,	by
definition,	the	only	source	for	Microsoft	operating-system	software,	could
raise	prices	and	slow	down	or	even	stop	its	innovation.	Even	if	we	did	we
wouldn't	be	able	to	sell	our	new	versions.	Existing	users	would	not	upgrade
and	we	wouldn't	get	any	new	users.	Our	revenue	would	fall	and	many	more
companies	would	compete	to	take	our	place.	The	positive-feedback
mechanism	helps	challengers	as	well	as	the	incumbent.	You	can't	rest	on	your
laurels,	because	there	is	always	a	competitor	coming	up	behind	you.
No	product	stays	on	top	unless	it	is	improved.	Even	the	VHS	standard	will	be
replaced	when	better	formats	appear	at	reasonable	prices.	In	fact,	the	era	of
VHS	is	almost	over.	Within	the	next	several	years	we	will	see	new	digital	tape
formats,	digital	movie	discs	that	put	feature	films	on	discs	like	a	music	CD,
and	eventually	the	information	highway	will	enable	new	services	such	as
video-on-demand,	and	VHS	will	be	unnecessary.
MS-DOS	is	being	replaced	now.	Despite	its	incredible	strength	as	the	leading
operating	system	for	personal	computers,	it	is	being	replaced	by	a	system	with
a	graphical	user	interface.	The	Macintosh	software	might	have	become	the
successor	to	MS-DOS.	So	might	OS/2	or	UNIX.	I======================================================== pler	it	is	to	search
and	navigate	through	them	quickly,	because	their	content	can	be	restructured
so	easily.
The	organizational	structure	of	a	reservation	book	at	a	restaurant	is	by	date
and	time.	A	9:00	P.M.	reservation	is	written	farther	down	the	page	than	an
8:00	P.M.	reservation.	Saturday-night	dinner	reservations	follow	those	for
Saturday	lunch.	A	mâitre	d'	or	anyone	else	can	rapidly	find	out	who	has	a
reservation	on	any	date	for	any	time	because	the	book's	information	is	ordered
that	way.	But	if,	for	whatever	reason,	someone	wants	to	extract	information	in
another	way,	the	simple	chronology	is	useless.
Imagine	the	plight	of	a	restaurant	captain	if	I	called	to	say,	"My	name	is
Gates.	My	wife	made	us	a	reservation	for	some	time	next	month.	Would	you
mind	checking	to	see	when	it	is?"

"I'm	sorry,	sir,	do	you	know	the	date	of	the	reservation?"	the	captain	would	be
likely	to	ask.
"No,	that's	what	I'm	trying	to	find	out."
"Would	that	have	been	on	a	weekend?"	the	captain	asks.
He	knows	he's	going	to	be	paging	through	the	book	by	hand,	and	he's	hoping
to	reduce	the	task	by	focusing	the	dates	in	any	possible	way.
A	restaurant	can	use	a	paper-based	reservation	book	because	the	total	number
of	reservations	isn't	large.	An	airline	reservation	system	is	not	a	book	but	a
database	containing	an	enormous	quantity	of	information—flights,	air	fares,
bookings,	seat	assignments,	and	billing	information—for	hundreds	of	flights	a
day	worldwide.	American	Airlines'	SABRE	reservation	system	stores	the
information—4.4	trillion	bytes	of	it,	which	is	more	than	4	million	million
characters—on	computer	hard	disks.	If	the	information	in	the	SABRE	system
were	copied	into	a	hypothetical	paper	reservation	book,	it	would	require	more
than	2	billion	pages.
For	as	long	as	we've	had	paper	documents	or	collections	of	documents,	we
have	been	ordering	information	linearly,	with	indexes,	tables	of	contents,	and
cross-references	of	various	kinds	to	provide	alternate	means	of	navigation.	In
most	offices	filing	cabinets	are	organized	by	customer,	vendor,	or	project	in
alphabetical	order,	but	to	speed	access,	often	a	duplicate	set	of
correspondence	is	filed	chronologically.	Professional	indexers	add	value	to	a
book	by	building	an	alternative	way	to	find	information.	And	before	library
catalogs	were	computerized,	new	books	were	entered	into	the	paper	catalogs
on	several	different	cards	so	a	reader	could	find	a	book	by	its	title	or	any	one
of	its	authors	or	topics.	This	redundancy	was	to	make	information	easier	to
find.
When	I	was	young	I	loved	my	family's	1960	World	Book	Encyclopedia.	Its
heavy	bound	volumes	contained	just	text	and	pictures.	They	showed	what
Edison's	phonograph	looked	like,	but	didn't	let	me	listen	to	its	scratchy	sound.
The	encyclopedia	had	photographs	of	a	fuzzy	caterpillar	changing	into	a
butterfly,	but	there	was	no	video	to	bring	the	transformation	to	life.	It	also
would	have	been	nice	if	it	had	quizzed	me	on	what	I	had	read,	or	if	the
information	had	always	been	up-to-date.	Naturally	I	wasn't	aware	of	those
drawbacks	then.	When	I	was	eight,	I	began	to	read	the	first	volume.	I	was
determined	to	read	straight	through	every	volume.	I	could	have	absorbed
more	if	it	had	been	easy	to	read	all	the	articles	about	the	sixteenth	century	in
sequence	or	all	the	articles	pertaining	to	medicine.	Instead	I	read	about

"Garter	Snakes"	then	"Gary,	Indiana,"	then	"Gas."	But	I	had	a	great	time
reading	the	encyclopedia	anyway	and	kept	at	it	for	five	years	until	I	reached
the	Ps.	Then	I	discovered	the	Encyclopaedia	Britannica,	with	its	greater
sophistication	and	detail.	I	knew	I	would	never	have	the	patience	to	read	all	of
it.	Also,	by	then,	satisfying	my	enthusiasm	for	computers	was	taking	up	most
of	my	spare	time.
Current	print	encyclopedias	consist	of	nearly	two	dozen	volumes,	with
millions	of	words	of	text	and	thousands	of	illustrations,	and	cost	hundreds	or
thousands	of	dollars.	That's	quite	an	investment,	especially	considering	how
rapidly	the	information	gets	out	of	date.	Microsoft	Encarta,	which	is
outselling	print	and	other	multi-media	encyclopedias,	comes	on	a	single	1-
ounce	CD-ROM	(which	stands	for	Compact	Disc	Read	Only	Memory).
Encarta	includes	26,000	topics	with	9	million	words	of	text,	8	hours	of
sounds,	7,000	photographs	and	illustrations,	800	maps,	250	interactive	charts
and	tables,	and	100	animations	and	video	clips.	It	costs	less	than	$100.	If	you
want	to	know	how	the	Egyptian	"ud"	(a	musical	instrument)	sounds,	hear	the
1936	abdication	speech	of	Great	Britain's	King	Edward	VIII,	or	see	an
animation	explaining	how	a	machine	works,	the	information's	all	there—and
no	paper-based	encyclopedia	will	ever	have	it.
Articles	in	a	print	encyclopedia	often	are	followed	by	a	list	of	articles	on
related	subjects.	To	read	them,	you	have	to	find	the	referenced	article,	which
may	be	in	another	volume.	With	a	CD-ROM	encyclopedia	all	you	have	to	do
is	click	on	the	reference	and	the	article	will	appear.	On	the	information
highway,	encyclopedia	articles	will	include	links	to	related	subjects—not	just
those	covered	in	the	encyclopedia,	but	those	in	other	sources.	There	will	be	no
limit	to	how	much	detail	you	will	be	able	to	explore	on	a	subject	that	interests
you.	In	fact,	an	encyclopedia	on	the	highway	will	be	more	than	just	a	specific
reference	work—it	will	be,	like	the	library	card	catalog,	a	doorway	to	all
knowledge.
1995:	Screen	from	Microsoft	Encarta	electronic	multimedia	encyclopedia

Today,	printed	information	is	hard	to	locate.	It's	almost	impossible	to	find	all
the	best	information—including	books,	news	articles,	and	film	clips—on	a
specific	topic.	It	is	extremely	time-consuming	to	assemble	the	information
you	can	find.	For	example,	if	you	wanted	to	read	biographies	of	all	the	recent
Nobel	Prize	laureates,	compiling	them	could	take	an	entire	day.	Electronic
documents,	however,	will	be	interactive.	Request	a	kind	of	information,	and
the	document	responds.	Indicate	that	you've	changed	your	mind,	and	the
document	responds	again.	Once	you	get	used	to	this	sort	of	system,	you	find
that	being	able	to	look	at	information	in	different	ways	makes	that
information	more	valuable.	The	flexibility	invites	exploration,	and	the
exploration	is	rewarded	with	discovery.
You'll	be	able	to	get	your	daily	news	in	a	similar	way.	You'll	be	able	to	specify
how	long	you	want	your	newscast	to	last.	This	will	be	possible	because	you'll
be	able	to	have	each	of	the	news	stories	selected	individually.	The	newscast
assembled	for	and	delivered	only	to	you	might	include	world	news	from
NBC,	the	BBC,	CNN,	or	the	Los	Angeles	Times,	with	a	weather	report	from	a
favorite	local	TV	meteorologist—or	from	any	private	meteorologist	who
wanted	to	offer	his	or	her	own	service.	You	will	be	able	to	request	longer
stories	on	the	subjects	that	particularly	interest	you	and	just	highlights	on
others.	If,	while	you	are	watching	the	newscast,	you	want	more	than	has	been
put	together,	you	will	easily	be	able	to	request	more	background	or	detail,
either	from	another	news	broadcast	or	from	file	information.
Among	all	the	types	of	paper	documents,	narrative	fiction	is	one	of	the	few
that	will	not	benefit	from	electronic	organization.	Almost	every	reference
book	has	an	index,	but	novels	don't	because	there	is	no	need	to	be	able	to	look
something	up	in	a	novel.	Novels	are	linear.	Likewise,	we'll	continue	to	watch
most	movies	from	start	to	finish.	This	isn't	a	technological	judgment—it	is	an
artistic	one:	Their	linearity	is	intrinsic	to	the	storytelling	process.	New	forms
of	interactive	fiction	are	being	invented	that	take	advantage	of	the	electronic
world,	but	linear	novels	and	movies	will	still	be	popular.
The	highway	will	make	it	easy	to	distribute	digital	documents	cheaply,
whatever	their	form.	Millions	of	people	and	companies	will	be	creating
documents	and	publishing	them	on	the	network.	Some	documents	will	be
aimed	at	paying	audiences	and	some	will	be	free	to	anyone	who	wants	to	pay
attention.	Digital	storage	is	fantastically	inexpensive.	Hard-disk	drives	in
personal	computers	will	soon	cost	about	$0.15	for	a	megabyte	(million	bytes)
of	information.	To	put	this	in	perspective,	1	megabyte	will	hold	about	700
pages	of	text,	so	the	cost	is	something	like	$0.00021	per	page—about	one

two-hundredth	what	the	local	copy	center	would	charge	at	$0.05	a	page.	And
because	there	is	the	option	of	reusing	the	storage	space	for	something	else,	the
cost	is	actually	the	cost	of	storage	per	unit	time—in	other	words,	of	renting
the	space.	If	we	assume	just	a	three-year	average	lifetime	for	the	hard-disk
drive,	the	amortized	price	per	page	per	year	is	$0.00007.	And	storage	is
getting	cheaper	all	the	time.	Hard-disk	prices	have	been	dropping	by	about	50
percent	per	year	for	the	last	several	years.
Text	is	particularly	easy	to	store	because	it	is	very	compact	in	digital	form.
The	old	saying	that	a	picture	is	worth	a	thousand	words	is	more	than	true	in
the	digital	world.	High-quality	photographic	images	take	more	space	than
text,	and	video	(which	you	can	think	of	as	a	sequence	of	up	to	thirty	new
images	appearing	every	second)	takes	even	more.	Nevertheless,	the	cost	of
distribution	for	these	kinds	of	data	is	still	quite	low.	A	feature	film	takes	up
about	4	gigabytes	(4,000	megabytes)	in	compressed	digital	format,	which	is
about	$1,600	worth	of	hard-disk	space.
Sixteen	hundred	dollars	to	store	a	single	film	doesn't	sound	low-cost.
However,	consider	that	the	typical	local	video-rental	store	usually	buys	at
least	eight	copies	of	a	hot	new	movie	for	about	$80	a	copy.	With	these	eight
copies	the	store	can	supply	only	eight	customers	per	day.
Once	the	disk	and	the	computer	that	manages	it	are	connected	up	to	the
highway,	only	one	copy	of	the	information	will	be	necessary	for	everyone	to
have	access.	The	most	popular	documents	will	have	copies	made	on	different
servers	to	avoid	delays	when	an	unusual	number	of	users	want	access.	With
one	investment,	roughly	what	a	single	shop	today	spends	for	a	popular
videotape	title,======================================================== tomers,	we
have	a	chance	to	continue	to	lead	the	way.	We	can	certainly	keep	providing
better	and	better	software	to	make	the	PC	a	universally	empowering	tool.	I
often	say	I	have	the	best	job	in	the	world,	and	I	mean	it.
I	think	this	is	a	wonderful	time	to	be	alive.	There	have	never	been	so	many
opportunities	to	do	things	that	were	impossible	before.	It's	also	the	best	time
ever	to	start	new	companies,	advance	sciences	such	as	medicine	that	improve
quality	of	life,	and	stay	in	touch	with	friends	and	relatives.	It's	important	that

both	the	good	and	bad	points	of	the	technological	advances	be	discussed
broadly	so	that	society	as	a	whole,	rather	than	just	technologists,	can	guide	its
direction.
Now	it's	back	to	you.	I	explained	in	the	Foreword	that	I	was	writing	this	book
to	help	get	a	dialogue	started	and	to	call	attention	to	a	number	of	the
opportunities	and	issues	that	individuals,	companies,	and	nations	will	face.
My	hope	is	that	after	reading	this	book	you	will	share	some	of	my	optimism,
and	will	join	the	discussion	about	how	we	should	be	shaping	the	future.======================================================== itches	to	handle	ISDN
with	very	little	idea	of	how	it	would	be	used.	The	good	news	is	that	the	PC
will	drive	explosive	demand.	An	add-in	card	for	a	PC	to	support	ISDN	costs
$500	in	1995,	but	the	price	should	drop	to	less	than	$200	over	the	next	few
years.	The	line	costs	vary	by	location	but	are	generally	about	$50	per	month
in	the	United	States.	I	expect	this	will	drop	to	less	than	$20,	not	much	more
than	a	regular	phone	connection.	We	are	among	companies	working	to
convince	phone	companies	all	over	the	world	to	lower	these	charges	in	order
to	encourage	PC	owners	to	connect,	using	ISDN.
Cable	companies	have	interim	technologies	and	strategies	of	their	own.	They
want	to	use	their	existing	coaxial	cable	networks	to	compete	with	the	phone
companies	to	provide	local	telephone	service.	They	have	also	already
demonstrated	that	special	cable	modems	can	connect	personal	computers	to
cable	networks.	This	allows	cable	companies	to	offer	bandwidth	somewhat
greater	than	ISDN's.
For	cable	companies	another	interim	step	will	be	to	increase	the	number	of
broadcast	channels	they	carry	five-	to	tenfold.	They'll	do	it	by	using	digital-
compression	technology	to	squeeze	more	channels	onto	existing	cables.

This	so-called	500-channel	approach—which	often	will	really	only	have	150
channels—makes	possible	near-video-on-demand,	although	only	for	a	limited
number	of	television	shows	and	movies.	You	would	choose	from	a	list	on-
screen	rather	than	selecting	a	numbered	channel.	A	popular	movie	might	run
on	twenty	of	the	channels,	with	the	starting	time	staggered	at	five-minute
intervals	so	that	you	could	begin	watching	it	within	five	minutes	of	whenever
you	wanted.	You	would	choose	from	among	the	available	starting	times	for
movies	and	television	programs,	and	the	set-top	box	would	switch	to	the
appropriate	channel.	The	half-hour-long	CNN	Headline	News	might	be
offered	on	six	channels	instead	of	one,	with	the	6:00	P.M.	broadcast	shown
again	at	6:05,	6:10,	6:15,	6:20,	and	6:25.	There	would	be	a	new,	live
broadcast	every	half	hour,	just	as	there	is	now.	Five	hundred	channels	will	get
used	up	pretty	fast	this	way.
The	cable	companies	are	under	pressure	to	add	channels	partly	as	a	reaction	to
competition.	Direct-broadcast	satellites	such	as	Hughes	Electronics'
DIRECTV	are	already	beaming	hundreds	of	channels	directly	into	homes.
Cable	companies	want	to	increase	their	channel	lineup	rapidly	to	avoid	losing
customers.	If	the	only	reason	for	the	information	highway	were	to	deliver	a
limited	number	of	movies,	then	a	500-channel	system	would	be	adequate.
A	500-channel	system	will	still	be	mostly	synchronous,	will	limit	your
choices,	and	will	provide	only	a	low-bandwidth	back	channel,	at	best.	A
"back	channel"	is	an	information	path	dedicated	to	carrying	instructions	and
other	information	from	a	consumer's	information	appliance	back	up	the	cable
to	the	network.	A	back	channel	on	a	500-channel	system	might	let	you	use
your	television	set-top	box	to	order	products	or	programs,	respond	to	polls	or
game-show	questions,	and	participate	in	certain	kinds	of	multiplayer	games.
But	a	low-bandwidth	back	channel	can't	offer	the	full	flexibility	and
interactivity	the	most	interesting	applications	will	require.	It	won't	let	you
send	a	video	of	your	children	to	their	grandparents,	or	play	truly	interactive
games.
Cable	and	phone	companies	around	the	world	will	progress	along	four
parallel	paths.	First,	each	will	be	going	after	the	others'	business.	Cable
companies	will	offer	telephone	service,	and	phone	companies	will	offer	video
services,	including	television.	Second,	both	systems	will	be	providing	better
ways	to	connect	PCs	with	either	ISDN	or	cable	modems.	Third,	both	will	be
converting	to	digital	technology	in	order	to	provide	more	television	channels
and	higher-quality	signals.	Fourth,	both	will	be	conducting	trials	of	broadband
systems	connected	to	television	sets	and	PCs.	Each	of	the	four	strategies	will
motivate	investment	in	digital	network	capacity.	There	will	be	intense

competition	between	the	telephone	companies	and	cable	television	networks
to	be	the	first	network	provider	in	a	neighborhood.
Eventually,	the	Internet	and	the	other	transitional	technologies	will	be
subsumed	within	the	real	information	highway.	The	highway	will	combine	the
best	qualities	of	both	the	telephone	and	the	cable	network	systems:	Like	the
telephone	network,	it	will	offer	private	connections	so	that	everyone	using	the
network	can	pursue	his	or	her	own	interests,	on	his	or	her	own	schedule.	It
will	also	be	fully	two-way	like	the	telephone	network,	so	that	rich	forms	of
interaction	are	possible.	Like	the	cable	television	network,	it	will	be	high
capacity,	so	there	will	be	sufficient	bandwidth	to	allow	multiple	televisions	or
personal	computers	in	a	single	household	to	connect	simultaneously	to
different	video	programs	or	sources	of	information.
Most	of	the	wires	connecting	servers	with	one	another,	and	with	the
neighborhoods	of	the	world,	will	be	made	of	incredibly	clear	fiber-optic
cable,	the	"asphalt"	of	the	information	highway.	All	of	the	major	long-
distance	trunk	lines	that	carry	telephone	calls	within	the	United	States	today
use	fiber,	but	the	lines	that	connect	our	homes	to	these	data	thoroughfares	are
still	copper	wire.	Telephone	companies	will	replace	the	copper-wire,
microwave,	and	satellite	links	in	their	networks	with	fiber-optic	cable	so	they
will	have	the	bandwidth	to	carry	enough	bits	to	deliver	high-quality	video.
Cable	television	companies	will	increase	the	amount	of	fiber	they	use.	At	the
same	time	fiber	is	being	deployed,	telephone	and	cable	companies	will	be
incorporating	new	switches	into	their	networks	so	that	digital	video	signals
and	other	information	can	be	routed	from	any	point	to	any	other	point.	The
costs	of	upgrading	the	existing	networks	to	prepare	for	the	highway	will	be
less	than	a	quarter	of	what	they	would	be	to	run	new	wires	into	every	home.
You	can	think	of	a	fiber	trunk	as	being	like	the	foot-wide	water	main	that
carries	water	up	your	street.	It	doesn't	come	directly	to	your	house;	instead,	a
smaller	pipe	at	the	curb	connects	the	main	to	your	home.	At	first,	the	fiber
will	probably	run	only	to	neighborhood	distribution	points	and	the	signals	will
be	carried	from	the	neighborhood	fiber	on	either	the	coaxial	cable	that	brings
you	cable	television	or	on	the	"twisted-pair"	copper-wire	connections	that
provide	telephone	service.	Eventually,	though,	fiber	connections	may	run
directly	into	your	home	if	you	use	lots	of	data.
Switches	are	the	sophisticated	computers	that	shunt	streams	of	data	from	one
track	to	another,	like	boxcars	in	a	train	yard.	Millions	of	simultaneous	streams
of	communications	will	flow	on	large	networks,	and	no	matter	how	many
intermediate	waypoints	are	required,	all	the	different	bits	of	information	will

have	to	be	guided	to	their	destinations,	with	an	assurance	they	will	arrive	in
the	right	places	and	on	time.	To	grasp	how	big	the	task	will	be	in	the	era	of
the	information	highway,	imagine	billions	of	boxcars	that	have	to	be	routed
along	railroad	tracks	through	vast	systems	of	switches	and	arrive	at	their
destinations	on	schedule.	Because	the	cars	are	attached	to	one	another,
switchyards	get	clogged	waiting	for	long,	multicar	trains	to	pass	through.
There	would	be	fewer	tie-ups	if	each	boxcar	could	travel	independently	and
find	its	own	way	through	the	switches,	then	reassemble	as	a	train	at	the
destination.
Information	traversing	the	information	highway	will	be	broken	up	into	tiny
packets,	and	each	packet	will	be	routed	independently	through	the	network,
the	way	individual	automobiles	navigate	roads.	When	you	order	a	movie,	it
will	be	broken	into	millions	of	tiny	pieces,	each	one	of	which	will	find	its	way
through	the	network	to	your	television.
This	routing	of	packets	will	be	accomplished	through	the	use	of	a
communications	protocol	known	as	asynchronous	transfer	mode,	or	ATM
(not	to	be	confused	with	"automatic	teller	machine").	It	will	be	one	of	the
building	blocks	of	the	information	highway.	Phone	companies	around	the
world	are	already	beginning	to	rely	on	ATM,	because	it	takes	great	advantage
of	fiber's	amazing	bandwidth.	One	strength	of	ATM	is	its	ability	to	guarantee
timely	delivery	of	information.	ATM	breaks	each	digital	stream	into	uniform
packets,	each	of	which	contains	48	bytes	of	the	information	to	be	transported
and	5	bytes	of	control	information	that	allow	the	highway's	switches	to	route
the	packets	very	quickly	to	their	destinations.	At	their	destinations	the	packets
are	recombined	into	a	stream.
ATM	delivers	streams	of	information	at	very	high	speeds—up	to	155	million
bits	per	second	at	first,	later	jumping	to	622	million	bits	per	second	and
eventually	to	2	billion	bits	per	second.	This	technology	will	make	it	possible
to	send	video	as	easily	as	voice	calls,	and	at	very	low	cost.	Just	as	advances	in
chip	technology	have	driven	down	the	cost	of	computing,	ATM,	because	it
will	also	be	able	to	carry	enormous	numbers	of	old-fashioned	voice	calls,	will
drive	down	the	cost	of	long-distance	phone	calls.
High-bandwidth	cable	connections	will	link	most	information	appliances	to
the	highway,	but	some	devices	will	connect	wirelessly.	We	already	use	a
number	of	wireless	communication	devices—cellular	telephones,	pagers,	and
consumer-electronics	remote	controls.	They	send	radio	signals	and	allow	us
mobility,	but	the	bandwidth	is	limited.	The	wireless	networks	of	the	future
will	be	faster,	but	unless	there	is	a	major	breakthrough,	wired	networks	will

have	far	greater	bandwidth.	Mobile	devices	will	be	able	to	send	and	receive
messages,	but	it	will	be	expensive	and	unusual	to	use	them	to	receive	an
individual	video	stream.
The	wireless	networks	that	will	allow	us	to	communicate	when	we	are	mobile
will	grow	out	of	today's	cellular-telephone	systems	and	the	new	alternative
wireless	phone	service,	called	PCS.	When	you	are	on	the	road	and	want
information	from	your	home	or	office	computer,	your	portable	information
appliance======================================================== long	as	society	needs	help,	there	will	definitely	be	plenty	for	everyone	to	do.
The	broad	benefits	of	advancing	productivity	are	no	solace	for	someone
whose	job	is	on	the	line.	When	a	person	has	been	trained	for	a	job	that	is	no
longer	needed,	you	can't	just	suggest	he	go	out	and	learn	something	else.
Adjustments	aren't	that	simple	or	fast,	but	ultimately	they	are	necessary.	It
isn't	easy	to	prepare	for	the	next	century,	because	it's	almost	impossible	to
guess	the	secondary	effects	of	even	the	changes	we	can	foresee,	much	less
those	we	can't.	A	hundred	years	ago,	people	saw	the	automobile	coming.	It
was	sure	to	make	fortunes,	and	also	to	run	over	some	jobs	and	industries.	But
specifics	would	have	been	hard	to	predict.	You	might	have	warned	your
friends	at	the	Acme	Buggy	Whip	Company	to	polish	up	their	résumés,	and
perhaps	learn	about	engines,	but	would	you	have	known	to	invest	in	real
estate	for	strip	malls?
More	than	ever,	an	education	that	emphasizes	general	problem-solving	skills
will	be	important.	In	a	changing	world,	education	is	the	best	preparation	for
being	able	to	adapt.	As	the	economy	shifts,	people	and	societies	who	are
appropriately	educated	will	tend	to	do	best.	The	premium	that	society	pays	for
skills	is	going	to	climb,	so	my	advice	is	to	get	a	good	formal	education	and
then	keep	on	learning.	Acquire	new	interests	and	skills	throughout	your	life.
A	lot	of	people	will	be	pushed	out	of	their	comfort	zones,	but	that	doesn't

mean	that	what	they	already	know	won't	still	be	valuable.	It	does	mean	that
people	and	companies	will	have	to	be	open	to	reinventing	themselves—
possibly	more	than	once.	Companies	and	governments	can	help	train	and
retrain	workers,	but	the	individual	must	ultimately	bear	principal
responsibility	for	his	education.
A	first	step	will	be	to	come	to	terms	with	computers.	Computers	make	almost
everyone	nervous	before	they	understand	them.	Children	are	the	primary
exception.	First-time	users	worry	that	a	single	misstep	will	cause	them	to	ruin
the	computer	or	lose	everything	stored	in	it.	People	do	lose	data,	of	course,
but	very	rarely	is	the	damage	irreversible.	We	have	worked	to	make	it	harder
to	lose	data	and	easier	to	recover	from	mistakes.	Most	programs	have	"Undo"
commands	that	make	it	simple	to	try	something,	then	quickly	reverse	it.	Users
become	more	confident	as	they	see	that	making	mistakes	won't	be
catastrophic.	And	then	they	begin	to	experiment.	PCs	provide	all	kinds	of
opportunities	for	experimentation.	The	more	experience	people	have	with
PCs,	the	better	they	understand	what	they	can	and	can't	do.	Then	PCs	become
tools	instead	of	threats.	Like	a	tractor	or	a	sewing	machine,	a	computer	is	a
machine	we	can	use	to	help	us	get	certain	tasks	done	more	efficiently.
Another	fear	people	express	is	that	computers	will	be	so	"smart"	they	will
take	over	and	do	away	with	any	need	for	the	human	mind.	Although	I	believe
that	eventually	there	will	be	programs	that	will	recreate	some	elements	of
human	intelligence,	it	is	very	unlikely	to	happen	in	my	lifetime.	For	decades
computer	scientists	studying	artificial	intelligence	have	been	trying	to	develop
a	computer	with	human	understanding	and	common	sense.	Alan	Turing	in
1950	suggested	what	has	come	to	be	called	the	Turing	Test:	If	you	were	able
to	carry	on	a	conversation	with	a	computer	and	another	human,	both	hidden
from	your	view,	and	were	uncertain	about	which	was	which,	you	would	have
a	truly	intelligent	machine.
Every	prediction	about	major	advances	in	artificial	intelligence	has	proved	to
be	overly	optimistic.	Today	even	simple	learning	tasks	still	go	well	beyond
the	world's	most	capable	computer.	When	computers	appear	to	be	intelligent
it	is	because	they	have	been	specially	programmed	to	handle	some	task	in	a
straightforward	fashion—like	trying	out	billions	of	chess	moves	in	order	to
play	master-level	chess.
The	computer	has	the	potential	to	be	a	tool	to	leverage	human	intelligence	for
the	foreseeable	future.	However,	information	appliances	won't	become
mainstream	for	publishing	information	until	almost	everyone	is	a	user.	It
would	be	wonderful	if	everyone—rich	or	poor,	urban	or	rural,	old	or	young—

could	have	access	to	one.	However,	personal	computers	are	still	too	expensive
for	most	people.	Before	the	information	highway	can	become	fully	integrated
into	society,	it	must	be	available	to	virtually	every	citizen,	not	just	the	elite,
but	this	does	not	mean	that	every	citizen	has	to	have	an	information	appliance
in	his	house.	Once	the	majority	of	people	have	systems	installed	in	their
homes,	those	who	do	not	can	be	accommodated	with	a	shared	appliance	at	a
library,	school,	post	office,	or	public	kiosk.	It's	important	to	remember	that	the
question	of	universal	access	arises	only	if	the	highway	is	immensely
successful—more	successful	than	many	commentators	expect.	Amazingly,
some	of	the	same	critics	who	complain	the	highway	will	be	so	popular	it	will
cause	problems	also	complain	it	won't	be	popular	at	all.
The	fully	developed	information	highway	will	be	affordable—almost	by
definition.	An	expensive	system	that	connected	a	few	big	corporations	and
wealthy	people	simply	would	not	be	the	information	highway—it	would	be
the	information	private	road.	The	network	will	not	attract	enough	great
content	to	thrive	if	only	the	most	affluent	10	percent	of	society	choose	to	avail
themselves	of	it.	There	are	fixed	costs	to	authoring	material;	so	to	make	them
affordable,	a	large	audience	is	required.	Advertising	revenue	won't	support	the
highway	if	a	majority	of	eligible	people	don't	embrace	it.	If	that	is	the	case,
the	price	for	connecting	will	have	to	be	cut	or	deployment	delayed	while	the
system	is	redesigned	to	be	more	attractive.	The	information	highway	is	a	mass
phenomenon,	or	it	is	nothing.
Eventually	the	costs	of	computing	and	communications	will	be	so	low,	and
the	competitive	environment	so	open,	that	much	of	the	entertainment	and
information	offered	on	the	highway	will	cost	very	little.	Advertising	income
will	allow	a	lot	of	content	to	be	free.	However,	most	service	providers,
whether	they	are	rock	bands	or	consulting	engineers	or	book	publishers,	will
still	ask	that	users	make	a	payment.	So	the	information	highway	will	be
affordable,	if	used	judiciously,	but	it	won't	be	free.
A	large	portion	of	the	money	you	will	spend	on	highway	services	you	spend
today	for	the	same	services	in	other	forms.	In	the	past	you	may	have	shifted
money	you	spent	on	records	to	buying	compact	discs,	or	from	movie	tickets
to	videotape	rentals.	Soon	your	spending	for	videotape	rentals	will	go	to
video-on-demand	movies.	You	will	redirect	part	of	what	you	now	spend	on
printed-periodical	subscriptions	to	interactive	information	services	and
communities.	Most	of	the	money	that	now	goes	to	local	telephone	service,
long-distance	service,	and	cable	television	will	be	available	to	spend	on	the
highway.

Access	to	government	information,	medical	advice,	bulletin	boards,	and	some
educational	material	will	be	free.	Once	people	are	on	the	highway,	they	will
enjoy	full	egalitarian	access	to	vital	on-line	resources.	Within	twenty	years,	as
commerce,	education,	and	broad-scale	communications	services	move	onto
the	highway,	an	individual's	ability	to	be	part	of	mainstream	society	will
depend,	at	least	in	part,	on	his	or	her	using	it.	Society	will	then	have	to	decide
how	to	subsidize	broad	access	so	that	all	users	will	be	equal,	both
geographically	and	socioeconomically.
Education	is	not	the	entire	answer	to	the	challenges	presented	by	the
Information	Age,	but	it	is	part	of	the	answer,	just	as	education	is	part	of	the
answer	to	a	range	of	society's	problems.	H.	G.	Wells,	who	was	as	imaginative
and	forward-looking	as	any	futurist,	summed	it	up	back	in	1920.	"Human
history,"	he	said,	"becomes	more	and	more	a	race	between	education	and
catastrophe"	Education	is	society's	great	leveler,	and	any	improvement	in
education	goes	a	long	way	toward	equalizing	opportunity.	Part	of	the	beauty
of	the	electronic	world	is	that	the	extra	cost	of	letting	additional	people	use
educational	material	is	basically	zero.
Your	education	in	personal	computers	can	be	informal.	As	I've	said,	my
fascination	began	with	game	playing,	as	years	later	Warren	Buffett's	did.	My
dad	got	hooked	when	he	used	a	computer	to	help	him	prepare	his	taxes.	If
computers	seem	intimidating	to	you,	why	not	try	doing	the	same	sort	of
thing?	Find	something	a	personal	computer	does	that	will	make	your	life
easier	or	more	fun	and	latch	on	to	that	as	a	way	of	getting	more	involved.
Write	a	screenplay;	do	your	banking	from	home;	help	your	child	with	her
homework.	It	is	worth	making	the	effort	to	establish	a	level	of	comfort	with
computers.	If	you	give	them	a	chance,	you	will	most	likely	be	won	over.	If
personal	computing	still	seems	too	hard	or	confusing,	it	doesn't	mean	you
aren't	smart	enough.	It	means	we	still	have	work	to	do	to	make	them	easier.
The	younger	you	are,	the	more	important	this	is.	If	you	are	fifty	or	older
today,	you	may	be	out	of	the	workforce	before	you'll	need	to	learn	to	use	a
computer—although	I	think	if	you	don't	learn,	you'll	be	missing	out	on	the
chance	for	an	amazing	experience.	But	if	you	are	twenty-five	today	and	not
comfortable	with	computers,	you	risk	being	ineffective	in	almost	any	kind	of
work	you	pursue.	To	begin	with,	finding	a	job	will	be	easier	if	you	have
embraced	the	computer	as	a	tool.
Ultimately,	the	information	highway	is	not	for	my	generation	or	those	before
me.	It	is	for	future	generations.	The	kids	who	have	grown	up	with	PCs	in	the
last	decade,	and	those	who	will	grow	up	with	the	highway	in	the	next,	will

push	the	technology	to	its	limits.
We	have	to	pay	particular	attention	to	correcting	the	gender	imbalance.	When
I	was	young,	it	seemed	that	only	boys	were	encouraged	to	mess	around	with
computers.	Girls	are	far	more	active	with	computers	today	than	twenty	years
ago,	but	there	are	still	many	fewer	women	in	technical	careers.	By	making
sure	that	girls	as	well	as	boys	become	comfortable	with	c======================================================== oduct	of	two	primes
would	take	millions	of	years	to	factor	with	any	foreseeable	amount	of	future
computing	power.	But	who	really	knows.	This	uncertainty—and	the	unlikely
but	conceivable	possibility	that	someone	could	come	up	with	an	easy	way	of
factoring	big	numbers—means	that	a	software	platform	for	the	information
highway	will	have	to	be	designed	in	such	a	way	that	its	encryption	scheme
can	be	changed	readily.
One	thing	we	don't	have	to	worry	about	is	running	out	of	prime	numbers,	or
the	prospect	of	two	computers'	accidentally	using	the	same	numbers	as	keys.
There	are	far	more	prime	numbers	of	appropriate	length	than	there	are	atoms
in	the	universe,	so	the	chance	of	an	accidental	duplication	is	vanishingly
small.
Key	encryption	allows	more	than	just	privacy.	It	can	also	assure	the
authenticity	of	a	document	because	a	private	key	can	be	used	to	encode	a
message	that	only	the	public	key	can	decode.	It	works	like	this:	If	I	have
information	I	want	to	sign	before	sending	it	to	you,	my	computer	uses	my
private	key	to	encipher	it.	Now	the	message	can	be	read	only	if	my	public	key
—which	you	and	everyone	else	knows—is	used	to	decipher	it.	This	message
is	verifiably	from	me,	because	no	one	else	has	the	private	key	that	could	have
encrypted	it	in	this	way.
My	computer	takes	this	enciphered	message	and	enciphers	it	again,	this	time
using	your	public	key.	Then	it	sends	this	double-coded	message	to	you	across
the	information	highway.
Your	computer	receives	the	message	and	uses	your	private	key	to	decipher	it.
This	removes	the	second	level	of	encoding	but	leaves	the	level	I	applied	with
my	private	key.	Then	your	computer	uses	my	public	key	to	decipher	the
message	again.	Because	it	really	is	from	me,	the	message	deciphers	correctly
and	you	know	it	is	authentic.	If	even	one	bit	of	information	was	changed,	the
message	would	not	decode	properly	and	the	tampering	or	communications
error	would	be	apparent.	This	extraordinary	security	will	enable	you	to
transact	business	with	strangers	or	even	people	you	distrust,	because	you'll	be
able	to	be	sure	that	digital	money	is	valid	and	signatures	and	documents	are
provably	authentic.
Security	can	be	increased	further	by	having	time	stamps	incorporated	into
encrypted	messages.	If	anyone	tries	to	tinker	with	the	time	that	a	document

supposedly	was	written	or	sent,	the	tinkering	will	be	detectable.	This	will
rehabilitate	the	evidentiary	value	of	photographs	and	videos,	which	has	been
under	assault	because	digital	retouching	has	become	so	easy	to	do.
My	description	of	public-key	encryption	oversimplifies	the	technical	details
of	the	system.	For	one	thing,	because	it	is	relatively	slow,	it	will	not	be	the
only	form	of	encipherment	used	on	the	highway.	But	public-key	encryption
will	be	the	way	that	documents	are	signed,	authenticity	is	established,	and	the
keys	to	other	kinds	of	encryption	are	distributed	securely.
The	major	benefit	of	the	PC	revolution	has	been	the	way	it	has	empowered
people.	The	highway's	low-cost	communications	will	empower	in	an	even
more	fundamental	way.	The	beneficiaries	won't	just	be	technology-oriented
individuals.	As	more	and	more	computers	are	connected	to	high-bandwidth
networks,	and	as	software	platforms	provide	a	foundation	for	great
applications,	everyone	will	have	access	to	most	of	the	world's	information.

6
THE	CONTENT
REVOLUTION
For	more	than	500	years,	the	bulk	of	human	knowledge	and	information	has
been	stored	as	paper	documents.	You've	got	one	in	your	hands	right	now
(unless	you're	reading	this	from	the	CD-ROM	or	a	future	on-line	edition).
Paper	will	be	with	us	indefinitely,	but	its	importance	as	a	means	of	finding,
preserving,	and	distributing	information	is	already	diminishing.
When	you	think	of	a	"document"	you	probably	visualize	pieces	of	paper	with
something	printed	on	them,	but	that	is	a	narrow	definition.	A	document	can	be
any	body	of	information.	A	newspaper	article	is	a	document,	but	the	broadest
definition	also	includes	a	television	show,	a	song,	or	an	interactive	video
game.	Because	all	information	can	be	stored	in	a	digital	form,	documents	will
be	easy	to	find,	store,	and	send	on	the	highway.	Paper	is	harder	to	transmit
and	very	limiting	if	the	contents	are	more	than	text	with	drawings	and	images.
Future	digitally	stored	documents	will	include	pictures,	audio,	programming
instructions	for	interactivity,	and	animation,	or	a	combination	of	these	and
other	elements.
On	the	information	highway,	rich	electronic	documents	will	be	able	to	do
things	no	piece	of	paper	can.	The	highway's	powerful	database	technology
will	allow	them	to	be	indexed	and	retrieved	using	interactive	exploration.	It
will	be	extremely	cheap	and	easy	to	distribute	them.	In	short,	these	new
digital	documents	will	replace	many	printed	paper	ones	because	they	will	be
able	to	help	us	in	new	ways.
But	not	for	quite	some	time.	The	paper-based	book,	magazine,	or	newspaper
still	has	a	lot	of	advantages	over	its	digital	counterpart.	To	read	a	digital
document	you	need	an	information	appliance	such	as	a	personal	computer.	A
book	is	small,	lightweight,	high-resolution,	and	inexpensive	compared	to	the
cost	of	a	computer.	For	at	least	a	decade	it	won't	be	as	convenient	to	read	a
long,	sequential	document	on	a	computer	screen	as	on	paper.	The	first	digital
documents	to	achieve	widespread	use	will	do	so	by	offering	new	functionality
rather	than	simply	duplicating	the	older	medium.	A	television	set	is	also
larger,	more	expensive,	more	cumbersome,	and	lower	resolution	than	a	book
or	magazine,	but	that	hasn't	limited	its	popularity.	Television	brought	video

entertainment	into	our	homes,	and	it	was	so	compelling	that	television	sets
found	their	place	alongside	books	and	magazines.
Ultimately,	incremental	improvements	in	computer	and	screen	technology
will	give	us	a	lightweight,	universal	electronic	book,	or	"e-book,"	which	will
approximate	today's	paper	book.	Inside	a	case	roughly	the	same	size	and
weight	as	today's	hardcover	or	paperback	book,	you'll	have	a	display	that	can
show	high-resolution	text,	pictures,	and	video.	You'll	be	able	to	flip	pages
with	your	finger	or	use	voice	commands	to	search	for	the	passages	you	want.
Any	document	on	the	network	will	be	accessible	from	such	a	device.
The	real	point	of	electronic	documents	is	not	simply	that	we	will	read	them	on
hardware	devices.	Going	from	paper	book	to	e-book	is	just	the	final	stage	of	a
process	already	well	under	way.	The	exciting	aspect	of	digital	documentation
is	the	redefinition	of	the	document	itself.
This	will	cause	dramatic	repercussions.	We	will	have	to	rethink	not	only	what
is	meant	by	the	term	"document,"	but	also	by	"author,"	"publisher,"	"office,"
"classroom,"	and	"textbook."
Today,	if	two	companies	are	negotiating	a	contract,	the	first	draft	is	probably
typed	into	a	computer,	then	printed	on	paper.	Chances	are	it	is	then	faxed	to
the	other	party,	who	edits,	amends,	and	alters	it	by	writing	on	the	paper	or	by
reentering	the	changed	document	into	another	computer,	from	which	it	is
printed.	He	then	faxes	it	back;	the	changes	are	incorporated;	a	new	paper
document	is	printed	and	faxed	back	again;	and	the	editing	process	is	repeated.
During	this	transaction	it	is	hard	to	tell	who	made	which	changes.
Coordinating	all	the	alterations	and	transmittals	introduces	a	lot	of	overhead.
Electronic	documents	can	simplify	this	process	by	allowing	a	version	of	the
contract	to	be	passed	back	and	forth	with	corrections	and	annotations	and
indications	who	made	them	and	when	printed	alongside	the	original	text.
Within	a	few	years	the	digital	document,	complete	with	authenticatable	digital
signatures,	will	be	the	original,	and	paper	printouts	will	be	secondary.	Already
many	businesses	are	advancing	beyond	paper	and	fax	machines	and
exchanging	editable	documents,	computer	to	computer,	through	electronic
mail.	This	book	would	have	been	much	harder	to	write	without	e-mail.
Readers	whose	opinions	I	was	soliciting	were	sent	drafts	electronically,	and	it
was	helpful	to	be	able	to	look	at	the	suggested	revisions	and	see	who	had
made	them	and	when.
By	the	end	of	the	decade	a	significant	percentage	of	documents,	even	in
offices,	won't	even	be	fully	printable	on	paper.	They	will	be	like	a	movie	or	a

song	is	today.	You	will	still	be	able	to	print	a	two-dimensional	view	of	its
content,	but	it	will	be	like	reading	a	musical	score	instead	of	experiencing	an
audio	recording.
Some	documents	are	so	superior	in	digital	form	that	the	paper	version	is
rarely	used.	Boeing	decided	to	design	its	new	777	jetliner	using	a	gigantic
electronic	document	to	hold	all	the	engineering	information.	To	coordinate
collaboration	among	the	design	teams,	manufacturing	groups	and	outside
contractors	during	development	of	previous	airplanes,	Boeing	had	used
blueprints	and	constructed	an	expensive	full-scale	mock-up	of	the	airplane.
The	mock-up	had	been	necessary	to	make	sure	that	parts	of	the	airplane,
designed	by	different	engineers,	actually	fit	together	properly.	During
development	of	the	777,	Boeing	did	away	with	blueprints	and	the	mock-up
and	from	the	start	used	an	electronic	document	that	contained	digital	3-D
models	of	all	the	parts	and	how	they	fit	together.	Engineers	at	computer
terminals	were	able	to	look	at	the	design	and	see	different	views	of	the
content.	They	could	track	the	progress	in	any	area,	search	for	interesting	test
results,	annotate	with	cost	information,	and	change	any	part	of	the	design	in
ways	that	would	be	impossible	on	paper.	Each	person,	working	with	the	same
data,	was	able	to	look	for	what	specifically	concerned	him.	Every	change
could	be	shared,	and	everyone	could	see	who	made	any	change,	when	it	was
made,	and	why.	Boeing	was	able	to	save	hundreds	of	thousands	of	pieces	of
paper	and	many	person-years	of	drafting	and	copying	by	using	digital
documents.
Digital	documents	can	also	be	faster	to	work	with	than	paper.	You	can
transmit	information	instantly	and	retrieve	it	almost	as	quickly.	Those	using
digital	documents	are	already	discovering	how	much	sim======================================================== kets	already	served	by	others.	Interestingly,	in	the	cable	TV	business,	the
few	places	a	second	system	was	constructed,	the	"overbuilder"	never	made
money.	Having	two	or	more	general-purpose	connections	running	into	every
home	would	aid	competition,	but	the	extra	cost	is	immense.
Servers	for	the	information	highway	will	have	to	be	large	computers	with
gigantic	storage	capacity	that	run	twenty-four	hours	a	day,	seven	days	a	week.
Competition	to	supply	them	will	be	intense.	Various	companies	have	different
ideas	about	the	right	design	for	the	servers,	and	strategies	for	developing
them.	Not	surprisingly,	the	positions	held	by	the	various	potential	competitors
are	influenced	by	their	areas	of	expertise.	If	your	only	tool	is	a	hammer,	pretty
soon	every	new	problem	starts	to	look	like	a	nail	that	needs	pounding.	Mini-
computer	companies	such	as	Hewlett	Packard	envision	using	clusters	of	mini-
computers	as	servers.	A	variety	of	companies	that	primarily	make	personal
computers	believe	that	inexpensive	PCs,	connected	together	in	large	numbers,
will	prove	to	be	the	most	cost-effective	and	reliable	approach.	Mainframe
specialists	such	as	IBM	are	adapting	their	big	machines	to	be	servers.	They
cherish	a	fond	hope	that	the	information	highway	will	be	the	last	bastion	of
Big	Iron.
Software	companies	naturally	see	their	product	as	the	answer.	Software	is	so
inexpensive	to	duplicate	that	substituting	it	for	costly	hardware	reduces
system	costs.	Another	competition	is	shaping	up	to	supply	the	software
platforms	that	will	run	these	servers.	Oracle,	a	database-management
company	that	makes	software	for	mainframes	and	mini-computers,	envisions
the	server	as	a	supercomputer	or	mini-computer	running	Oracle	software.
AT&T,	with	its	experience	in	the	network	business,	will	probably	try	to

embed	most	of	the	system's	intelligence	in	the	servers	and	switches	of	the
network	and	put	relatively	little	processing	power	in	information	appliances
such	as	PCs	and	set-top	boxes.
At	Microsoft,	our	only	"hammer"	is	software.	We	expect	that	the	highway's
intelligence	will	be	evenly	divided	between	servers	and	information
appliances.	This	arrangement	is	sometimes	called	"client/server"	computing,
which	means	that	the	information	appliances	(the	clients)	and	the	servers	will
run	cooperating	software	applications.	We	don't	believe	that	giant
supercomputers,	mainframes,	or	even	clusters	of	mini-computers	will	be
necessary.	Instead,	Microsoft,	like	many	of	the	PC	manufacturers,	sees	the
server	as	a	network	of	dozens	to	hundreds	of	what	are	essentially	personal
computers.	They	won't	have	the	familiar	cases,	monitors,	and	keyboards,	and
may	be	housed	together	in	large	racks	at	the	headquarters	of	a	cable	system	or
the	central	office	of	a	telephone	system.	It	will	take	special	software
technology	to	harness	the	computing	horsepower	of	thousands	of	such
machines.	Our	approach	is	to	make	the	coordination	of	the	highway	a
software	problem	and	then	use	the	highest-volume	(and	therefore	cheapest)
computers	to	do	the	work—the	same	ones	used	in	the	PC	industry.
Our	approach	focuses	on	taking	full	advantage	of	all	the	advances	going	on	in
the	PC	industry,	including	the	software.	The	PC	will	be	one	of	the	primary
devices	used	on	the	highway.	We	think	the	set-top	box	should	share	as	many
technical	features	as	possible	with	the	PC	to	make	it	easy	for	developers	to
create	applications	and	services	that	will	work	with	both.	This	will	allow	the
Internet	to	evolve	upward	into	the	highway	in	a	compatible	fashion.	We
believe	tools	and	applications	available	on	the	PC	today	can	be	used	to	build
new	applications.	For	instance,	we	think	set-top	boxes	should	be	able	to	run
most	of	the	CD-ROM	titles	for	PCs	that	will	appear	over	the	next	decade.	One
could	argue	that	we	are	thinking	too	narrowly	by	trying	to	imagine	the	new
world	in	terms	of	the	PC.	But	there	are	more	than	50	million	PCs	sold	every
year	worldwide.	The	population	of	installed	PCs	will	provide	a	substantial
starter	market	for	a	prospective	developer	of	any	application	or	service.
Even	if	there	were	suddenly	a	million	of	one	type	of	set-top	box	in	use,	it	still
would	represent	a	tiny	market	compared	to	the	opportunity	for	multi-media
titles	for	the	PC.	A	developer	could	afford	to	spend	only	a	small	fraction	of	its
R&D	on	customers	with	these	specialized	boxes.	Only	the	very	largest
companies	are	able	to	invest	in	new	applications	without	concerning
themselves	about	the	near-term	audience	size.	We	believe	that	most	of	the
innovation	that	will	occur	will	be	extending	existing	markets,	and	that	using
the	PC/Internet	market	is	the	likeliest	means	of	extending	to	interactive	TV

and	the	highway.	But	similar	arguments	could	be	made	in	favor	of	other
computer	platforms	or	even	home	game	machines.
Other	software	companies	are	equally	confident	about	their	own	strategies	for
set-top	box	software.	Apple	proposes	to	use	Macintosh	technology,	and
Silicon	Graphics	intends	to	adapt	its	workstation	operating	system,	which	is	a
form	of	UNIX.	One	small	company	even	wants	to	repurpose	an	operating
system	that	is	currently	used	primarily	in	the	antilock-brake	systems	of
commercial	trucks!
Hardware	manufacturers	are	making	similar	decisions	about	which	approach
to	set-top	boxes	they	want	to	take.	Meanwhile,	consumer-electronics
companies	are	determining	what	sorts	of	information	appliances—from	wallet
PCs	to	TVs	they	will	build	and	what	software	they	will	use.
The	battle	among	software	architectures	will	play	out	over	a	long	period	and
may	involve	potential	competitors	who	have	not	yet	declared	their	interest.
All	software	components	will	be	compatible	to	a	degree,	the	way	all	of
today's	computer	systems	share	certain	degrees	of	compatibility.	You	can
connect	nearly	any	computer	to	the	Internet,	and	the	same	will	be	true	for	the
highway.
There	are	open	questions	such	as	to	what	extent	these	platforms	will	share	a
personality	or	user	interface.	A	single	common	user	interface	is	great—unless
you	happen	not	to	like	it.	Will	Mom,	Dad,	Grandma,	the	preschooler,	and	the
Generation	X-er	all	have	the	same	taste?	Must	one	size	fit	all	in	this,	the	most
flexible	medium?	Here,	too,	good	arguments	can	be	made	in	all	directions,	so
interface	is	another	area	in	which	the	industry	will	have	to	experiment,
innovate,	and	let	the	market	decide.
There	are	other,	similar	decisions	awaiting	the	judgment	of	the	marketplace.
For	instance,	will	advertising	play	a	large	role	in	underwriting	information
and	entertainment,	or	will	customers	pay	directly	for	most	services?	Will	you
control	all	of	what	you	see	when	you	first	turn	on	a	TV	or	other	information
appliance,	or	will	your	network	provider	get	some	part	of	your	first	screen	to
show	you	information	it	controls?
The	market	will	also	influence	technical	aspects	of	network	design.	Most
experts	believe	that	the	interactive	network	will	use	asynchronous	transfer
mode	(ATM),	but	today	ATM	costs	too	much	to	use.	If	ATM	equipment	prices
behave	like	other	chip-related	technologies,	they	will	come	down	rapidly.
However,	if	for	some	reason	they	stay	high	or	don't	drop	quickly	enough,
signals	may	have	to	be	translated	into	some	other	form	before	they	enter	a

consumer's	home.
A	wide	range	of	skills,	from	a	wide	range	of	companies,	will	be	necessary	to
put	the	information	highway	together	sufficiently	for	a	mass	market	to	begin.
It	will	be	tempting	for	a	company	strong	in	one	or	more	of	the	necessary
disciplines	to	try	to	find	a	way	to	do	every	piece	and	ignite	the	market	all	by
itself,	but	I	think	this	would	be	a	mistake.
I	have	always	believed	businesses	that	concentrate	on	a	very	few	core
competencies	will	do	the	best.	One	of	the	lessons	of	the	computer	industry—
as	well	as	of	life—is	that	it	is	almost	impossible	to	do	everything	well.	IBM
and	DEC	and	other	companies	in	the	old	computer	industry	tried	offering
everything,	including	chips,	software,	systems,	and	consulting.	When	the	pace
of	technology	was	accelerated	by	the	microprocessor	and	PC	standards,	the
diversified	strategy	proved	vulnerable,	because,	over	time,	competitors	who
had	focused	on	specific	areas	did	better.	One	company	did	great	chips,
another	did	great	PC	design,	yet	another	did	great	distribution	and	integration.
Each	successful	new	company	picked	a	narrow	slice	and	focused	on	it.
Beware!	Mergers	that	are	attempts	to	bring	all	aspects	of	highway	expertise
into	one	organization	should	be	viewed	skeptically.	Much	of	the	press
coverage	about	the	highway	has	concerned	just	such	huge	business	deals.
Media	companies	are	merging	and	trying	different	configurations.	Some
phone	companies	are	buying	cable	companies.	McCaw	Cellular	wireless
communications	company	was	bought	by	wire-based	AT&T.	Disney	has
purchased	Capital	Cities-ABC	and	Time-Warner	proposed	buying	Turner
Broadcasting.	It	will	be	a	long	time	before	the	corporations	making	these
investments	can	assess	how	wise	they	were.
Right	or	wrong,	deals	like	these	fascinate	the	public.	For	example,	when	the
proposed	$30	billion	merger	between	Bell	Atlantic	and	TCI	fell	through,	the
press	speculated	about	whether	it	was	a	setback	for	the	information	highway.
The	answer	is	no.	Both	companies	still	have	very	aggressive	investment	plans
for	building	the	highway's	infrastructure.
The	highway's	arrival	will	depend	on	the	evolution	of	the	PC,	the	Internet,
and	new	applications.	Companies	merging,	or	failing	to	merge,	is	no
indication	of	progress	or	the	lack	of	it.	The	deals	are	like	background	noise;
they	keep	rumbling	along	whether	or	not	anyone	is	listening.	Microsoft	plans
to	reach	out	to	hundreds	of	companies,	including	movie	studios,	television
networks,	and	newspaper	and	magazine	publishers.	We	hope	to	work	with
them	so	that	together	we	can	assemble	their	respective	content	assets	and

build	applications	for	CD-ROMs,	the	Internet,	and	the	highway.
We	believe	in	alliances	and	are	eager	to	participate	in	them.	Our	core	mission,
however,	is	to	build	a	number	of	software	components	for	the	information
h======================================================== will	connect	to	the	wireless	part	of	the	highway,	a	switch	will
connect	that	to	the	wired	part,	and	then	to	the	computer/server	in	your	home
or	office	and	bring	you	the	information	you	asked	for.
There	will	also	be	local,	less	expensive	kinds	of	wireless	networks	available
inside	businesses	and	most	homes.	These	networks	will	allow	you	to	connect
to	the	highway	or	your	own	computer	system	without	paying	time	charges	so
long	as	you	are	within	a	certain	range.	Local	wireless	networks	will	use
technology	different	from	the	one	used	by	the	wide-area	wireless	networks.
However,	portable	information	devices	will	automatically	select	the	least
expensive	network	they	are	able	to	connect	to,	so	the	user	won't	be	aware	of
the	technological	differences.	The	indoor	wireless	networks	will	allow	wallet
PCs	to	be	used	in	place	of	remote	controls.
Wireless	service	poses	obvious	concerns	about	privacy	and	security,	because
radio	signals	can	easily	be	intercepted.	Even	wired	networks	can	be	tapped.
The	highway	software	will	have	to	encrypt	transmission	to	avoid
eavesdropping.
Governments	have	long	understood	the	importance	of	keeping	information
private,	for	both	economic	and	military	reasons.	The	need	to	make	personal,
commercial,	military,	or	diplomatic	messages	secure	(or	to	break	into	them)
has	attracted	powerful	intellects	through	the	generations.	It	is	very	satisfying
to	break	an	encoded	message.	Charles	Babbage,	who	made	dramatic	advances
in	the	art	of	code	breaking	in	the	mid-1800s,	wrote:	"Deciphering	is,	in	my
opinion,	one	of	the	most	fascinating	of	arts,	and	I	fear	I	have	wasted	upon	it
more	time	than	it	deserves."	I	discovered	its	fascination	as	a	kid	when,	like
kids	everywhere,	a	bunch	of	us	played	with	simple	ciphers.	We	would	encode
messages	by	substituting	one	letter	of	the	alphabet	for	another.	If	a	friend	sent
me	a	cipher	that	began	"ULFW	NZXX"	it	would	be	fairly	easy	to	guess	that
this	represented	"DEAR	BILL,"	and	that	U	stood	for	D,	and	L	for	E,	and	so
forth.	With	those	seven	letters	it	wasn't	hard	to	unravel	the	rest	of	the	cipher
fairly	quickly.

Past	wars	have	been	won	or	lost	because	the	most	powerful	governments	on
earth	didn't	have	the	cryptological	power	any	interested	junior	high	school
student	with	a	personal	computer	can	harness	today.	Soon	any	child	old
enough	to	use	a	computer	will	be	able	to	transmit	encoded	messages	that	no
government	on	earth	will	find	easy	to	decipher.	This	is	one	of	the	profound
implications	of	the	spread	of	fantastic	computing	power.
When	you	send	a	message	across	the	information	highway	it	will	be	"signed"
by	your	computer	or	other	information	appliance	with	a	digital	signature	that
only	you	are	capable	of	applying,	and	it	will	be	encrypted	so	that	only	the
intended	recipient	will	be	able	to	decipher	it.	You'll	send	a	message,	which
could	be	information	of	any	kind,	including	voice,	video,	or	digital	money.
The	recipient	will	be	able	to	be	almost	positive	that	the	message	is	really	from
you,	that	it	was	sent	at	exactly	the	indicated	time,	that	it	has	not	been
tampered	with	in	the	slightest,	and	that	others	cannot	decipher	it.
The	mechanism	that	will	make	this	possible	is	based	on	mathematical
principles,	including	what	are	called	"one-way	functions"	and	"public-key
encryption."	These	are	quite	advanced	concepts,	so	I'm	only	going	to	touch	on
them.	Keep	in	mind	that	regardless	of	how	complicated	the	system	is
technically,	it	will	be	extremely	easy	for	you	to	use.	You'll	just	tell	your
information	appliance	what	you	want	it	to	do	and	it	will	seem	to	happen
effortlessly.
A	one-way	function	is	something	that	is	much	easier	to	do	than	undo.
Breaking	a	pane	of	glass	is	a	one-way	function,	but	not	one	useful	for
encoding.	The	sort	of	one-way	function	required	for	cryptography	is	one	that
is	easy	to	undo	if	you	know	an	extra	piece	of	information	and	very	difficult	to
undo	without	that	information.	There	are	a	number	of	such	one-way	functions
in	mathematics.	One	involves	prime	numbers.	Kids	learn	about	prime
numbers	in	school.	A	prime	number	cannot	be	divided	evenly	by	any	number
except	1	and	itself.	Among	the	first	dozen	numbers,	the	primes	are	2,	3,	5,	7,
and	11.	The	numbers	4,	6,	8,	and	10	are	not	prime	because	2	divides	into	each
of	them	evenly.	The	number	9	is	not	prime	because	3	divides	into	it	evenly.
There	are	an	infinite	number	of	prime	numbers,	and	there	is	no	known	pattern
to	them	except	that	they	are	prime.	When	you	multiply	two	prime	numbers
together,	you	get	a	number	that	can	be	divided	evenly	only	by	those	same	two
primes.	For	example,	only	5	and	7	can	be	divided	evenly	into	35.	Finding	the
primes	is	called	"factoring"	the	number.
It	is	easy	to	multiply	the	prime	numbers	11,927	and	20,903	and	get	the
number	249,310,081,	but	it	is	much	harder	to	recover	from	the	product,

249,310,081,	the	two	prime	numbers	that	are	its	factors.	This	one-way
function,	the	difficulty	of	factoring	numbers,	underlies	an	ingenious	kind	of
cipher:	the	most	sophisticated	encryption	system	in	use	today.	It	takes	a	long
time	for	even	the	largest	computers	to	factor	a	really	large	product	back	into
its	constituent	primes.	A	coding	system	based	on	factoring	uses	two	different
decoding	keys,	one	to	encipher	a	message	and	a	different	but	related	one	to
decipher.	With	only	the	enciphering	key,	it's	easy	to	encode	a	message,	but
deciphering	it	within	any	practical	period	of	time	is	nearly	impossible.
Deciphering	requires	a	separate	key,	available	only	to	the	intended	recipient
of	the	message—or,	rather,	to	the	recipient's	computer.	The	enciphering	key	is
based	on	the	product	of	two	huge	prime	numbers,	whereas	the	deciphering
key	is	based	on	the	primes	themselves.	A	computer	can	generate	a	new	pair	of
unique	keys	in	a	flash,	because	it	is	easy	for	a	computer	to	generate	two	large
prime	numbers	and	multiply	them	together.	The	enciphering	key	thus	created
can	be	made	public	without	appreciable	risk,	because	of	the	difficulty	even
another	computer	would	have	factoring	it	to	obtain	the	deciphering	key.
The	practical	application	of	this	encryption	will	be	at	the	center	of	the
information	highway's	security	system.	The	world	will	become	quite	reliant
on	this	network,	so	it	is	important	that	security	be	handled	competently.	You
can	think	of	the	information	highway	as	a	postal	network	where	everyone	has
a	mailbox	that	is	impervious	to	tampering	and	has	an	unbreakable	lock.	Each
mailbox	has	a	slot	that	lets	anyone	slide	information	in,	but	only	the	owner	of
a	mailbox	has	the	key	to	get	information	out.	(Some	governments	may	insist
that	each	mailbox	have	a	second	door	with	a	separate	key	that	the	government
keeps,	but	we'll	ignore	that	political	consideration	for	now	and	concentrate	on
the	security	that	software	will	provide.)
Each	user's	computer	or	other	information	appliance	will	use	prime	numbers
to	generate	an	enciphering	key,	which	will	be	listed	publicly,	and	a
corresponding	deciphering	key,	which	only	the	user	will	know.	This	is	how	it
will	work	in	practice:	I	have	information	I	want	to	send	you.	My	information
appliance/computer	system	looks	up	your	public	key	and	uses	it	to	encrypt	the
information	before	sending	it.	No	one	can	read	the	message,	even	though	your
key	is	public	knowledge,	because	your	public	key	does	not	contain	the
information	needed	for	decryption.	You	receive	the	message	and	your
computer	decrypts	it	with	a	private	key	that	corresponds	to	your	public	key.
You	want	to	answer.	Your	computer	looks	up	my	public	key	and	uses	it	to
encrypt	your	reply.	No	one	else	can	read	the	message,	even	though	it	was
encrypted	with	a	key	that	is	totally	public.	Only	I	can	read	it	because	only	I
have	the	private	deciphering	key.	This	is	very	practical,	because	no	one	has	to

trade	keys	in	advance.
How	big	do	the	prime	numbers	and	their	products	have	to	be	to	ensure	an
effective	one-way	function?.
The	concept	of	public-key	encryption	was	invented	by	Whitfield	Diffie	and
Martin	Hellman	in	1977.	Another	set	of	computer	scientists,	Ron	Rivest,	Adi
Shamir,	and	Leonard	Adelman,	soon	came	up	with	the	notion	of	using	prime
factorization	as	part	of	what	is	now	known	as	the	RSA	cryptosystem,	after	the
initials	of	their	last	names.	They	projected	that	it	would	take	millions	of	years
to	factor	a	130-digit	number	that	was	the	product	of	two	primes,	regardless	of
how	much	computing	power	was	brought	to	bear.	To	prove	the	point,	they
challenged	the	world	to	find	the	two	factors	in	this	129-digit	number,	known
to	people	in	the	field	as	RSA	129:
114,381,625,757,888,867,669,235,779,976,146,612,010,218,296,
721,242,362,562,561,842,935,706,935,245,733,897,830,597,123,563,958,705,058,989,075,147,599,29.0,026,879,543,541
They	were	sure	that	a	message	they	had	encrypted	using	the	number	as	the
public	key	would	be	totally	secure	forever.	But	they	hadn't	anticipated	either
the	full	effects	of	Moore's	Law,	as	discussed	in	chapter	2,	which	has	made
computers	much	more	powerful,	or	the	success	of	the	personal	computer,
which	has	dramatically	increased	the	number	of	computers	and	computer
users	in	the	world.	In	1993	a	group	of	more	than	600	academics	and	hobbyists
from	around	the	world	began	an	assault	on	the	129-digit	number,	using	the
Internet	to	coordinate	the	work	of	various	computers.	In	less	than	a	year	they
factored	the	number	into	two	primes,	one	64	digits	long	and	the	other	65.	The
primes	are	as	follows:
3,490,529,510,847,650,949,147,849,619,903,898,133,417,764,638,
493,387,843,990,820,577
and
32,769,132,993,266,709,549,961,988,190,834,461,413,177,642,
967,992,942,539,798,288,533
And	the	encoded	message	says:	"The	magic	words	are	squeamish	and
ossifrage."
One	lesson	that	came	out	of	this	challenge	is	that	a	129-digit	public	key	is	not
long	enough	if	the	information	being	encrypted	is	really	important	and
sensitive.	Another	is	that	no	one	should	get	too	cocksure	about	the	security	of

encryption.
Increasing	the	key	just	a	few	digits	makes	it	much	more	difficult	to	crack.
Mathematicians	today	believe	that	a	250-digit-long	pr======================================================== ected	to	the	highway	will	help	teachers	monitor,	evaluate,	and
guide	student	performance.	Teachers	will	continue	to	give	homework,	but
soon	their	assignments	will	include	hypertext	references	to	electronic	resource
material.	Students	will	create	their	own	links	and	use	multi-media	elements	in
their	homework,	which	will	then	be	submitted	electronically	on	a	diskette	or
across	the	highway.	Teachers	will	be	able	to	keep	a	cumulative	record	of	a
student's	work,	which	can	be	reviewed	at	any	time	or	shared	with	other
instructors.
Special	software	programs	will	help	summarize	information	on	the	skills,
progress,	interests,	and	expectations	of	students.	Once	teachers	have	enough
information	on	a	student	and	are	relieved	of	a	lot	of	tedious	paperwork,	they
will	have	more	energy	and	time	to	meet	the	revealed	individual	needs	of	that
student.	This	information	will	be	used	to	tailor	classroom	materials	and
homework	assignments.	Teachers	and	parents	will	also	be	able	to	review	and
discuss	the	particulars	of	a	child's	progress	easily.	As	a	result	of	this—and	of
the	common	availability	of	videoconferences—the	potential	for	strong	parent-
teacher	collaboration	will	grow.	Parents	will	be	in	a	better	position	to	help

their	children,	whether	by	creating	informal	study	groups	with	other	parents
or	by	seeking	additional	assistance	for	their	children.
Parents	may	also	help	their	children	at	school	by	teaching	them	to	use	the
software	they	use	in	their	work.	Some	teachers	and	staff	are	already	using
popular	business	software	to	administer	their	activities	and	to	give	students
experience	with	the	tools	of	the	modern	workplace.	Most	college	students	and
an	increasing	number	of	high	schoolers	now	prepare	reports	on	PCs	with
word	processors	instead	of	using	typewriters	or	writing	by	hand.	Spreadsheets
and	charting	applications	are	routinely	used	to	explain	mathematics	and
economic	theories	and	have	become	a	standard	part	of	most	accounting
courses.	Students	and	faculty	have	also	discovered	new	uses	for	popular
business	applications.	For	example,	students	studying	a	foreign	language	can
take	advantage	of	the	major	word-processor	programs'	ability	to	work	in
different	languages.	Such	programs	include	supplemental	tools	for	checking
spellings	and	looking	up	synonyms	in	multilingual	documents.
In	some	families,	children	are	probably	introducing	their	parents	to
computing.	Kids	and	computers	get	along	just	great,	partly	because	kids	aren't
invested	in	established	ways	of	doing	things.	Children	like	to	provoke	a
reaction,	and	computers	are	reactive.	Parents	are	sometimes	surprised	by	how
taken	with	computers	even	their	preschoolers	are,	but	the	fascination	makes
sense	if	you	think	about	how	much	a	young	child	enjoys	interaction—whether
it	is	playing	peek-a-boo	with	a	parent	or	stabbing	at	a	remote	control	and
watching	channels	change.
I	like	to	watch	my	three-year-old	niece	play	with	Just	Grandma	and	Me,	a
Brøderbund	CD-ROM	based	on	a	children's	book.	She	has	memorized	the
dialogue	in	this	cartoon	story	and	talks	along	with	the	characters,	much	as	she
does	when	her	mother	reads	her	a	book.	If	my	niece	uses	the	computer's
mouse	to	click	on	a	mailbox,	the	mailbox	opens	and	a	frog	jumps	out	or
sometimes	a	hand	appears	and	pulls	the	mailbox	door	shut.	Her	ability	to
influence	what	she	sees	on	the	screen—to	answer	the	question	"What	happens
if	I	click	here?"—keeps	her	curiosity	high.	The	interactivity,	combined	with
the	underlying	quality	of	the	storyline,	keeps	her	involved.
I've	always	believed	most	people	have	more	intelligence	and	curiosity	than
current	information	tools	encourage	them	to	use.	Most	people	have	had	the
experience	of	getting	interested	in	a	topic	and	feeling	the	gratifying	sense	of
accomplishment	that	comes	from	finding	good	material	on	it,	and	the	pleasure
of	mastering	the	topic.	But	if	a	search	for	information	brings	you	up	against	a
blank	wall,	you	become	discouraged.	You	begin	to	think	you're	never	going	to

understand	the	subject.	And	if	you	experience	that	natural	reaction	too	often,
especially	when	you're	a	child,	your	impulse	to	try	again	is	diminshed.
I	was	fortunate	to	be	raised	in	a	family	that	encouraged	kids	to	ask	questions.
And	I	was	lucky	in	my	early	teens	to	become	friends	with	Paul	Allen.	Soon
after	I	had	met	Paul,	I	asked	him	where	gasoline	came	from.	I	wanted	to	know
what	it	meant	to	"refine"	gasoline.	I	wanted	to	know	exactly	how	it	was	that
gasoline	could	power	a	car.	I	had	found	a	book	on	the	subject,	but	it	was
confusing.	Gasoline,	however,	was	one	of	the	many	subjects	that	Paul
understood,	and	he	explained	it	in	a	way	that	made	it	interesting	and
understandable	to	me.	You	might	say	my	curiosity	about	gasoline	is	what
fueled	our	friendship.
Paul	had	lots	of	answers	to	things	I	was	curious	about	(and	a	great	collection
of	science	fiction	books	too).	I	was	more	of	a	math	person	than	Paul,	and	I
understood	software	better	than	anyone	he	knew.	We	were	interactive
resources	for	each	other.	We	asked	or	answered	questions,	drew	diagrams,	or
brought	each	other's	attention	to	related	information.	We	liked	to	challenge
and	test	each	other.	This	is	exactly	the	way	the	highway	will	interact	with
users.	Let's	say	another	teenager	wants	to	find	out	about	gasoline—not	in
1970,	but	three	or	four	years	from	now.	He	may	not	be	lucky	enough	to	have
a	Paul	Allen	around,	but	if	his	school	or	library	has	a	computer	linked	to	rich
multi-media	information,	he'll	be	able	to	delve	as	deeply	into	the	topic	as	he
likes.
He'll	see	photos,	videos,	and	animations	explaining	how	oil	is	drilled,
transported,	and	refined.	He'll	learn	the	difference	between	automobile	fuel
and	aviation	fuel—and	if	he	wants	to	know	the	difference	between	a	car's
internal-combustion	engine	and	a	jetliner's	turbine	engine,	all	he'll	have	to	do
is	ask.
He'll	be	able	to	explore	the	complex	molecular	structure	of	gasoline,	which	is
a	combination	of	hundreds	of	distinct	hydrocarbons,	and	learn	about
hydrocarbons	too.	With	all	of	the	links	to	additional	knowledge,	who	knows
what	fascinating	topics	this	exploration	will	lead	him	to.
At	first,	new	information	technology	will	just	provide	incremental
improvements	over	today's	tools.	Wall-mounted	video	white	boards	will
replace	a	teacher's	chalkboard	handwriting	with	readable	fonts	and	colorful
graphics	drawn	from	millions	of	educational	illustrations,	animations,
photographs,	and	videos.	Multi-media	documents	will	assume	some	of	the
roles	now	played	by	textbooks,	movies,	tests,	and	other	educational	materials.

And	because	multi-media	documents	will	be	linked	to	servers	on	the
information	highway,	they	will	be	kept	thoroughly	up-to-date.
CD-ROMs	available	today	offer	a	taste	of	the	interactive	experience.	The
software	responds	to	instructions	by	presenting	information	in	text,	audio,	and
video	forms.	CD-ROMs	are	already	being	used	in	schools	and	by	kids	doing
their	assignments	at	home,	but	they	have	limitations	the	highway	won't.	CD-
ROMs	can	offer	either	a	little	information	about	a	broad	range	of	topics	the
way	an	encyclopedia	does,	or	a	lot	of	information	about	a	single	topic,	such	as
dinosaurs,	but	the	total	amount	of	information	available	at	one	time	is	limited
by	the	capacity	of	the	disc.	And,	of	course,	you	can	use	only	the	discs	you
have	available.	Nevertheless,	they're	a	great	advance	over	just-paper	texts.
Multi-media	encyclopedias	provide	not	only	a	research	tool,	but	all	sorts	of
material	that	can	be	incorporated	into	homework	documents.	These
encyclopedias	are	available	with	teacher's	guides	that	include	suggestions	for
ways	to	use	the	encyclopedias	in	the	classroom	or	as	part	of	assignments.	I
have	been	excited	to	hear	from	teachers	and	students	about	the	ways	they
have	used	our	products—only	a	few	of	which	we	had	anticipated.
CD-ROMs	are	one	clear	precursor	to	the	highway.	The	Internet's	World	Wide
Web	is	another.	The	Web	offers	access	to	interesting,	educational	information,
although	most	of	it	is	still	plain	text.	Creative	teachers	are	already	using	on-
line	services	to	devise	exciting	new	kinds	of	lessons.
Fourth-graders	in	California	have	done	on-line	searches	of	newspapers	to	read
about	the	challenges	Asian	immigrants	face.	Boston	University	has	created
interactive	software	for	high	school	students	that	shows	detailed	visual
simulations	of	chemical	phenomena,	such	as	salt	molecules	dissolving	in
water.
Christopher	Columbus	Middle	School	in	Union	City,	New	Jersey,	was	a
school	created	out	of	crisis.	In	the	late	1980s,	the	state	test	scores	were	so	low
and	the	absentee	and	dropout	rates	were	so	high	among	the	children	of	the
school	district	that	the	state	was	considering	taking	it	over.	The	school
system,	the	teachers,	and	the	parents	(well	over	90	percent	of	whom	were	of
Hispanic	extraction	and	didn't	speak	English	as	a	first	language)	came	up	with
an	innovative	five-year	plan	to	rescue	their	schools.
Bell	Atlantic	(the	local	telephone	company)	agreed	to	help	find	a	special
networked,	multi-media	system	of	PCs	linking	the	students'	homes	with	the
classrooms,	teachers,	and	school	administrators.	The	corporation	initially
provided	140	multi-media	PCs,	enough	for	the	homes	of	the	seventh-graders,

the	homes	of	all	seventh-grade	teachers,	and	at	least	four	per	classroom.	The
computers	were	networked	and	linked	with	high-speed	lines	and	connected	to
the	Internet,	and	the	teachers	were	trained	in	using	the	PCs.	The	teachers	set
up	weekend	training	courses	for	the	parents,	over	half	of	whom	attended,	and
encouraged	the	students	to	use	e-mail	and	the	Internet.
Two	years	later,	parents	are	actively	involved	with	their	children's	use	of	the
home	PCs	and	employ	them	themselves	to	keep	in	touch	with	teachers	and
administrators;	the	dropout	rate	and	absenteeism	are	both	almost	zero,	and	the
students	are	scoring	nearly	three	times	higher	than	the	average	for	all	New
Jersey	inner-city	schools	on	standardized	tests.	And	the	program	has	been
expanded	to	include	the	entire	middle	school.
Raymond	W.	Smith,	chairman======================================================== ical	records
before	determining	whether	it	chooses	to	insure	our	mortality.	These
companies	may	also	want	to	know	if	we	indulge	in	any	dangerous	pastimes,
such	as	hang	gliding,	smoking,	or	stock	car	racing.	Should	an	insurer's
computer	be	allowed	to	examine	the	information	highway	for	records	of	our
purchases	to	see	if	there	are	any	that	might	indicate	risky	behavior	on	our
part?	Should	a	prospective	employer's	computer	be	allowed	to	examine	our
communications	or	entertainment	records	to	develop	a	psychological	profile?
How	much	information	should	a	federal,	state,	or	city	agency	be	allowed	to
see?	What	should	a	potential	landlord	be	able	to	learn	about	you?	What
information	should	a	potential	spouse	have	access	to?	We	will	need	to	define
both	the	legal	and	practical	limits	of	privacy.
These	privacy	fears	revolve	around	the	possibility	that	someone	else	is
keeping	track	of	information	about	you.	But	the	highway	will	also	make	it
possible	for	an	individual	to	keep	track	of	his	or	her	own	whereabouts—to
lead	what	we	might	call	"a	documented	life"
Your	wallet	PC	will	be	able	to	keep	audio,	time,	location,	and	eventually	even
video	records	of	everything	that	happens	to	you.	It	will	be	able	to	record
every	word	you	say	and	every	word	said	to	you,	as	well	as	body	temperature,

blood	pressure,	barometric	pressure,	and	a	variety	of	other	data	about	you	and
your	surroundings.	It	will	be	able	to	track	your	interactions	with	the	highway
—all	of	the	commands	you	issue,	the	messages	you	send,	and	the	people	you
call	or	who	call	you.	The	resulting	record	will	be	the	ultimate	diary	and
autobiography,	if	you	want	one.	If	nothing	else,	you	would	know	exactly
when	and	where	you	took	a	photograph	when	you	organize	your	family's
digital	photo	album.
The	technology	required	is	not	difficult.	It	should	soon	be	possible	to
compress	the	human	voice	down	to	a	few	thousand	bits	of	digital	information
per	second,	which	means	that	an	hour	of	conversation	will	be	converted	into
about	1	megabyte	of	digital	data.	Small	tapes	used	for	backing	up	computer
hard	disks	already	store	10	gigabytes	or	more	of	data—enough	to	record
about	10,000	hours	of	compressed	audio.	Tapes	for	new	generations	of	digital
VCRs	will	hold	more	than	100	gigabytes,	which	means	that	a	single	tape
costing	a	few	dollars	could	hold	recordings	of	all	the	conversations	an
individual	has	over	the	course	of	a	decade	or	possibly	even	a	lifetime—
depending	on	how	talkative	he	is.	These	numbers	are	based	only	on	today's
capacities—in	the	future	storage	will	be	much	cheaper.	Audio	is	easy,	but
within	a	couple	of	years	a	full	video	recording	will	be	possible	as	well.
I	find	the	prospect	of	documented	lives	a	little	chilling,	but	some	people	will
warm	to	the	idea.	One	reason	for	documenting	a	life	will	be	defensive.	We
can	think	of	the	wallet	PC	as	an	alibi	machine,	because	encrypted	digital
signatures	will	guarantee	an	unforgeable	alibi	against	false	accusations.	If
someone	ever	accused	you	of	something,	you	could	retort:	"Hey,	buddy,	I
have	a	documented	life.	These	bits	are	stored	away.	I	can	play	back	anything
I've	ever	said.	So	don't	play	games	with	me"	On	the	other	hand,	if	you	were
guilty	of	something,	there	would	be	a	record	of	it.	There	would	also	be	a
record	of	any	tampering.	Richard	Nixon's	taping	of	conversations	in	the
White	House—and	then	the	suspicions	that	he	had	attempted	to	alter	those
tapes—contributed	to	his	undoing.	He	chose	to	have	a	documented	political
life	and	lived	to	regret	it.
The	Rodney	King	case	showed	the	evidentiary	power	of	videotape	and	its
limits.	Before	long	every	police	car,	or	individual	policeman,	may	be
equipped	with	a	digital	video	camera,	with	nonforgeable	time	and	location
stamps.	The	public	may	insist	that	the	police	record	themselves	in	the	course
of	their	work.	And	the	police	could	be	all	for	it,	to	guard	against	claims	of
brutality	or	abuse	on	one	hand	and	as	an	aid	in	gathering	better	evidence	on
the	other.	Some	police	forces	are	already	videorecording	all	arrests.	This	sort
of	record	won't	affect	just	the	police.	Medical	malpractice	insurance	might	be

cheaper,	or	only	available,	for	doctors	who	record	surgical	procedures	or	even
office	visits.	Bus,	taxi,	and	trucking	companies	have	an	obvious	interest	in	the
performance	of	their	drivers.	Some	transportation	companies	have	already
installed	equipment	to	record	mileage	and	average	speed.	I	can	imagine
proposals	that	every	automobile,	including	yours	and	mine,	be	outfitted	not
only	with	a	recorder	but	also	with	a	transmitter	that	identifies	the	car	and	its
location—a	future	license	plate.	After	all,	airplanes	have	"black	box"
recorders	today,	and	once	the	cost	drops,	there	is	no	reason	they	shouldn't	also
be	in	our	cars.	If	a	car	was	reported	stolen,	its	location	would	be	known
immediately.	After	a	hit-and-run	accident	or	a	drive-by	shooting,	a	judge
could	authorize	a	query:	"What	vehicles	were	in	the	following	two-block	area
during	this	thirty-minute	period?"	The	black	box	could	record	your	speed	and
location,	which	would	allow	for	the	perfect	enforcement	of	speeding	laws.	I
would	vote	against	that.
In	a	world	that	is	increasingly	instrumented,	we	could	reach	the	point	where
cameras	record	most	of	what	goes	on	in	public.	Video	cameras	in	public
places	are	already	relatively	commonplace.	They	perch,	often	concealed,
around	banks,	airports,	automatic-teller	machines,	hospitals,	freeways,	stores,
and	hotel	and	office-building	lobbies	and	elevators.
The	prospect	of	so	many	cameras,	always	watching,	might	have	distressed	us
fifty	years	ago,	as	it	did	George	Orwell.	But	today	they	are	unremarkable.
There	are	neighborhoods	in	the	United	States	and	Europe	where	citizens	are
welcoming	these	cameras	above	streets	and	parking	lots.	In	Monaco,	street
crime	has	been	virtually	eliminated	because	hundreds	of	video	cameras	have
been	placed	around	the	tiny	principality.	Monaco,	however,	is	small	enough	in
area,	370	acres	(150	hectares),	that	a	few	hundred	cameras	can	pretty	much
cover	it	all.	Many	parents	would	welcome	cameras	around	schoolyards	to
discourage	or	help	apprehend	drug	dealers,	child	molesters,	and	even
playground	bullies.	Every	city	streetlight	represents	a	substantial	investment
by	a	community	in	public	safety.	In	a	few	years	it	will	require	only	a
relatively	modest	additional	sum	to	add	and	operate	cameras	with	connections
to	the	information	highway.	Within	a	decade,	computers	will	be	able	to	scan
video	records	very	inexpensively	looking	for	a	particular	person	or	activity.	I
can	easily	imagine	proposals	that	virtually	every	pole	supporting	a	streetlight
should	also	have	one	or	more	cameras.	The	images	from	these	cameras	might
be	accessed	only	in	the	event	of	a	crime,	and	even	then	possibly	only	under
court	order.	Some	people	might	argue	that	every	image	from	every	camera
should	be	available	for	viewing	by	everyone	at	any	time.	This	raises	serious
privacy	questions	in	my	mind,	but	advocates	might	argue	that	it's	appropriate
if	the	cameras	are	only	in	public	places.

Almost	everyone	is	willing	to	accept	some	restrictions	in	exchange	for	a	sense
of	security.	From	a	historical	perspective,	people	living	in	Western
democracies	already	enjoy	a	degree	of	privacy	and	personal	freedom
unprecedented	in	all	of	human	history.	If	ubiquitous	cameras	tied	into	the
information	highway	should	prove	to	reduce	serious	crime	dramatically	in	test
communities,	a	real	debate	would	begin	over	whether	people	fear	surveillance
more	or	less	than	they	fear	crime.	It	is	difficult	to	imagine	a	government-
sanctioned	experiment	along	these	lines	in	the	United	States	because	of	the
privacy	issues	it	raises	and	the	likelihood	of	constitutional	challenges.
However,	opinion	can	change.	It	might	take	only	a	few	more	incidents	like
the	bombing	in	Oklahoma	City	within	the	borders	of	the	United	States	for
attitudes	toward	strong	privacy	protection	to	shift.	What	today	seems	like
digital	Big	Brother	might	one	day	become	the	norm	if	the	alternative	is	being
left	to	the	mercy	of	terrorists	and	criminals.	I	am	not	advocating	either
position—technology	will	enable	society	to	make	a	political	decision.
At	the	same	time	technology	is	making	it	easier	to	create	video	records,	it	is
also	making	it	possible	to	keep	all	your	personal	documents	and	messages
totally	private.	Encryption-technology	software,	which	anyone	can	download
from	the	Internet,	can	transform	a	PC	into	a	virtually	unbreakable	code
machine.	As	the	highway	is	deployed,	security	services	will	be	applied	to	all
forms	of	digital	information—phone	calls,	files,	databases,	you	name	it.	As
long	as	you	protect	the	password,	the	information	stored	on	your	computer
can	be	held	under	the	strongest	lock	and	key	that	has	ever	existed.	This	allows
for	the	greatest	degree	of	information	privacy	any	individual	has	ever	had.
Many	in	government	are	opposed	to	this	encryption	capability,	because	it
reduces	their	ability	to	gather	information.	Unfortunately	for	them,	the
technology	can't	be	stopped.	The	National	Security	Agency	is	a	part	of	the
U.S.	government	defense	and	intelligence	community	that	protects	this
country's	secret	communications	and	decrypts	foreign	communications	to
gather	intelligence	data.	The	NSA	does	not	want	software	containing
advanced	encryption	capabilities	to	be	sent	outside	the	United	States.
However,	this	software	is	already	available	throughout	the	world,	and	any
computer	can	run	it.	No	policy	decision	will	be	able	to	restore	the	tapping
capabilities	governments	had	in	the	past.
Today's	legislation	that	prevents	the	export	of	software	with	good	encryption
capability	could	harm	U.S.	software	and	hardware	companies.	The
restrictions	give	foreign	companies	an	advantage	over	U.S.	competitors.
American	companies	almost	unanimously	agree	that	the	current	encryption
export	restrictions	don't	work.

Each	media	advance	has	had	a	substantial	effect	on	how	people	and
governments	interact.	The	printing	press	and,	later,	mass-circulation
newspapers	changed	the	nature	o======================================================== eramental	monsters	that	resided	in	climate-controlled
cocoons.	After	we	had	used	up	the	money	the	Mothers'	Club	had	provided,
my	school	friend	Paul	Allen,	with	whom	I	later	started	Microsoft,	and	I	spent
a	lot	of	time	trying	to	get	access	to	computers.	They	performed	modestly	by
today's	standards,	but	seemed	awesome	to	us	because	they	were	big	and
complicated	and	cost	as	much	as	millions	of	dollars	each.	They	were
connected	by	phone	lines	to	clackety	Teletype	terminals	so	they	could	be
shared	by	people	at	different	locations.	We	rarely	got	close	to	the	actual
mainframes.	Computer	time	was	very	expensive.	When	I	was	in	high	school,
it	cost	about	$40	an	hour	to	access	a	time-shared	computer	using	a	Teletype—
for	that	$40	an	hour	you	got	a	slice	of	the	computer's	precious	attention.	This
seems	odd	today,	when	some	people	have	more	than	one	PC	and	think
nothing	of	leaving	them	idle	for	most	of	the	day.	Actually,	it	was	possible
even	then	to	own	your	own	computer.	If	you	could	afford	$18,000,	Digital
Equipment	Corporation	(DEC)	made	the	PDP-8.	Although	it	was	called	a
"mini-computer,"	it	was	large	by	today's	standards.	It	occupied	a	rack	about
two	feet	square	and	six	feet	high	and	weighed	250	pounds.	We	had	one	at	our
high	school	for	a	while,	and	I	fooled	around	with	it	a	lot.	The	PDP-8	was	very
limited	compared	to	the	mainframes	we	could	reach	by	phone;	in	fact,	it	had
less	raw	computing	power	than	some	wristwatches	do	today.	But	it	was
programmable	the	same	way	the	big,	expensive	ones	were:	by	giving	it
software	instructions.	Despite	its	limitations,	the	PDP-8	inspired	us	to	indulge
in	the	dream	that	one	day	millions	of	individuals	could	possess	their	own
computers.	With	each	passing	year,	I	became	more	certain	that	computers	and
computing	were	destined	to	be	cheap	and	ubiquitous.	I'm	sure	that	one	of	the
reasons	I	was	so	determined	to	help	develop	the	personal	computer	is	that	I
wanted	one	for	myself.
At	that	time	software,	like	computer	hardware,	was	expensive.	It	had	to	be
written	specifically	for	each	kind	of	computer.	And	each	time	computer
hardware	changed,	which	it	did	regularly,	the	software	for	it	pretty	much	had
to	be	rewritten.	Computer	manufacturers	provided	some	standard	software
program	building	blocks	(for	example,	libraries	of	mathematical	functions)
with	their	machines,	but	most	software	was	written	specifically	to	solve	some
business's	individual	problems.	Some	software	was	shared,	and	a	few
companies	were	selling	general-purpose	software,	but	there	was	very	little
packaged	software	that	you	could	buy	off	the	shelf.
My	parents	paid	my	tuition	at	Lakeside	and	gave	me	money	for	books,	but	I

had	to	take	care	of	my	own	computer-time	bills.	This	is	what	drove	me	to	the
commercial	side	of	the	software	business.	A	bunch	of	us,	including	Paul
Allen,	got	entry-level	software	programming	jobs.	For	high	school	students
the	pay	was	extraordinary—about	$5,000	each	summer,	part	in	cash	and	the
rest	in	computer	time.	We	also	worked	out	deals	with	a	few	companies
whereby	we	could	use	computers	for	free	if	we'd	locate	problems	in	their
software.	One	of	the	programs	I	wrote	was	the	one	that	scheduled	students	in
classes.	I	surreptitiously	added	a	few	instructions	and	found	myself	nearly	the
only	guy	in	a	class	full	of	girls.	As	I	said	before,	it	was	hard	to	tear	myself
away	from	a	machine	at	which	I	could	so	unambiguously	demonstrate
success.	I	was	hooked.
Paul	knew	a	lot	more	than	I	did	about	computer	hardware,	the	machines
themselves.	One	summer	day	in	1972,	when	I	was	sixteen	and	Paul	was
nineteen,	he	showed	me	a	ten-paragraph	article	buried	on	page	143	of
Electronics	magazine.	It	was	announcing	that	a	young	firm	named	Intel	had
released	a	microprocessor	chip	called	the	8008.
A	microprocessor	is	a	simple	chip	that	contains	the	entire	brain	of	a	whole
computer.	Paul	and	I	realized	this	first	microprocessor	was	very	limited,	but
he	was	sure	that	the	chips	would	get	more	powerful	and	computers	on	a	chip
would	improve	very	rapidly.
At	the	time,	the	computer	industry	had	no	idea	of	building	a	real	computer
around	a	microprocessor.	The	Electronics	article,	for	example,	described	the
8008	as	suitable	for	"any	arithmetic,	control,	or	decision-making	system,	such
as	a	smart	terminal"	The	writers	didn't	see	that	a	microprocessor	could	grow
up	to	be	a	general-purpose	computer.	Microprocessors	were	slow	and	limited
in	the	amount	of	information	they	could	handle.	None	of	the	languages
programmers	were	familiar	with	was	available	for	the	8008,	which	made	it
nearly	impossible	to	write	complex	programs	for	it.	Every	application	had	to
be	programmed	with	the	few	dozen	simple	instructions	the	chip	could
understand.	The	8008	was	condemned	to	life	as	a	beast	of	burden,	carrying
out	uncomplicated	and	unchanging	tasks	over	and	over.	It	was	quite	popular
in	elevators	and	calculators.

1972:	Intel's	8088	microprocessor
To	put	it	another	way,	a	simple	microprocessor	in	an	embedded	application,
such	as	an	elevator's	controls,	is	a	single	instrument,	a	drum	or	a	horn,	in	the
hands	of	an	amateur:	good	for	basic	rhythm	or	uncomplicated	tunes.	A
powerful	microprocessor	with	programming	languages,	however,	is	like	an
accomplished	orchestra.	With	the	right	software,	or	sheet	music,	it	can	play
anything.
Paul	and	I	wondered	what	we	could	program	the	8008	to	do.	He	called	up
Intel	to	request	a	manual.	We	were	a	little	surprised	when	they	actually	sent
him	one.	We	both	dug	into	it.	I	had	worked	out	a	version	of	BASIC,	which
ran	on	the	limited	DEC	PDP-8,	and	was	excited	at	the	thought	of	doing	the
same	for	the	little	Intel	chip.	But	as	I	studied	the	8008's	manual,	I	realized	it
was	futile	to	try.	The	8008	just	wasn't	sophisticated	enough,	didn't	have
enough	transistors.
We	did,	however,	figure	out	a	way	to	use	the	little	chip	to	power	a	machine
that	could	analyze	the	information	counted	by	traffic	monitors	on	city	streets.
Many	municipalities	that	measured	traffic	flow	did	so	by	stringing	a	rubber
hose	over	a	selected	street.	When	a	car	crossed	the	hose,	it	punched	a	paper
tape	inside	a	metal	box	at	the	end	of	the	hose.	We	saw	that	we	could	use	the
8008	to	process	these	tapes,	to	print	out	graphs	and	other	statistics.	We
baptized	our	first	company	"Traf-O-Data."	At	the	time	it	sounded	like	poetry.
I	wrote	much	of	the	software	for	the	Traf-O-Data	machine	on	cross-state	bus
trips	from	Seattle	to	Pullman,	Washington,	where	Paul	was	attending	college.
Our	prototype	worked	well,	and	we	envisioned	selling	lots	of	our	new
machines	across	the	country.	We	used	it	to	process	traffic-volume	tapes	for	a
few	customers,	but	no	one	actually	wanted	to	buy	the	machine,	at	least	not
from	a	couple	of	teenagers.
Despite	our	disappointment,	we	still	believed	our	future,	even	if	it	was	not	to

be	in	hardware,	might	have	something	to	do	with	microprocessors.	After	I
started	at	Harvard	College	in	1973,	Paul	somehow	managed	to	coax	his
clunky	old	Chrysler	New	Yorker	cross-country	from	Washington	State	and
took	a	job	in	Boston,	programming	mini-computers	at	Honeywell.	He	drove
over	to	Cambridge	a	lot	so	we	could	continue	our	long	talks	about	future
schemes.
In	the	spring	of	1974,	Electronics	magazine	announced	Intel's	new	8080	chip
—ten	times	the	power	of	the	8008	inside	the	Traf-O-Data	machine.	The	8080
was	not	much	larger	than	the	8008,	but	it	contained	2,700	more	transistors.
All	at	once	we	were	looking	at	the	heart	of	a	real	computer,	and	the	price	was
under	$200.	We	attacked	the	manual.	"DEC	can't	sell	any	more	PDP-8s	now,"
I	told	Paul.	It	seemed	obvious	to	us	that	if	a	tiny	chip	could	get	so	much	more
powerful,	the	end	of	big	unwieldy	machines	was	coming.
Computer	manufacturers,	however,	didn't	see	the	microprocessor	as	a	threat.
They	just	couldn't	imagine	a	puny	chip	taking	on	a	"real"	computer.	Not	even
the	scientists	at	Intel	saw	its	full	potential.	To	them,	the	8080	represented
nothing	more	than	an	improvement	in	chip	technology.	In	the	short	term,	the
computer	establishment	was	right.	The	8080	was	just	another	slight	advance.
But	Paul	and	I	looked	past	the	limits	of	that	new	chip	and	saw	a	different	kind
of	computer	that	would	be	perfect	for	us,	and	for	everyone—personal,
affordable,	and	adaptable.	It	was	absolutely	clear	to	us	that	because	the	new
chips	were	so	cheap,	they	soon	would	be	everywhere.
Computer	hardware,	which	had	once	been	scarce,	would	soon	be	readily
available,	and	access	to	computers	would	no	longer	be	charged	for	at	a	high
hourly	rate.	It	seemed	to	us	people	would	find	all	kinds	of	new	uses	for
computing	if	it	was	cheap.	Then,	software	would	be	the	key	to	delivering	the
full	potential	of	these	machines.	Paul	and	I	speculated	that	Japanese
companies	and	IBM	would	likely	produce	most	of	the	hardware.	We	believed
we	could	come	up	with	new	and	innovative	software.	And	why	not?	The
microprocessor	would	change	the	structure	of	the	industry.	Maybe	there	was	a
place	for	the	two	of	us.
This	kind	of	talk	is	what	college	is	all	about.	You	have	all	kinds	of	new
experiences,	and	dream	crazy	dreams.	We	were	young	and	assumed	we	had
all	the	time	in	the	world.	I	enrolled	for	another	year	at	Harvard	and	kept
thinking	about	how	we	could	get	a	software	company	going.	One	plan	was
pretty	simple.	We	sent	letters	from	my	dorm	room	to	all	the	big	computer
companies,	offering	to	write	them	a	version	of	BASIC	for	the	new	Intel	chip.
We	got	no	takers.	By	December,	we	were	pretty	discouraged.	I	was	planning

to	fly	home	to	Seattle	for	the	holidays,	and	Paul	was	staying	in	Boston.	On	an
achingly	cold	Massachusetts	morning	a	few	days	before	I	left,	Paul	and	I	were
hanging	out	at	the	Harvard	Square	newsstand,	and	Paul	picked	up	the	January
issue	of	Popular	Electronics.	This	is	the	moment	I	described	at	the	beginning
of	the	Foreword.	This	gave	reality	to	our	dreams	about	the	future.
January	1975	issue	of	Popular	Electronics
On	the	magazine's	cover	was	a	photograph	of	a	very	small	computer,	not
much	larger	than	a	toaster	oven.	It	had	a	name	only	slightly	more	dignified
t======================================================== a	disk-based	server	will	be	able	to	serve	thousands	of
customers	simultaneously.	The	extra	cost	for	each	user	is	simply	the	cost	of
using	the	disk	storage	for	a	short	period	of	time	and	the	communications
charge.	And	that	is	becoming	extremely	cheap.	So	the	extra	per-user	cost	will
be	nearly	zero.
This	doesn't	mean	that	information	will	be	free,	but	the	cost	of	distributing	it
will	be	very	small.	When	you	buy	a	paper	book,	a	good	portion	of	your
money	pays	for	the	cost	of	producing	and	distributing	it,	rather	than	for	the
author's	work.	Trees	have	to	be	cut	down,	ground	into	pulp,	and	turned	into
paper.	The	book	must	be	printed	and	bound.	Most	publishers	invest	capital	in
a	first	printing	that	reflects	the	largest	number	of	copies	they	think	will	sell
right	away,	because	the	printing	technology	is	efficient	only	if	lots	of	books
are	made	at	once.	The	capital	tied	up	in	this	inventory	is	a	financial	risk	for
the	publishers:	They	may	never	sell	all	the	copies,	and	even	if	they	do,	it	will

take	a	while	to	sell	them	all.	Meanwhile,	the	publisher	has	to	store	the	books
and	ship	them	to	wholesalers	and	ultimately	to	retail	bookstores.	Those	folks
also	invest	capital	in	their	inventory	and	expect	a	financial	return	from	it.
By	the	time	the	consumer	selects	the	book	and	the	cash	register	rings,	the
profit	for	the	author	can	be	a	pretty	small	piece	of	the	pie	compared	to	the
money	that	goes	to	the	physical	aspect	of	delivering	information	on	processed
wood	pulp.	I	like	to	call	this	the	"friction"	of	distribution,	because	it	holds
back	variety	and	dissipates	money	away	from	the	author	and	to	other	people.
The	information	highway	will	be	largely	friction	free,	a	theme	I	will	explore
further	in	chapter	8.	This	lack	of	friction	in	information	distribution	is
incredibly	important.	It	will	empower	more	authors,	because	very	little	of	the
customer's	dollar	will	be	used	to	pay	for	distribution.
Gutenberg's	invention	of	the	printing	press	brought	about	the	first	real	shift	in
distribution	friction—it	allowed	information	on	any	subject	to	be	distributed
quickly	and	relatively	cheaply.	The	printing	press	created	a	mass	medium
because	it	offered	low-friction	duplication.	The	proliferation	of	books
motivated	the	general	public	to	read	and	write,	but	once	people	had	the	skills
there	were	many	other	things	that	could	be	done	with	the	written	word.
Businesses	could	keep	track	of	inventory	and	write	contracts.	Lovers	could
exchange	letters.	Individuals	could	keep	notes	and	diaries.	By	themselves
these	applications	were	not	sufficiently	compelling	to	get	large	numbers	of
people	to	make	the	effort	to	learn	to	read	and	write.	Until	there	was	a	real
reason	to	create	an	"installed	base"	of	literate	people,	the	written	word	wasn't
really	useful	as	a	means	for	storing	information.	Books	gave	literacy	critical
mass,	so	you	can	almost	say	that	the	printing	press	taught	us	to	read.
The	printing	press	made	it	easy	to	make	lots	of	copies	of	a	document,	but
what	about	something	written	for	a	few	people?	New	technology	was	required
for	small-scale	publishing.	Carbon	paper	was	fine	if	you	wanted	just	one	or
two	more	copies.	Mimeographs	and	other	messy	machines	could	make
dozens,	but	to	use	any	of	these	processes	you	had	to	have	planned	for	them
when	you	prepared	your	original	document.
In	the	1930s,	Chester	Carlson,	frustrated	by	how	difficult	it	was	to	prepare
patent	applications	(which	involved	copying	drawings	and	text	by	hand),	set
out	to	invent	a	better	way	to	duplicate	information	in	small	quantities.	What
he	came	up	with	was	a	process	he	called	"xerography"	when	he	patented	it	in
1940.	In	1959,	the	company	he	had	hooked	up	with—later	known	as	Xerox—
released	its	first	successful	production-line	copier.	The	914	copier,	by	making

it	possible	to	reproduce	modest	numbers	of	documents	easily	and
inexpensively,	set	off	an	explosion	in	the	kinds	and	amount	of	information
distributed	to	small	groups.	Market	research	had	projected	that	Xerox	would
sell	at	most	3,000	of	their	first	copier	model.	They	actually	placed	about
200,000.	A	year	after	the	copier	was	introduced,	50	million	copies	a	month
were	being	made.	By	1986,	more	than	200	billion	copies	were	being	made
each	month,	and	the	number	has	been	rising	ever	since.	Most	of	these	copies
would	never	be	made	if	the	technology	wasn't	so	cheap	and	easy.
The	photocopier	and	its	later	cousin,	the	desktop	laser	printer—along	with	PC
desktop	publishing	software—facilitated	newsletters,	memos,	maps	to	parties,
flyers,	and	other	documents	intended	for	modest-sized	audiences.	Carlson	was
another	who	reduced	the	distribution	friction	of	information.	The	wild	success
of	his	copier	demonstrates	that	amazing	things	happen	once	you	reduce
distribution	friction.
Of	course,	it's	easier	to	make	copies	of	a	document	than	it	is	to	make	it	worth
reading.	There	is	no	intrinsic	limit	to	the	number	of	books	that	can	be
published	in	a	given	year.	A	typical	bookstore	has	10,000	different	titles,	and
some	of	the	new	superstores	might	carry	100,000.	Only	a	small	fraction,
under	10	percent,	of	all	trade	books	published	make	money	for	their
publishers,	but	some	succeed	beyond	anybody's	wildest	expectations.
My	favorite	recent	example	is	A	Brief	History	of	Time,	by	Stephen	W.
Hawking,	a	brilliant	scientist	who	has	amyotrophic	lateral	sclerosis	(Lou
Gehrig's	disease),	which	confines	him	to	a	wheelchair	and	allows	him	to
communicate	only	with	great	difficulty.	What	are	the	odds	that	his	treatise	on
the	origins	of	the	universe	would	have	been	published	if	there	were	only	a
handful	of	publishers	and	each	of	them	could	produce	only	a	few	books	a
year?	Suppose	an	editor	had	one	spot	left	on	his	list	and	had	to	choose
between	publishing	Hawking's	book	and	Madonna's	Sex?	The	obvious	bet
would	be	Madonna's	book,	because	it	would	likely	sell	a	million	copies.	It
did.	But	Hawking's	book	sold	5.5	million	copies	and	is	still	selling.
Every	now	and	then	this	sort	of	sleeper	best-seller	surprises	everyone	(but	the
author).	A	book	I	enjoyed	greatly,	The	Bridges	of	Madison	County,	was	the
first	published	novel	by	a	business-school	teacher	of	communications.	It
wasn't	positioned	by	the	publisher	to	be	a	bestseller,	but	nobody	really	knows
what	will	appeal	to	the	public's	taste.	Like	most	examples	of	central	planning
trying	to	outguess	a	market	decision,	this	is	fundamentally	a	losing
proposition.	There	are	almost	always	a	couple	of	books	on	The	New	York
Times	best-seller	list	that	have	bubbled	up	from	nowhere,	because	books	cost

so	relatively	little	to	publish—compared	to	other	media—that	publishers	can
afford	to	give	them	a	chance.
Costs	are	much	higher	in	broadcast	television	or	movies,	so	it's	tougher	to	try
something	risky.	In	the	early	days	of	TV	there	were	only	a	few	stations	in
each	geographic	area	and	most	programming	was	targeted	for	the	broadest
possible	audience.
Cable	television	increased	the	number	of	programming	choices,	although	it
wasn't	started	with	that	intention.	It	began	in	the	late	1940s	as	a	way	of
providing	better	television	reception	to	outlying	areas.	Community	antennas
to	feed	a	local	cable	system	were	erected	by	viewers	whose	broadcast
reception	was	blocked	by	hills.	No	one	then	imagined	that	communities	with
perfectly	good	broadcast	television	reception	would	pay	to	have	cable	so	they
could	watch	a	steady	stream	of	music	videos	or	channels	that	offered	nothing
but	news	or	weather	twenty-four	hours	a	day.
When	the	number	of	stations	carried	went	from	three	or	five	to	twenty-four	or
thirty-six,	the	programming	dynamic	changed.	If	you	were	in	charge	of
programming	for	the	thirtieth	channel,	you	wouldn't	attract	much	of	an
audience	if	you	just	tried	to	imitate	channels	1	through	29.	Instead,	cable
channel	programmers	were	forced	to	specialize.	Like	special-interest
magazines	and	newsletters,	these	new	channels	attract	viewers	by	appealing
to	strong	interests	held	by	a	relatively	smaller	number	of	enthusiasts.	This	is
in	contrast	to	general	programming,	which	tries	to	provide	something	for
everyone.	But	the	costs	of	production	and	the	small	number	of	channels	still
limit	the	number	of	television	programs	produced.
Although	it	costs	far	less	to	publish	a	book	than	to	broadcast	a	TV	show,	it's
still	a	lot	compared	to	the	cost	involved	in	electronic	publishing.	To	get	a
book	into	print	a	publisher	has	to	agree	to	pay	the	up-front	expense	of
manufacturing,	distribution,	and	marketing.	The	information	highway	will
create	a	medium	with	entry	barriers	lower	than	any	we	have	ever	seen.	The
Internet	is	the	greatest	self-publishing	vehicle	ever.	Its	bulletin	boards	have
demonstrated	some	of	the	changes	that	will	occur	when	everyone	has	access
to	low-friction	distribution	and	individuals	can	post	messages,	images,	or
software	of	their	own	creation.
Bulletin	boards	have	contributed	a	lot	to	the	popularity	of	the	Internet.	To	be
published	there	all	you	have	to	do	is	type	your	thoughts	and	post	them
someplace.	This	means	that	there	is	a	lot	of	garbage	on	the	Internet,	but	also	a
few	gems.	A	typical	message	is	only	a	page	or	two	long.	A	single	message

posted	on	a	popular	bulletin	board	or	sent	to	a	mailing	list	might	reach	and
engage	millions	of	people.	Or	it	might	sit	there	and	languish	with	no	impact
whatsoever.	The	reason	anyone	is	willing	to	risk	the	latter	eventuality	is	the
low	distribution	friction.	The	network	bandwidth	is	so	great	and	the	other
factors	that	contribute	to	the	cost	are	so	low	that	nobody	thinks	about	the	cost
of	sending	messages.	At	worst	you	might	be	a	bit	embarrassed	if	your
message	just	sits	there	and	nobody	responds	to	it.	On	the	other	hand,	if	your
message	is	popular,	a	lot	of	people	will	see	it,	forward	it	as	e-mail	to	their
friends,	and	post	their	own	comments	on	it.
It	is	amazingly	fast	and	inexpensive	to	communicate	with	bulletin	boards.
Mail	or	telephone	communications	are	fine	for	a	one-on-one	discussion,	but
they	are	also	pretty	expensive	if	you	are	trying	to	communicate	with	a	group.
It	costs	nearly======================================================== er.
Conversely,	there	is	a	negative	spiral	companies	can	get	caught	in.	A
company	in	a	positive	spiral	has	an	air	of	destiny,	while	one	in	a	negative

spiral	feels	doomed.	If	a	company	starts	to	lose	market	share	or	delivers	one
bad	product,	the	talk	becomes	"Why	do	you	work	there?"	"Why	would	you
invest	in	that	company?"	"I	don't	think	you	should	buy	from	them."	The	press
and	analysts	smell	blood	and	begin	telling	inside	stories	about	who's
quarreling	and	who's	responsible	for	mismanagement.	Customers	begin	to
question	whether,	in	the	future,	they	should	continue	to	buy	the	company's
products.	Within	a	sick	company	everything	is	questioned,	including	things
that	are	being	done	well.	Even	a	fine	strategy	can	get	dismissed	with	the
argument	"You	are	just	defending	the	old	way"	and	that	can	cause	more
mistakes.	Then	down	the	company	spirals.	Leaders	such	as	Lee	Iacocca	who
have	been	able	to	reverse	a	negative	spiral	deserve	a	lot	of	credit.
Throughout	my	youth	the	hot	computer	firm	was	Digital	Equipment
Corporation,	known	as	DEC.	For	twenty	years	its	positive	spiral	seemed
unstoppable.	Ken	Olsen,	the	company's	founder,	was	a	legendary	hardware
designer	and	a	hero	of	mine,	a	distant	god.	In	1960	he	had	created	the
minicomputer	industry	by	offering	the	first	"small"	computers.	The	earliest
was	the	PDP-1,	the	ancestor	of	my	high	school's	PDP-8.	A	buyer,	instead	of
paying	the	millions	asked	by	IBM	for	its	"Big	Iron,"	could	get	one	of	Olsen's
PDP-1s	for	$120,000.	It	wasn't	nearly	as	powerful	as	the	big	machines,	but	it
could	be	used	for	a	wide	variety	of	applications.	DEC	grew	to	a	$6.7	billion
company	in	eight	years	by	offering	a	wide	range	of	computers	in	different
sizes.
Two	decades	later,	Olsen's	vision	faltered.	He	couldn't	see	the	future	of	small
desktop	computers.	Eventually	he	was	forced	out	of	DEC,	and	part	of	his
legend	now	is	that	he	is	the	man	famous	for	repeatedly,	and	publicly,
dismissing	the	personal	computer	as	a	passing	fad.	I	am	sobered	by	stories
like	Olsen's.	He	was	brilliant	at	seeing	new	ways	of	doing	things,	and	then—
after	years	of	being	an	innovator—he	missed	a	big	bend	in	the	road.
Another	visionary	who	faltered	was	An	Wang,	the	Chinese	immigrant	who
built	Wang	Laboratories	into	the	dominant	supplier	of	electronic	calculators	in
the	1960s.	In	the	1970s	he	ignored	the	advice	of	everyone	around	him	and	left
the	calculator	market	just	before	the	arrival	of	low-cost	competition	that
would	have	ruined	him.	It	was	a	brilliant	move.	Wang	reinvented	his	company
to	be	the	leading	supplier	of	word-processing	machines.	During	the	1970s,	in
offices	around	the	world,	Wang	word-processing	terminals	began	to	replace
typewriters.	The	machines	contained	a	microprocessor	but	weren't	true
personal	computers,	because	they	were	designed	to	do	only	one	thing—
handle	text.

Wang	was	a	visionary	engineer.	The	kind	of	insight	that	had	led	him	to
abandon	calculators	could	have	led	to	success	in	personal-computer	software
in	the	1980s,	but	he	failed	to	spot	the	next	industry	turn.	Even	though	he
developed	great	software,	it	was	tied	proprietarily	to	his	word	processors.	His
software	was	doomed	once	general-purpose	personal	computers	appeared	that
could	run	a	variety	of	word-processing	software	applications	such	as
WordStar,	WordPerfect,	and	MultiMate	(which	imitated	Wang	software).	If
Wang	had	recognized	the	importance	of	compatible	software	applications,
there	might	not	be	a	Microsoft	today.	I	might	be	a	mathematician	or	an
attorney	somewhere,	and	my	adolescent	foray	into	personal	computing	might
be	little	more	than	a	distant	personal	memory.
IBM	was	another	major	company	that	missed	technological	changes	at	the
start	of	the	PC	revolution.	The	company's	leader	had	been	a	hard-driving
former	cash-register	salesman,	Thomas	J.	Watson.	Technically,	Watson	wasn't
the	founder	of	IBM,	but	it	was	thanks	to	his	aggressive	management	style	that
by	the	early	1930s	IBM	dominated	the	market	for	accounting	machines.
IBM	began	working	on	computers	in	the	middle	1950s.	It	was	one	of	many
companies	in	the	business	vying	for	leadership	in	the	field.	Until	1964	each
computer	model,	even	from	the	same	manufacturer,	had	had	a	unique	design
and	required	its	own	operating	system	and	application	software.	An	operating
system	(sometimes	called	a	disk-operating	system,	or	just	DOS)	is	the
fundamental	software	that	coordinates	a	computer	system's	components,	tells
them	how	to	work	together,	and	performs	other	functions.	Without	an
operating	system,	a	computer	is	useless.	The	operating	system	is	a	platform
on	which	all	the	software	programs	for	applications—such	as	accounting	or
payroll	or	word-processing	or	electronic-mail	programs—are	built.
Computers	at	different	price	levels	had	different	designs.	Some	models	were
dedicated	to	scientific	study,	others	to	commerce.	As	I	discovered	when	I
wrote	the	BASIC	for	various	personal	computers,	significant	work	was
required	to	move	software	from	one	computer	model	to	another.	This	was	true
even	if	the	software	was	written	in	a	standard	language	such	as	COBOL	or
FORTRAN.	Under	the	direction	of	young	Tom,	as	Watson's	son	and	successor
was	known,	the	company	gambled	$5	billion	on	the	novel	notion	of	scalable
architecture—all	the	computers	in	the	System/360	family,	no	matter	what
size,	would	respond	to	the	same	set	of	instructions.	Models	built	with
different	technology,	from	the	slowest	to	the	fastest,	from	small	machines	that
could	fit	into	a	normal	office	to	water-cooled	giants	that	sat	in	climate-
controlled	glass	rooms,	could	run	the	same	operating	system.	Customers
could	move	their	applications	and	peripherals,	accessories	such	as	disks,	tape

drives,	and	printers,	freely	from	one	model	to	the	next.	Scalable	architecture
completely	reshaped	the	industry.
System/360	was	a	runaway	success	and	made	IBM	the	powerhouse	in
mainframe	computers	for	the	next	thirty	years.	Customers	made	large
investments	in	the	360,	confident	that	their	commitment	to	software	and
training	would	not	be	wasted.	If	they	needed	to	move	to	a	larger	computer,
they	could	get	an	IBM	that	ran	the	same	system,	and	shared	the	same
architecture.	In	1977,	DEC	introduced	its	own	scalable-architecture	platform,
the	VAX.	The	VAX	family	of	computers	ultimately	ranged	from	desktop
systems	to	mainframe-size	machine	clusters	and	did	for	DEC	what
System/360	did	for	IBM.	DEC	became	overwhelmingly	the	leader	in	the
minicomputer	market.
The	scalable	architecture	of	the	IBM	System/360	and	its	successor,	the
System/370,	drove	many	of	IBM's	competitors	out	of	business	and	scared
away	potential	newcomers.	In	1970,	a	new	competing	company	was	founded
by	Eugene	Amdahl,	who	had	been	a	senior	engineer	at	IBM.	Amdahl	had	a
novel	business	plan.	His	company,	also	called	Amdahl,	would	build
computers	fully	compatible	with	the	IBM	360	software.	Amdahl	delivered
hardware	that	not	only	ran	the	same	operating	systems	and	applications	as
IBM,	but,	because	it	took	advantage	of	new	technology,	also	outperformed
IBM's	comparably	priced	systems.	Soon	Control	Data,	Hitachi,	and	Itel	all
also	offered	mainframes	that	were	"plug-compatible"	to	IBM.	By	the	mid-
1970s,	the	importance	of	360	compatibility	was	becoming	obvious.	The	only
mainframe	companies	doing	well	were	those	whose	hardware	could	run
IBM's	operating	systems.
Before	the	360,	computer	designs	were	intentionally	incompatible	with	those
from	other	companies	because	the	manufacturer's	goal	was	to	make	it
discouragingly	difficult	and	expensive	for	customers	heavily	invested	in	one
company's	computer	to	switch	to	a	different	brand.	Once	a	customer
committed	to	a	machine,	he	or	she	was	stuck	with	offerings	from	the
computer's	manufacturer	because	changing	the	software	could	be	done	but
was	too	difficult.	Amdahl	and	the	others	ended	that.	Market-driven
compatibility	is	an	important	lesson	for	the	future	personal-computer	industry.
It	should	also	be	remembered	by	those	creating	the	highway.	Customers
choose	systems	that	give	them	a	choice	of	hardware	suppliers	and	the	widest
variety	of	software	applications.
While	this	was	going	on,	I	was	busy	enjoying	school	and	experimenting	with
computers.	I	arrived	at	Harvard	in	the	fall	of	1973.	In	college	there	is	a	lot	of

posturing,	and	appearing	to	slack	off	was	considered	a	great	way	to	establish
your	coolness.	Therefore,	during	my	freshman	year	I	instituted	a	deliberate
policy	of	skipping	most	classes	and	then	studying	feverishly	at	the	end	of	the
term.	It	became	a	game—a	not	uncommon	one—to	see	how	high	a	grade	I
could	pull	while	investing	the	least	time	possible.	I	filled	in	my	leisure	hours
with	a	good	deal	of	poker,	which	had	its	own	attraction	for	me.	In	poker,	a
player	collects	different	shards	of	information—who's	betting	boldly,	what
cards	are	showing,	what's	this	guy's	pattern	of	betting	and	bluffing—and	then
crunches	all	that	information	together	to	devise	a	plan	for	his	own	hand.	I	got
pretty	good	at	this	kind	of	information	processing.
The	experience	of	poker	strategizing—and	the	money—were	helpful	when	I
got	into	business,	but	the	other	game	I	was	playing,	the	postponing	one,	didn't
serve	me	well	at	all.	But	I	didn't	know	that	then.	In	fact,	I	was	encouraged	that
my	dilatory	practices	were	shared	by	a	new	friend,	Steve	Ballmer,	a	math
major	whom	I	met	freshman	year,	when	we	lived	in	the	same	student	dorm,
Currier	House.	Steve	and	I	led	very	different	lives,	but	we	were	both	trying	to
pare	down	to	the	minimum	the	course	time	needed	to	get	top	grades.	Steve	is
a	man	of	endless	energy,	effortlessly	social.	His	activities	took	a	lot	of	his
time.	By	his	sophomore	year	he	was	a	manager	of	the	football	team,	the
advertising	manager	for	the	Harvard	Crimson,	the	school	newspaper,	and
president	of	a	literary	magazine.	He	also	belonged	to	a	social	club,	the
Harvard	equivalent	of	a	fraternity.
He	and	I	would	pay	very	little	attention	to	our	classes	and	then	furiously
inhale	the	key	books	just	before	an	exam.	Once	we	took	a	tough	graduate-
level	economics	course	together—E======================================================== he	telegraph	and,	later,	ticker	services	was	to	deliver	racetrack
results.	Satellite	television	broadcasts	contributed	to	off-track	betting.	Slot
machine	designs	have	always	tracked	the	progress	in	mechanical	calculators
and,	more	recently,	computers.	The	information	highway	will	have	an	even
more	significant	effect	on	both	legal	and	illegal	gambling.	We	are	sure	to	see
current	odds	posted	on	servers,	and	e-mail	as	a	way	to	make	bets.	Electronic
currency	will	be	used	to	place	bets	and	make	payoffs.
Gambling	is	a	highly	regulated	business,	so	it's	difficult	to	predict	what	forms
will	be	allowed	on	the	highway.	Maybe	air	travelers	who	are	stuck	on	a	plane
with	nothing	else	to	do	will	be	able	to	gamble	with	each	other.	Perhaps
gambling	games	will	have	to	provide	full	disclosure	of	the	odds	against	you.
The	technology	will	allow	people	to	bet	on	anything	they	choose	to,	and	if	it's
legal	someone	is	sure	to	set	up	a	service.	It	will	be	possible	to	bring	horse
races,	dog	races,	or	any	other	kind	of	live	sports	event	into	your	home	in	real-
time,	so	some	of	the	excitement	of	the	track	or	stadium	will	be	made
available.	Many	governments	raise	revenue	with	lotteries	and	in	the	future
could	provide	plug-into	electronic	lotteries.	The	highway	will	make	gambling
far	more	difficult	to	control	than	it	is	today.
We	can	be	sure	we'll	use	the	highway's	unique	capabilities	to	help	us	find
communities	of	others	with	common	interests.	Today	you	may	belong	to	the
local	ski	club	so	you	can	meet	other	people	who	like	to	ski.	You	may	also

subscribe	to	Recreational	Skier	so	you	can	get	information	about	new	ski
products.	Tomorrow	you	will	be	able	to	join	such	a	community	on	the
information	highway.	It	will	not	only	provide	you	with	up-to-date	information
about	weather	conditions	instantly,	but	will	also	be	a	way	for	you	to	stay	in
touch	with	other	enthusiasts.
The	greater	the	number	of	people	who	join	an	electronic	community,	the	more
valuable	it	will	be	to	everyone	who	uses	it.	Most	of	the	world's	skiing
enthusiasts	will	participate,	at	least	occasionally.	In	time,	the	world's	best
information	about	skis	and	skiing	will	be	available	electronically.	If	you	join,
you	will	find	the	best	slopes	near	Munich,	the	lowest	price	anywhere	for	a
particular	set	of	poles,	and	the	latest	news	and	advertising	about	all	ski-related
products.	If	people	have	taken	photos	or	made	videos	of	a	race	or	a	trip,	they
can	share	them.	Books	about	skiing	will	be	reviewed	by	anyone	who	has	an
opinion.	Laws	and	safety	practices	will	be	debated.	Instructional	videos	will
be	available	on	a	moment's	notice.	These	multi-media	documents	will	be
available	free	or	for	a	charge,	to	one	person	or	to	hundreds	of	thousands.	This
community	on	the	information	highway	will	become	the	place	to	go	if	you	are
interested	in	skiing.
If	you	want	to	get	yourself	in	better	physical	condition	before	trying	a	hard
slope,	you	might	find	training	more	fun	if	you	are	in	close	electronic	touch
with	a	dozen	other	people	who	are	your	size,	weight,	and	age,	and	who	share
your	specific	goals	for	exercise	and	weight	reduction.	You	would	have	less	to
be	self-conscious	about	in	an	exercise	program	in	which	everyone	else	is	like
you.	And	if	you	still	were	uncomfortable,	you	could	turn	your	video	camera
off.	Members	of	this	community	could	get	together	to	encourage	each	other
and	even	work	out	at	the	same	time.
The	community	of	skiers	is	quite	large	and	easy	to	define.	On	the	information
highway	there	will	be	applications	to	help	you	find	people	and	information
that	intersect	with	your	interests,	no	matter	how	specific.	If	you're	thinking	of
visiting	Berlin,	the	highway	will	make	vast	amounts	of	historical,	touristic,
and	sociological	information	available.	But	there	will	also	be	applications	to
let	you	find	fellow	enthusiasts	there.	You'll	be	invited	to	register	your	interests
in	databases	that	can	be	analyzed	by	the	applications.	These	applications	will
even	suggest	people	you	might	like	to	meet.	If	you	have	a	collection	of
Venetian	glass	paperweights,	you'll	probably	choose	to	be	a	member	of	one	or
more	world	communities	of	people	who	share	this	interest.	Some	of	those
people	may	live	in	Berlin	and	have	collections	they'd	be	delighted	to	show
you.	If	you	have	a	ten-year-old	daughter	you'll	be	taking	with	you	to	Berlin,
you	might	query	whether	there	is	anyone	in	Berlin	who	has	a	ten-year-old,

shares	your	language,	and	is	willing	to	spend	time	with	you	during	your	visit.
If	you	find	two	or	three	suitable	people,	you	have	created	a	small—and
probably	temporary—community	of	interest.
I	recently	visited	Africa	and	took	a	lot	of	pictures	of	chimpanzees.	If	the
information	highway	were	available	now,	I	would	put	out	a	message	saying
that	if	anyone	else	from	the	safari	wanted	to	exchange	photographs,	he	or	she
should	put	them	on	the	same	bulletin	board	where	I	had	posted	my
chimpanzee	photos.	I	would	be	able	to	set	it	up	so	only	fellow	safari	members
could	have	access	to	that	bulletin	board.
Already,	thousands	of	newsgroups	on	the	Internet	and	countless	forums	on
commercial	on-line	services	have	been	set	up	as	locations	for	small
communities	to	share	information.	For	example,	on	the	Internet	there	are
lively	text-based	discussion	groups	with	such	names	as	alt.agriculture.fruit,
alt.animals.raccoons,	alt.asian-movies,	alt.coffee,	bionet.-
biology.cardiovascular,	soc.religion.islam,	and	talk.philosophy,	misc.	But
these	topics	aren't	nearly	so	specialized	as	some	of	the	subjects	I	expect
electronic	communities	will	address	in	the	future.	Some	communities	will	be
very	local,	and	some	will	be	global.	You	won't	be	overwhelmed	by	the
number	of	choices	of	communities	any	more	than	you	are	now	by	the
telephone	system.	You'll	look	for	a	group	that	interests	you	in	general,	and
then	you'll	search	through	it	for	the	small	segment	you	want	to	join.	I	can
imagine	the	administration	of	every	municipality,	for	example,	becoming	the
focus	of	an	electronic	community.
Sometimes	I	get	annoyed	by	a	traffic	light	near	my	office	that	always	stays
red	longer	than	I	think	it	should.	I	could	write	a	letter	to	the	city,	telling	the
folks	who	program	the	lights	that	the	timing	isn't	optimal,	but	that	would	just
be	one	cranky	letter.	On	the	other	hand,	if	I	could	find	the	"community"	of
people	who	drive	the	route	I	do,	we	could	send	a	strong	complaint	to	the	city.
I	could	find	these	others	by	sending	a	message	to	people	who	live	near	me	or
by	posting	a	message	on	a	community	affairs	bulletin	board	that	showed	a
map	of	the	intersection	accompanied	by	the	message:	"During	the	morning
rush	hours	hardly	anyone	goes	left	at	this	intersection.	Does	anyone	else	think
the	cycle	should	be	shortened?"	Anyone	who	agreed	with	me	could	add	to	my
message.	It	would	make	it	easier	to	fight	City	Hall.
As	on-line	communities	grow	in	importance,	they	will	increasingly	be	where
people	will	turn	to	find	out	what	the	public	is	really	thinking.	People	like	to
know	what's	popular,	which	movies	friends	are	watching,	and	what	news
others	think	is	interesting.	I	want	to	read	the	same	"newspaper	front	page"	as

those	I'm	going	to	meet	with	later	today,	so	we	can	have	something	in
common	to	talk	about.	You	will	be	able	to	see	what	places	on	the	network	are
being	looked	at	often.	There	will	be	all	sorts	of	"hot	lists"	of	the	coolest
places.
Electronic	communities,	with	all	the	information	they	reveal,	will	also	create
problems.	Some	institutions	will	have	to	make	big	changes	as	on-line
communities	gain	power.	Doctors	and	medical	researchers	are	already	having
to	contend	with	patients	who	explore	medical	literature	electronically	and
compare	notes	with	other	patients	who	have	the	same	serious	disease.	Word
of	unorthodox	or	unapproved	treatments	spreads	fast	in	these	communities.
Some	patients	in	drug	trials	have	been	able	to	figure	out,	by	communicating
with	other	patients	in	the	trial,	that	they	are	receiving	a	placebo	rather	than	the
real	medication.	The	discovery	has	prompted	some	of	them	to	drop	out	of	the
trials	or	to	seek	alternate,	simultaneous	remedies.	This	undermines	the
research,	but	it	is	hard	to	fault	patients	who	are	trying	to	save	their	lives.
It's	not	just	medical	researchers	who	will	be	affected	by	so	much	access	to
information.	One	of	the	biggest	concerns	is	parents	having	to	contend	with
children	who	can	find	out	about	almost	anything	they	want	to,	right	from	a
home	information	appliance.	Already,	rating	systems	are	being	designed	to
allow	parental	control	over	what	kids	have	access	to.	This	could	become	a
major	political	issue	if	the	information	publishers	don't	handle	it	properly.
On	balance,	the	advantages	will	greatly	outweigh	the	problems.	The	more
information	there	is	available,	the	more	choices	we	will	have.	Today,	devoted
fans	plan	their	evenings	around	the	broadcast	times	of	their	favorite	television
shows,	but	once	video-on-demand	gives	us	the	opportunity	to	watch	whatever
we	like	whenever	we	like,	family	or	social	activities,	rather	than	a
broadcaster's	time	slots,	will	control	our	entertainment	schedules.	Before	the
telephone,	people	thought	of	their	neighbors	as	their	only	community.	Almost
everything	was	done	with	others	who	lived	nearby.	The	telephone	and	the
automobile	allowed	us	to	stretch	out.	We	may	visit	face-to-face	less	often	than
we	did	a	century	ago	because	we	can	pick	up	the	telephone,	but	this	doesn't
mean	we	have	become	isolated.	It	has	made	it	easier	for	us	to	talk	to	each
other	and	stay	in	touch.	Sometimes	it	may	seem	too	easy	for	people	to	reach
you.
A	decade	from	now,	you	may	shake	your	head	that	there	was	ever	a	time
when	any	stranger	or	a	wrong	number	could	interrupt	you	at	home	with	a
phone	call.	Cellular	phones,	pagers,	and	fax	machines	have	already	made	it
necessary	for	businesspeople	to	make	explicit	decisions	that	used	to	be

implicit.	A	decade	ago	we	didn't	have	to	decide	whether	we	wanted	to	receive
documents	at	home	or	take	calls	on	the	road.	It	was	easy	to	withdraw	to	your
house,	or	certainly	to	you======================================================== o	try	to	put	into
perspective	what's	going	on.
In	the	rush	to	build	the	information	highway,	no	one	has	seen	any	gold	yet,
and	there's	a	lot	of	investing	to	be	done	before	anyone	does.	The	investments
will	be	driven	by	faith	that	the	market	will	be	large.	Neither	the	full	highway
nor	the	market	will	exist	until	a	broadband	network	has	been	brought	to	most
homes	and	businesses.	Before	that	can	happen,	the	software	platforms,
applications,	networks,	servers,	and	information	appliances	that	will	make	up
the	highway	all	have	to	be	built	and	deployed.	Many	pieces	of	the	highway
won't	be	profitable	until	there	are	tens	of	millions	of	users.	Achieving	that

goal	will	require	hard	work,	technical	ingenuity,	and	money.	Today's	frenzy	is
helpful	in	this	regard,	because	it	encourages	investment	and	experimentation.
No	one	yet	knows	for	sure	what	the	public	wants	from	the	information
highway.	The	public	itself	can't	know,	because	it	hasn't	had	experience	with
video-capable	interactive	networks	and	applications.	Some	early	technology
has	been	tried,	but	there	have	been	only	a	few	such	trials.	They	have	offered
movies,	some	shopping,	and	a	lot	of	novelty,	which	soon	wears	off.	As	a
result,	all	that	has	really	been	learned	so	far	is	that	limited	interactive	systems
generate	limited	results.	It	will	be	impossible	to	get	much	of	a	sense	of	the
highway's	real	potential	until	dozens	of	new	applications	have	been	built.
However,	it's	tough	to	justify	building	applications	without	confidence	in	the
market.	Until	at	least	one	credible	trial	proves	that	the	revenue	generated	can
justify	the	fixed	costs	of	the	system,	everyone	who	insists	his	company	will
spend	billions	building	the	information	highway	to	connect	it	to	homes	is
posturing.	My	view	is	that	the	highway	won't	be	a	sudden,	revolutionary
creation	but	that	the	Internet,	along	with	evolution	in	the	PC	and	PC	software,
will	guide	us	step	by	step	to	the	full	system.
Some	posturing	is	unfairly	elevating	expectations	and	contributing	to	the
excesses	of	Information	Highway	Frenzy.	A	surprising	number	of	people	are
speculating	about	the	direction	technology	will	take.	Some	of	these
conjectures	ignore	practicality	or	preferences	the	public	has	already
demonstrated	or	are	unrealistic	about	how	soon	the	pieces	will	come	together.
Everyone	should	be	free	to	theorize,	but	speculation	suggesting	that	the	full
information	highway's	major	impact	on	consumers	will	come	before	the	turn
of	the	century	is	flat	wrong.
Companies	investing	now	in	the	information	highway	are,	at	best,	making
informed	guesses.	Skeptics	bring	up	good	reasons	why	they	think	it	won't	be
as	big	or	early	an	opportunity	as	I	think	it	will	be.	I	believe	in	this	business.
Microsoft	is	investing	more	than	$100	million	a	year	on	research	and
development	for	the	highway.	It	will	almost	certainly	take	five	years	or	more
of	this	kind	of	investing	before	the	results	of	the	R&D	bring	in	enough
revenue	to	make	the	money	back,	so	we're	making	a	$500	million	bet.	It	could
prove	to	be	a	half-billion-dollar	losing	bet.	Our	shareholders	are	allowing	us
to	make	it	on	the	basis	of	our	previous	successes,	but	that's	no	guarantee.
Naturally	we	expect	we'll	be	successful,	and	like	the	others	running	the	race,
we	have	a	rationale	for	why.	We	believe	our	software-development	skills	and
our	commitment	to	PC	evolution	will	allow	us	to	get	a	return	on	our
investment.

Comprehensive	trials	of	broadband	connections	to	PCs	and	television	sets
should	get	under	way	in	1996	in	North	America,	Europe,	and	Asia,	financed
by	companies	willing	to	take	a	risk	and	hoping	that	the	results	will	give	them
a	head	start.	Some	of	the	trials	will	be	"me	too"	efforts	aimed	at	showing	that
a	particular	network	operator	can	build	and	operate	a	high-bandwidth
network.	The	primary	goal	of	the	trials	should	be	to	make	available	a	platform
for	software	developers	to	build	and	explore	new	applications	on,	to	test	the
applications'	appeal	and	financial	viability.
When	Paul	Allen	and	I	saw	that	picture	of	the	first	Altair	computer,	we	could
only	guess	at	the	wealth	of	applications	it	would	inspire.	We	knew
applications	would	be	developed	but	we	didn't	know	what	they	would	be.
Some	were	predictable—for	example,	programs	that	would	let	a	PC	function
as	the	terminal	for	a	mainframe	computer—but	the	most	important
applications,	such	as	the	VisiCalc	spreadsheets,	were	unexpected.
These	forthcoming	trials	will	give	companies	the	opportunity	to	look	for	the
equivalents	of	the	spreadsheet—unexpected	killer	applications	and	services
that	will	capture	the	imagination	of	consumers—and	build	a	financial	case	for
rolling	out	the	highway.	It's	almost	impossible	to	guess	what	applications	will
or	won't	appeal	to	the	public.	Customers'	needs	and	desires	are	so	personal.
For	instance,	I	hope	to	be	able	to	use	the	highway	to	stay	up-to-date	on
medical	advances.	I'd	like	to	find	out	about	health	risks	for	someone	in	my
age	group,	and	ways	to	avoid	them.	So	I	want	fitness	and	medical	applications
as	well	as	ones	that	would	enable	me	to	continue	educating	myself	in	other
areas	I'm	interested	in.	But	that's	just	me.	Will	other	users	want	medical
advice?	New	kinds	of	games?	New	ways	of	meeting	people?	Home	shopping?
Or	just	a	few	more	movies?
The	trials	will	determine	which	are	the	most	popular	applications	and
services.	These	will	probably	include	simple	extensions	of	existing
communication	functions,	such	as	video-on-demand	and	high-speed
connections	between	personal	computers.	In	addition,	there	will	be	a	few	wild
new	services	that	catch	the	fancy	of	the	public	and	inspire	further	innovation,
investment,	and	entrepreneurship.	Those	are	what	I'm	looking	forward	to
seeing.	If	the	early	trials	don't	excite	consumers,	there	will	have	to	be	more
trials,	and	the	building	of	the	full	highway	will	be	delayed.	In	the	meantime,
the	Internet,	connected	PCs,	and	PC	software	will	continue	to	improve	and
become	an	even	better	foundation	to	build	on.	Hardware	and	software	prices
will	continue	to	come	down.
It's	interesting	to	watch	how	different	large	companies	respond	to	these

opportunities.	No	one	wants	to	admit	to	uncertainty.	Phone	and	cable
companies,	TV	stations	and	networks,	computer	hardware	and	software
companies,	newspapers,	magazines,	movie	studios,	and	even	individual
authors	are	all	formulating	strategies.	From	a	distance	their	plans	appear
similar,	but	the	details	are	really	quite	different.	It's	like	the	old	story	about
the	blind	men	and	the	elephant.	Each	one	has	a	hold	of	a	different	part	of	the
elephant	and	from	his	own	small	amount	of	information	is	drawing	sweeping
and	erroneous	conclusions	about	what	the	whole	animal	looks	like.	Here,
instead	of	trying	to	guess	the	appearance	of	a	large	beast,	we're	investing
billions	of	dollars	based	on	a	vague	understanding	of	the	true	shape	of	the
market.
Competition	is	a	boon	for	consumers,	but	it	can	be	tough	on	investors,
especially	those	who	invest	in	a	product	that	doesn't	exist	yet.	At	the	moment
there	is	a	nonexistent	business	being	called	the	"information	highway."	It	has
generated	zero	dollars	in	revenue.	The	building	of	the	highway	will	be	a
learning	process,	and	some	companies	will	lose	their	shirts.	What	seem	to	be
lucrative	niches	today	may	wind	up	as	highly	competitive	markets,	with	low
margins.	Or	they	may	prove	downright	unpopular.	Gold	rushes	tend	to
encourage	impetuous	investments.	A	few	will	pay	off,	but	when	the	frenzy	is
behind	us,	we	will	look	back	incredulously	at	the	wreckage	of	failed	ventures
and	wonder,	"Who	funded	those	companies?	What	was	going	on	in	their
minds?	Was	that	just	mania	at	work?"
Entrepreneurship	will	play	a	major	role	in	shaping	the	development	of	the
information	highway,	the	same	way	it	shaped	the	personal-computer	business.
Only	a	handful	of	companies	that	made	mainframe	software	managed	the
transition	to	personal	computers.	Most	successes	came	from	little	start-ups,
run	by	people	who	were	open	to	new	possibilities.	This	will	be	true	on	the
information	highway,	too.	For	every	large	existing	company	that	succeeds
with	a	new	application	or	service,	ten	start-ups	will	flourish	and	fifty	more
will	flash	into	existence	and	momentary	glory	before	slipping	into	obscurity.
This	is	a	hallmark	of	an	evolving	entrepreneurial	market;	rapid	innovation
occurs	on	many	fronts.	Most	of	it	will	be	unsuccessful,	regardless	of	whether
it's	attempted	by	a	large	or	a	small	company.	Large	companies	tend	to	take
fewer	risks,	but	when	they	crash	and	burn,	the	combination	of	their	sheer	ego
and	the	scale	of	their	resources	means	they	wind	up	digging	a	bigger	crater	in
the	ground.	By	comparison,	a	start-up	usually	fails	without	much	notice.	The
good	news	is	that	people	learn	from	both	the	successes	and	the	failures,	and
the	net	result	is	rapid	progress.

By	letting	the	marketplace	decide	which	companies	and	approaches	win	and
which	lose,	many	paths	are	explored	simultaneously.	Nowhere	is	the	benefit
of	a	market-driven	decision	more	apparent	than	in	an	unproven	market.	When
hundreds	of	companies	try	different	risk-taking	approaches	to	discover	the
level	of	demand,	society	gets	to	the	right	solution	a	lot	faster	than	it	would
with	any	form	of	central	planning.	The	range	of	uncertainties	about	the
information	highway	is	very	large,	but	the	marketplace	will	design	an
appropriate	system.
Governments	can	help	assure	a	strong	competitive	framework	and	should	be
willing,	though	not	overeager,	to	intercede	if	the	marketplace	fails	in	some
particular	area.	After	the	trials	have	yielded	sufficient	information,	they	can
determine	the	"rules	of	the	road"—the	basic	framework	guidelines	within
which	companies	can	compete.	But	they	should	not	attempt	to	design	or
dictate	the	nature	of	the	information	highway,	because	governments	cannot
outsmart	or	outmanage	the	competitive	marketplace,	particularly	while	there
are	still	questions	about	customer	preference	and	technological	development.
The	U.S.	government	is	deeply	involved	in	rule-making	for	comm======================================================== ical	records
before	determining	whether	it	chooses	to	insure	our	mortality.	These
companies	may	also	want	to	know	if	we	indulge	in	any	dangerous	pastimes,
such	as	hang	gliding,	smoking,	or	stock	car	racing.	Should	an	insurer's
computer	be	allowed	to	examine	the	information	highway	for	records	of	our
purchases	to	see	if	there	are	any	that	might	indicate	risky	behavior	on	our
part?	Should	a	prospective	employer's	computer	be	allowed	to	examine	our
communications	or	entertainment	records	to	develop	a	psychological	profile?
How	much	information	should	a	federal,	state,	or	city	agency	be	allowed	to
see?	What	should	a	potential	landlord	be	able	to	learn	about	you?	What
information	should	a	potential	spouse	have	access	to?	We	will	need	to	define
both	the	legal	and	practical	limits	of	privacy.
These	privacy	fears	revolve	around	the	possibility	that	someone	else	is
keeping	track	of	information	about	you.	But	the	highway	will	also	make	it
possible	for	an	individual	to	keep	track	of	his	or	her	own	whereabouts—to
lead	what	we	might	call	"a	documented	life"
Your	wallet	PC	will	be	able	to	keep	audio,	time,	location,	and	eventually	even
video	records	of	everything	that	happens	to	you.	It	will	be	able	to	record
every	word	you	say	and	every	word	said	to	you,	as	well	as	body	temperature,

blood	pressure,	barometric	pressure,	and	a	variety	of	other	data	about	you	and
your	surroundings.	It	will	be	able	to	track	your	interactions	with	the	highway
—all	of	the	commands	you	issue,	the	messages	you	send,	and	the	people	you
call	or	who	call	you.	The	resulting	record	will	be	the	ultimate	diary	and
autobiography,	if	you	want	one.	If	nothing	else,	you	would	know	exactly
when	and	where	you	took	a	photograph	when	you	organize	your	family's
digital	photo	album.
The	technology	required	is	not	difficult.	It	should	soon	be	possible	to
compress	the	human	voice	down	to	a	few	thousand	bits	of	digital	information
per	second,	which	means	that	an	hour	of	conversation	will	be	converted	into
about	1	megabyte	of	digital	data.	Small	tapes	used	for	backing	up	computer
hard	disks	already	store	10	gigabytes	or	more	of	data—enough	to	record
about	10,000	hours	of	compressed	audio.	Tapes	for	new	generations	of	digital
VCRs	will	hold	more	than	100	gigabytes,	which	means	that	a	single	tape
costing	a	few	dollars	could	hold	recordings	of	all	the	conversations	an
individual	has	over	the	course	of	a	decade	or	possibly	even	a	lifetime—
depending	on	how	talkative	he	is.	These	numbers	are	based	only	on	today's
capacities—in	the	future	storage	will	be	much	cheaper.	Audio	is	easy,	but
within	a	couple	of	years	a	full	video	recording	will	be	possible	as	well.
I	find	the	prospect	of	documented	lives	a	little	chilling,	but	some	people	will
warm	to	the	idea.	One	reason	for	documenting	a	life	will	be	defensive.	We
can	think	of	the	wallet	PC	as	an	alibi	machine,	because	encrypted	digital
signatures	will	guarantee	an	unforgeable	alibi	against	false	accusations.	If
someone	ever	accused	you	of	something,	you	could	retort:	"Hey,	buddy,	I
have	a	documented	life.	These	bits	are	stored	away.	I	can	play	back	anything
I've	ever	said.	So	don't	play	games	with	me"	On	the	other	hand,	if	you	were
guilty	of	something,	there	would	be	a	record	of	it.	There	would	also	be	a
record	of	any	tampering.	Richard	Nixon's	taping	of	conversations	in	the
White	House—and	then	the	suspicions	that	he	had	attempted	to	alter	those
tapes—contributed	to	his	undoing.	He	chose	to	have	a	documented	political
life	and	lived	to	regret	it.
The	Rodney	King	case	showed	the	evidentiary	power	of	videotape	and	its
limits.	Before	long	every	police	car,	or	individual	policeman,	may	be
equipped	with	a	digital	video	camera,	with	nonforgeable	time	and	location
stamps.	The	public	may	insist	that	the	police	record	themselves	in	the	course
of	their	work.	And	the	police	could	be	all	for	it,	to	guard	against	claims	of
brutality	or	abuse	on	one	hand	and	as	an	aid	in	gathering	better	evidence	on
the	other.	Some	police	forces	are	already	videorecording	all	arrests.	This	sort
of	record	won't	affect	just	the	police.	Medical	malpractice	insurance	might	be

cheaper,	or	only	available,	for	doctors	who	record	surgical	procedures	or	even
office	visits.	Bus,	taxi,	and	trucking	companies	have	an	obvious	interest	in	the
performance	of	their	drivers.	Some	transportation	companies	have	already
installed	equipment	to	record	mileage	and	average	speed.	I	can	imagine
proposals	that	every	automobile,	including	yours	and	mine,	be	outfitted	not
only	with	a	recorder	but	also	with	a	transmitter	that	identifies	the	car	and	its
location—a	future	license	plate.	After	all,	airplanes	have	"black	box"
recorders	today,	and	once	the	cost	drops,	there	is	no	reason	they	shouldn't	also
be	in	our	cars.	If	a	car	was	reported	stolen,	its	location	would	be	known
immediately.	After	a	hit-and-run	accident	or	a	drive-by	shooting,	a	judge
could	authorize	a	query:	"What	vehicles	were	in	the	following	two-block	area
during	this	thirty-minute	period?"	The	black	box	could	record	your	speed	and
location,	which	would	allow	for	the	perfect	enforcement	of	speeding	laws.	I
would	vote	against	that.
In	a	world	that	is	increasingly	instrumented,	we	could	reach	the	point	where
cameras	record	most	of	what	goes	on	in	public.	Video	cameras	in	public
places	are	already	relatively	commonplace.	They	perch,	often	concealed,
around	banks,	airports,	automatic-teller	machines,	hospitals,	freeways,	stores,
and	hotel	and	office-building	lobbies	and	elevators.
The	prospect	of	so	many	cameras,	always	watching,	might	have	distressed	us
fifty	years	ago,	as	it	did	George	Orwell.	But	today	they	are	unremarkable.
There	are	neighborhoods	in	the	United	States	and	Europe	where	citizens	are
welcoming	these	cameras	above	streets	and	parking	lots.	In	Monaco,	street
crime	has	been	virtually	eliminated	because	hundreds	of	video	cameras	have
been	placed	around	the	tiny	principality.	Monaco,	however,	is	small	enough	in
area,	370	acres	(150	hectares),	that	a	few	hundred	cameras	can	pretty	much
cover	it	all.	Many	parents	would	welcome	cameras	around	schoolyards	to
discourage	or	help	apprehend	drug	dealers,	child	molesters,	and	even
playground	bullies.	Every	city	streetlight	represents	a	substantial	investment
by	a	community	in	public	safety.	In	a	few	years	it	will	require	only	a
relatively	modest	additional	sum	to	add	and	operate	cameras	with	connections
to	the	information	highway.	Within	a	decade,	computers	will	be	able	to	scan
video	records	very	inexpensively	looking	for	a	particular	person	or	activity.	I
can	easily	imagine	proposals	that	virtually	every	pole	supporting	a	streetlight
should	also	have	one	or	more	cameras.	The	images	from	these	cameras	might
be	accessed	only	in	the	event	of	a	crime,	and	even	then	possibly	only	under
court	order.	Some	people	might	argue	that	every	image	from	every	camera
should	be	available	for	viewing	by	everyone	at	any	time.	This	raises	serious
privacy	questions	in	my	mind,	but	advocates	might	argue	that	it's	appropriate
if	the	cameras	are	only	in	public	places.

Almost	everyone	is	willing	to	accept	some	restrictions	in	exchange	for	a	sense
of	security.	From	a	historical	perspective,	people	living	in	Western
democracies	already	enjoy	a	degree	of	privacy	and	personal	freedom
unprecedented	in	all	of	human	history.	If	ubiquitous	cameras	tied	into	the
information	highway	should	prove	to	reduce	serious	crime	dramatically	in	test
communities,	a	real	debate	would	begin	over	whether	people	fear	surveillance
more	or	less	than	they	fear	crime.	It	is	difficult	to	imagine	a	government-
sanctioned	experiment	along	these	lines	in	the	United	States	because	of	the
privacy	issues	it	raises	and	the	likelihood	of	constitutional	challenges.
However,	opinion	can	change.	It	might	take	only	a	few	more	incidents	like
the	bombing	in	Oklahoma	City	within	the	borders	of	the	United	States	for
attitudes	toward	strong	privacy	protection	to	shift.	What	today	seems	like
digital	Big	Brother	might	one	day	become	the	norm	if	the	alternative	is	being
left	to	the	mercy	of	terrorists	and	criminals.	I	am	not	advocating	either
position—technology	will	enable	society	to	make	a	political	decision.
At	the	same	time	technology	is	making	it	easier	to	create	video	records,	it	is
also	making	it	possible	to	keep	all	your	personal	documents	and	messages
totally	private.	Encryption-technology	software,	which	anyone	can	download
from	the	Internet,	can	transform	a	PC	into	a	virtually	unbreakable	code
machine.	As	the	highway	is	deployed,	security	services	will	be	applied	to	all
forms	of	digital	information—phone	calls,	files,	databases,	you	name	it.	As
long	as	you	protect	the	password,	the	information	stored	on	your	computer
can	be	held	under	the	strongest	lock	and	key	that	has	ever	existed.	This	allows
for	the	greatest	degree	of	information	privacy	any	individual	has	ever	had.
Many	in	government	are	opposed	to	this	encryption	capability,	because	it
reduces	their	ability	to	gather	information.	Unfortunately	for	them,	the
technology	can't	be	stopped.	The	National	Security	Agency	is	a	part	of	the
U.S.	government	defense	and	intelligence	community	that	protects	this
country's	secret	communications	and	decrypts	foreign	communications	to
gather	intelligence	data.	The	NSA	does	not	want	software	containing
advanced	encryption	capabilities	to	be	sent	outside	the	United	States.
However,	this	software	is	already	available	throughout	the	world,	and	any
computer	can	run	it.	No	policy	decision	will	be	able	to	restore	the	tapping
capabilities	governments	had	in	the	past.
Today's	legislation	that	prevents	the	export	of	software	with	good	encryption
capability	could	harm	U.S.	software	and	hardware	companies.	The
restrictions	give	foreign	companies	an	advantage	over	U.S.	competitors.
American	companies	almost	unanimously	agree	that	the	current	encryption
export	restrictions	don't	work.

Each	media	advance	has	had	a	substantial	effect	on	how	people	and
governments	interact.	The	printing	press	and,	later,	mass-circulation
newspapers	changed	the	nature	o======================================================== and	so	can't	carry	many	bits
per	second.	"Modems"	(shorthand	for	modulator-demodulators)	are	the
devices	that	connect	phone	lines	to	PCs.	Modems,	by	converting	to	0s	and	1s
into	different	tones,	allow	computers	to	connect	over	phone	lines.	In	the	early
days	of	the	IBM	PC,	modems	typically	carried	data	at	the	rate	of	300	or	1,200
bits	per	seconds	(also	known	as	300	or	1,200	"baud").	Most	of	the	data
transmitted	through	phone	lines	at	these	speeds	was	text,	because	transmitting
pictures	was	painfully	slow	when	so	little	information	could	be	transferred
each	second.	Faster	modems	have	gotten	much	more	affordable.	Today,	many
modems	that	connect	PCs	to	other	computers	via	the	phone	system	can	send
and	receive	14,400	(14.4K)	or	28,800	(28.8K)	bits	per	second.	From	a
practical	standpoint,	this	is	still	insufficient	bandwidth	for	many	kinds	of
transmissions.	A	page	of	text	is	sent	in	a	second,	but	a	complete,	screen-sized
photograph,	even	if	compressed,	requires	perhaps	ten	seconds	at	these	baud
rates.	It	takes	minutes	to	send	a	color	photograph	with	enough	resolution	for	it
to	be	made	into	a	slide.	Motion	video	would	take	so	much	time	to	transmit	it
just	isn't	practical	at	these	speeds.
Already,	anyone	can	send	anyone	else	a	message	on	the	Internet	for	business,

education,	or	just	the	fun	of	it.	Students	around	the	world	can	send	messages
to	one	another.	Shut-ins	can	carry	on	animated	conversations	with	friends
they	might	never	get	out	to	meet.	Correspondents	who	might	be
uncomfortable	talking	to	each	other	in	person	have	forged	bonds	across	a
network.	The	information	highway	will	add	video,	which	unfortunately	will
do	away	with	the	social,	racial,	gender,	and	species	blindness	that	text-only
exchanges	permit.
The	Internet	and	other	information	services	carried	on	telephone	networks
suggest	some	aspects	of	how	the	information	highway	will	operate.	When	I
send	you	a	message,	it	is	transmitted	by	phone	line	from	my	computer	to	the
server	that	has	my	"mailbox,"	and	from	there	it	passes	directly	or	indirectly	to
whichever	server	stores	your	mailbox.	When	you	connect	to	your	server,	via
the	telephone	network	or	a	corporate	computer	network,	you	are	able	to
retrieve	("download")	the	contents	of	your	mailbox,	including	my	message.
That's	how	electronic	mail	works.	You	can	type	a	message	once	and	send	it	to
one	person	or	twenty-five,	or	post	it	on	what	is	called	a	"bulletin	board."
Like	its	namesake,	an	electronic	bulletin	board	is	where	messages	are	left	for
anyone	to	read.	Public	conversations	result,	as	people	respond	to	messages.
These	exchanges	are	usually	asynchronous.	Bulletin	boards	typically	are
organized	by	topics	to	serve	specific	communities	of	interest.	This	makes
them	effective	ways	to	reach	targeted	groups.	Commercial	services	offer
bulletin	boards	for	pilots,	journalists,	teachers,	and	much	smaller
communities.	On	the	Internet,	where	the	often	unedited	and	unmoderated
bulletin	boards	are	called	"usenet	newsgroups,"	there	are	thousands	of
communities	devoted	to	topics	as	narrow	as	caffeine,	Ronald	Reagan,	and
neckties.	You	can	download	all	the	messages	on	a	topic,	or	just	recent
messages,	or	all	messages	from	a	certain	person,	or	those	that	respond	to	a

particular	other	message,	or	that	contain	a	specific	word	in	their	subject	line,
and	so	forth.
In	addition	to	electronic	mail	and	file	exchange,	the	Internet	supports	"Web
browsing,"	one	of	its	most	popular	applications.	The	"World	Wide	Web"
(abbreviated	as	the	Web	or	WWW)	refers	to	those	servers	connected	to	the
Internet	that	offer	graphical	pages	of	information.	When	you	connect	to	one
of	those	servers,	a	screen	of	information	with	a	number	of	hyperlinks	appears.
When	you	activate	a	hyperlink	by	clicking	on	it	with	your	mouse,	you	are
taken	to	another	page	containing	additional	information	and	other	hyperlinks.
That	page	may	be	stored	on	the	same	server	or	any	other	server	on	the
Internet.
1995:	U.S.	Library	of	Congress	home	page	on	the	World	Wide	Web,	showing
hyperlinks
The	main	page	for	a	company	or	an	individual	is	called	the	"home"	page.	If
you	create	one,	you	register	its	electronic	address,	then	Internet	users	can	find
you	by	typing	in	the	address.	In	advertisements	today	we	are	starting	to	see
home	page	citations	as	part	of	the	address	information.	The	software	to	set	up
a	Web	server	is	very	cheap	and	available	for	almost	all	computers.	The
software	to	browse	the	Web	is	also	available	for	all	machines,	generally	for
free.	You	can	Web	browse	using	the	CD	that	comes	with	this	book.	In	the
future,	operating	systems	will	integrate	Internet	browsing.
The	ease	with	which	companies	and	individuals	can	publish	information	on
the	Internet	is	changing	the	whole	idea	of	what	it	means	to	"publish."	The
Internet	has,	on	its	own,	established	itself	as	a	place	to	publish	content.	It	has
enough	users	so	that	it	is	benefiting	from	positive	feedback:	the	more
subscribers	it	gets,	the	more	content	it	gets,	and	the	more	content	it	gets,	the
more	subscribers	it	gets.
The	Internet's	unique	position	arises	from	a	number	of	elements.	The	TCP/IP

protocols	that	define	its	transport	level	support	distributed	computing	and	also
scale	incredibly	well.	The	protocols	that	define	Web	browsing	are	extremely
simple	and	have	allowed	servers	to	handle	immense	amounts	of	traffic
reasonably	well.	Many	of	the	predictions	about	interactive	books	and
hyperlinks—made	decades	ago	by	pioneers	like	Ted	Nelson—are	coming	true
on	the	Web.
Today's	Internet	is	not	the	information	highway	I	imagine,	although	you	can
think	of	it	as	the	beginning	of	the	highway.	An	analogy	is	the	Oregon	Trail.
Between	1841	and	the	early	1860s,	more	than	300,000	hardy	souls	rode
wagon	trains	out	of	Independence,	Missouri,	for	a	dangerous	2,000-mile
journey	across	the	wilderness	to	the	Oregon	Territories	or	the	gold	fields	of
California.	An	estimated	20,000	succumbed	to	marauders,	cholera,	starvation,
or	exposure.	Their	route	was	named	the	Oregon	Trail.	You	could	easily	say
the	Oregon	Trail	was	the	start	of	today's	highway	system.	It	crossed	many
boundaries	and	provided	two-way	traffic	to	travelers	in	wheeled	vehicles.	The
modern	path	of	Interstate	84	and	several	other	highways	follows	the	Oregon
Trail	for	much	of	its	length.	However,	many	conclusions	drawn	from
descriptions	of	the	Oregon	Trail	would	be	misleading	if	applied	to	the	future
system.	Cholera	and	starvation	aren't	a	problem	on	Interstate	84.	Tailgating
and	drunk	drivers	weren't	much	of	a	hazard	for	the	wagon	trains.
The	trail	blazed	by	the	Internet	will	direct	many	elements	of	the	highway.	The
Internet	is	a	wonderful,	critical	development	and	a	very	clear	element	of	the
final	system,	but	it	will	change	significantly	in	the	years	ahead.	The	current
Internet	lacks	security	and	needs	a	billing	system.	Much	of	the	Internet
culture	will	seem	as	quaint	to	future	users	of	the	information	highway	as
stories	of	wagon	trains	and	pioneers	on	the	Oregon	Trail	do	to	us	today.
In	fact,	the	Internet	of	today	is	not	the	Internet	of	even	a	short	time	ago.	The
pace	of	its	evolution	is	so	rapid	that	a	description	of	the	Internet	as	it	existed	a
year	or	even	six	months	ago	might	be	seriously	out-of-date.	This	adds	to	the
confusion.	It	is	very	hard	to	stay	up-to-date	with	something	so	dynamic.
Many	companies,	including	Microsoft,	are	working	together	to	define
standards	in	order	to	extend	the	Internet	and	overcome	its	limitations.
Because	the	Internet	originated	as	a	computer-science	proiect	rather	than	a
communications	utility,	it	has	always	been	a	magnet	for	hackers—
programmers	who	turn	their	talents	toward	mischief	or	malice	by	breaking
into	the	computer	systems	of	others.
On	November	2,	1988,	thousands	of	computers	connected	to	the	network

began	to	slow	down.	Many	eventually	ground	to	a	temporary	halt.	No	data
were	destroyed,	but	millions	of	dollars	of	computing	time	were	lost	as
computer	system	administrators	fought	to	regain	control	of	their	machines.
Much	of	the	public	may	have	heard	of	the	Internet	for	the	first	time	when	this
story	was	widely	covered.	The	cause	turned	out	to	be	a	mischievous	computer
program,	called	a	"worm,"	that	was	spreading	from	one	computer	to	another
on	the	network,	replicating	as	it	went.	(It	was	designated	a	worm	rather	than	a
virus	because	it	didn't	infect	other	programs.)	It	used	an	unnoticed	"back
door"	in	the	systems'	software	to	access	directly	the	memory	of	the	computers
it	was	attacking.	There	it	hid	itself	and	passed	around	misleading	information
that	made	it	harder	to	detect	and	counteract.	Within	a	few	days	The	New	York
Times	identified	the	hacker	as	Robert	Morris,	Jr.,	a	twenty-three-year-old
graduate	student	at	Cornell	University.	Morris	later	testified	that	he	had
designed	and	then	unleashed	the	worm	to	see	how	many	computers	it	would
reach,	but	a	mistake	in	his	programming	caused	the	worm	to	replicate	far
faster	than	he	had	expected.	Morris	was	convicted	of	violating	the	1986
Computer	Fraud	and	Abuse	Act,	a	federal	offense.	He	was	sentenced	to	three
years	of	probation,	a	fine	of	$10,000,	and	400	hours	of	community	service.
There	have	been	occasional	breakdowns	and	security	problems,	but	not	many,
and	the	Internet	has	become	a	reasonably	reliable	communications	channel
for	millions	of	people.	It	provides	worldwide	connections	between	servers,
facilitating	the	exchange	of	electronic	mail,	bulletin	board	items,	and	other
data.	The	exchanges	range	from	short	messages	of	a	few	dozen	characters	to
multimillion-byte	transfers	of	photographs,	software,	and	other	kinds	of	data.
It	costs	no	more	to	request	data	from	a	server	that	is	a	mile	away	than	from
one	that	is	thousands	of	miles	distant.
Already	the	Internet's	pricing	model	has	changed	the	notion	that
communication	has	to	be	paid	for	by	time	and	distance.	The	same	thing
happened	with	computing.	If	you	couldn't	afford	a	big	computer	you	used	to
pay	for	computer	time	by	the	hour.	PCs	changed	that.
Because	the	Internet	is	inexpensive	to	use,	people	assume	it	is	government
funded.	Th======================================================== bout	another	lifestyle	to	contrast	it	with	their	own.
Within	individual	societies,	the	balance	of	traditional	versus	modern
experiences	will	shift	as	people	use	the	information	highway	to	expose
themselves	to	a	greater	range	of	possibilities.	Some	cultures	may	feel	under
assault,	as	people	pay	greater	attention	to	global	issues	or	cultures,	and	less	to
traditional	local	ones.
"The	fact	that	the	same	ad	can	appeal	to	someone	in	a	New	York	apartment
and	an	Iowa	farm	and	an	African	village	does	not	prove	these	situations	are

alike,"	commented	Bill	McKibben,	a	critic	of	what	he	sees	as	television's
tendency	to	override	local	diversity	with	homogenized	common	experiences.
"It	is	merely	evidence	that	the	people	living	in	them	have	a	few	feelings	in
common,	and	it	is	these	barest,	most	minimal	commonalties	that	are	the
content	of	the	global	village."
Yet	if	people	choose	to	watch	the	ad,	or	the	program	the	ad	supports,	should
they	be	denied	that	privilege?	This	is	a	political	question	for	every	country	to
answer	individually.	It	will	not,	however,	be	easy	to	filter	a	highway
connection	so	that	it	selects	and	takes	in	only	some	elements.
American	popular	culture	is	so	potent	that	outside	the	United	States	some
countries	now	attempt	to	ration	it.	They	hope	to	guarantee	the	viability	of
domestic-content	producers	by	permitting	only	a	certain	number	of	hours	of
foreign	television	to	be	aired	each	week.	In	Europe	the	availability	of	satellite
and	cable-delivered	programming	reduced	the	potential	for	government
control.	The	information	highway	is	going	to	break	down	boundaries	and	may
promote	a	world	culture,	or	at	least	a	sharing	of	cultural	activities	and	values.
The	highway	will	also	make	it	easy	for	patriots,	even	expatriates,	deeply
involved	in	their	own	ethnic	communities	to	reach	out	to	others	with	similar
interests	no	matter	where	they	may	be	located.	This	may	strengthen	cultural
diversity	and	counter	the	tendency	toward	a	single	world	culture.
If	people	do	gravitate	to	their	own	interests	and	withdraw	from	the	broader
world—if	weight	lifters	communicate	only	with	other	weight	lifters,	and
Latvians	choose	to	read	only	Latvian	newspapers—there	is	a	risk	that
common	experiences	and	values	will	fall	away.	Such	xenophobia	would	have
the	effect	of	fragmenting	societies.	I	doubt	this	will	happen,	because	I	think
people	want	a	sense	of	belonging	to	many	communities,	including	a	world
community.	When	we	Americans	share	national	experiences,	it	is	usually
because	we're	witnessing	events	all	at	the	same	time	on	television—whether	it
is	the	Challenger	blowing	up	after	liftoff,	the	Super	Bowl,	an	inauguration,
coverage	of	the	Gulf	War,	or	the	O.	J.	Simpson	car	chase.	We	are	"together"	at
those	moments.
Another	worry	people	have	is	that	multi-media	entertainment	will	be	so	easy
to	get	and	so	compelling,	some	of	us	will	use	the	system	too	much	for	our
own	good.	This	could	become	a	serious	problem	when	virtual-reality
experiences	are	commonplace.
One	day	a	virtual-reality	game	will	let	you	enter	into	a	virtual	bar	and	make
eye	contact	with	"someone	special,"	who	will	note	your	interest	and	come

over	to	engage	you	in	conversation.	You'll	talk,	impressing	this	new	friend
with	your	charm	and	wit.	Perhaps	the	two	of	you	will	decide,	then	and	there,
to	go	to	Paris.	Whoosh!	You'll	be	in	Paris,	gazing	together	at	the	stained	glass
of	Notre	Dame.	"Have	you	ever	ridden	the	Star	Ferry	in	Hong	Kong?"	you
might	ask	your	friend,	invitingly.	Whoosh!	VR	will	certainly	be	more
engrossing	than	video	games	have	ever	been,	and	more	addictive.
If	you	were	to	find	yourself	escaping	into	these	attractive	worlds	too	often,	or
for	too	long,	and	began	to	be	worried	about	it,	you	could	try	to	deny	yourself
entertainment	by	telling	the	system,	"No	matter	what	password	I	give,	don't
let	me	play	any	more	than	half	an	hour	of	games	a	day."	This	would	be	a	little
speed	bump,	a	warning	to	slow	your	involvement	with	something	you	found
too	appealing.	It	would	serve	the	same	purpose	as	a	photo	of	some	very
overweight	people	you	might	post	on	your	refrigerator	to	discourage
snacking.
Speed	bumps	help	a	lot	with	behavior	that	tends	to	generate	day-after	regrets.
If	someone	elects	to	spend	his	or	her	free	hours	examining	the	stained	glass	in
a	simulation	of	Notre	Dame,	or	chatting	in	a	make-believe	bar	with	a
synthetic	friend,	that	person	is	exercising	his	or	her	freedom.	Today	a	lot	of
people	spend	several	hours	a	day	with	a	television	on.	To	the	extent	we	can
replace	some	of	that	passive	entertainment	with	interactive	entertainment,
viewers	may	be	better	off.	Frankly,	I'm	not	too	concerned	about	the	world
whiling	away	its	hours	on	the	information	highway.	At	worst,	I	expect,	it	will
be	like	playing	video	games	or	gambling.	Support	groups	will	convene	to	help
abusers	who	want	to	modify	their	behavior.
A	more	serious	concern	than	individual	overindulgence	is	the	vulnerability
that	could	result	from	society's	heavy	reliance	on	the	highway.
This	network,	and	the	computer-based	machines	connected	to	it,	will	form
society's	new	playground,	new	workplace,	and	new	classroom.	It	will	replace
physical	tender.	It	will	subsume	most	existing	forms	of	communication.	It	will
be	our	photo	album,	our	diary,	our	boom	box.	This	versatility	will	be	the
strength	of	the	network,	but	it	will	also	mean	we	will	become	reliant	on	it.
Reliance	can	be	dangerous.	During	the	New	York	City	blackouts	in	1965	and
1977,	millions	of	people	were	in	trouble—at	least	for	a	few	hours—because
of	their	dependence	on	electricity.	They	counted	on	electric	power	for	light,
heat,	transport,	and	security.	When	electricity	failed,	people	were	trapped	in
elevators,	traffic	lights	stopped	working,	and	electric	water	pumps	quit.
Anything	really	useful	is	missed	when	you	lose	it.

A	complete	failure	of	the	information	highway	is	worth	worrying	about.
Because	the	system	will	be	thoroughly	decentralized,	any	single	outage	is
unlikely	to	have	a	widespread	effect.	If	an	individual	server	fails,	it	will	be
replaced	and	its	data	restored.	But	the	system	could	be	susceptible	to	assault.
As	the	system	becomes	more	important,	we	will	have	to	design	in	more
redundancy.	One	area	of	vulnerability	is	the	system's	reliance	on	cryptography
—the	mathematical	locks	that	keep	information	safe.
None	of	the	protection	systems	that	exist	today,	whether	steering-wheel	locks
or	steel	vaults,	are	completely	fail-safe.	The	best	we	can	do	is	make	it	as
difficult	as	possible	for	somebody	to	break	in.	Despite	popular	opinions	to	the
contrary,	computer	security	has	a	very	good	record.	Computers	are	capable	of
protecting	information	in	such	a	way	that	even	the	smartest	hackers	can't	get
at	it	readily	unless	someone	entrusted	with	information	makes	a	mistake.
Sloppiness	is	the	main	reason	computer	security	gets	breached.	On	the
information	highway	there	will	be	mistakes,	and	too	much	information	will
get	passed	along.	Someone	will	issue	digital	concert	tickets	that	prove	to	be
forgeable,	and	too	many	people	will	show	up.	Whenever	this	sort	of	thing
happens,	the	system	will	have	to	be	reworked	and	laws	may	have	to	be
revised.
Because	both	the	system's	privacy	and	the	security	of	digital	money	depend
on	encryption,	a	breakthrough	in	mathematics	or	computer	science	that
defeats	the	cryptographic	system	could	be	a	disaster.	The	obvious
mathematical	breakthrough	would	be	development	of	an	easy	way	to	factor
large	prime	numbers.	Any	person	or	organization	possessing	this	power	could
counterfeit	money,	penetrate	any	personal,	corporate,
or	governmental	file,	and	possibly	even	undermine	the	security	of	nations,
which	is	why	we	have	to	be	so	careful	in	designing	the	system.	We	have	to
ensure	that	if	any	particular	encryption	technique	proves	fallible,	there	is	a
way	to	make	an	immediate	transition	to	an	alternate	technique.	There's	a	little
bit	of	inventing	still	to	be	done	before	we	have	that	perfected.	It	is	particularly
hard	to	guarantee	security	for	information	you	want	kept	private	for	a	decade
or	more.
Loss	of	privacy	is	another	major	concern	about	the	highway.	A	great	deal	of
information	is	already	being	gathered	about	each	of	us,	by	private	companies
as	well	as	by	government	agencies,	and	we	often	have	no	idea	how	it	is	used
or	whether	it	is	accurate.	Census	Bureau	statistics	contain	great	amounts	of
detail.	Medical	records,	driving	records,	library	records,	school	records,	court
records,	credit	histories,	tax	records,	financial	records,	employment	reviews,

and	charge-card	bills	all	profile	you.	The	fact	that	you	call	a	lot	of	motorcycle
shops,	and	might	be	susceptible	to	motorcycle	advertising,	is	commercial
information	that	a	telephone	company	theoretically	could	sell.	Information
about	us	is	routinely	compiled	into	direct-marketing	mailing	lists	and	credit
reports.	Errors	and	abuses	have	already	fostered	legislation	regulating	the	use
of	these	databases.	In	the	United	States,	you	are	entitled	to	see	certain	kinds
of	information	stored	about	you,	and	you	may	have	the	right	to	be	notified
when	someone	looks	at	it.	The	scattered	nature	of	information	protects	your
privacy	in	an	informal	way,	but	when	the	repositories	are	all	connected
together	on	the	highway,	it	will	be	possible	to	use	computers	to	correlate	it.
Credit	data	could	be	linked	with	employment	records	and	sales	transaction
records	to	construct	an	intrusively	accurate	picture	of	your	personal	activities.
As	more	business	is	transacted	using	the	highway	and	the	amount	of
information	stored	there	accrues,	governments	will	consciously	set	policies
regarding	privacy	and	access	to	information.	The	network	itself	will	then
administer	those	policies,	ensuring	that	a	doctor	does	not	get	access	to	a
patient's	tax	records,	a	government	auditor	is	not	able	to	look	at	a	taxpayer's
scholastic	record,	and	a	teacher	is	not	permitted	to	browse	a	student's	medical
record.	The	potential	problem	is	abuse,	not	the	mere	existence	of	information.
We	now	allow	a	life	insurance	company	to	examine	our	med